Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begins the words of Albucaçim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre,  
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the operation with a hand is laid bare in our region and in our time completely deprived, except that only little of its knowledge remains and its trace persists; and nothing but some small descriptions remain in the books of the Ancients, which have changed much and led to errors and misconceptions such that the meanings of it are closed off and the strength and artistry of it are weakened.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I revitalize that according to the order of this treatise in a way that follows exposition and clarification and abbreviation; and for which to come with the forms of the tools of cautery and other instruments of the work as by adding to the explanation, and for the preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	May the cause for which no good artisan is found with his hand in our time is that the art of medicine is long, and it requires its practitioner to be exercised beforehand in the science of anatomy, which Galen mentions among those who know the joints of the members and their forms; and the conjunction and separation thereof; and had knowledge of the bones, nerves, and veins, and their number, and their extension; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and the places of their origin.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this reason Hippocrates says that in name it is small, but in action it is great, and especially so in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already spoken of this in the introduction of this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said concerning anatomy will not be exempt from falling into error, which can lead to the death of people, as I have seen too many cases of this. For some are formed in this science and then stray from it due to a lack of knowledge and experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw an inexperienced and unskilled doctor attempt to incise a scrophulous abscess on a woman's neck, and in doing so cut some of the arteries in the neck, causing a great loss of blood, which led to the woman dying in the arms of those present.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who took it upon himself to remove a stone from a man who had suffered in his condition, and the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the bladder, because that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have already called for extracting it, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I understood that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And you see another doctor who was receiving payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and happened upon a castrated black man who had a fracture in his thigh; and the doctor prepared with his ignorance, extracted the fracture, over the wound, with pillows and splints with strong binding, and did not leave the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then release the bandage according to their wishes, and then dress the wound, and then keep it dry for some days and command that we loosen the binding; and this should be done until the thigh and foot are free from abscesses, and recovery is achieved.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and prepared to loosen the binding, and thus peace was achieved and his pains were somewhat alleviated.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But corruption had already set in the limb, so it could not be stopped, and the corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the patient was in peril.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who punctured a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated over the course of several days, until the malignancy of it grew significantly under the care of the doctor.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the cancer is pure of melancholic humors, so it is not necessary to treat it with iron entirely, but rather the limb should be treated so that it suffers and is thus purged.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you to divide the operation under my guidance into two parts: one part is an operation associated with health, and the other involves work where there is peril in the most critical dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor;
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take up your weapons with diligence and under the protection of God, and treat your patients with happiness and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best method by the grace of God to reach health and favorable outcomes, and leave behind terrible diseases that are difficult to heal, and withstand what makes you fear with your defenses, so that hesitation in your faith and in your name does not escape you: for more remains for your glory, and further out in the world and later for your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	When translating this line by line from the given medieval-like text into English:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat illnesses poorly, so that bad doctors are not named.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is ordered from head to foot, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cauteries, and of what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on drying and piercing, and on cupping, and on plasters, and on the extraction of arrows and similar objects, all chaptered and ordered according to the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the treatment of fractures and similar injuries; a chapter ordered from head to foot, and detailing the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On cauteries with fire and sharp medicine and a reminder of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that, the treatise on the entire book begins.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	It is necessary for me to say the quality of the benefits of that cautery and its harms, and in what conditions the use of cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the discussion about the quality of the usefulness and harm of cauterization is long and prolix, subtle through science, and secretively hidden; many wise people have already spoken about it, and they are in disagreement about it, and for me, a small part of their discussions suffices, fearing lengthiness.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore, I say that cauterization is beneficial to all complications universally, whether they are with matter or without matter, except for two complications, which are complications of the tail without matter. 
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the condition of dry and hot illness, materials tend to disarrange; for some say that a cautery is helpful in this case, while others say the opposite, that a cautery is not appropriate in an illness which is by nature hot and dry, because the nature of fire is hot and dry, and it is inappropriate for a dry and hot illness to be treated with something that is also hot and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And let those who say the opposite be heard: they claim that a cautery provides relief in all dry and hot illnesses that occur in human bodies, because when you compare the body of a person and its humidity to the composition of fire, you find that the human body is cold. 
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the speech of that person, who has experienced this to me several times openly.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici,
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	And in other conditions, there is no need for fear, especially in cold and humid illnesses, because all doctors agree on these, and they do not disagree about treating them with cautery.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, sons, that the secret of healing through cautery with fire and its goodness, especially concerning cautery combined with burning medicine, is that fire is simple, the action of which only reaches the member being cauterized and does not affect the adjacent member except with a slight harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	And here is the translation of the given sentence:
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Here is the translation of the given text line by line into English:
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, sons, that they forget the time in which it is appropriate to perform cautery and consider the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, so that the harm caused by accidental time is submerged in the healing brought about by the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for necessary pains or to prevent pain, strong and urgent, which do not tolerate delay because it is feared that those may worsen, which are greater evils entering over time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And this does not fall into your views, or, children, this is only valued by the common people and foolish doctors, for that disease which is healed by cautery is not recommended at all times, and its consequence should be paused. 
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as they think by this means, for cautery is nothing more than a method of medicine that alters composition and dries out the humors which are the cause of the pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	And yet cauteries are excessive in medicine due to the eagerness for its health benefits and the power of its operation and the greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that their illness may return at some time, according to the constitution of the patient and the location of their illness, and their strength, and what is prepared in their body due to the accumulation of excesses within them, and what has been acquired by them through food and similar causes; but for an illness where a cautery is administered, it should be an illness subtle in a member with few excesses and moisture, just as a dental cautery for pain and similar issues, it is possible that such pain will not return to them, although this is done to a small extent.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And the common saying is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this saying is true, not in the way that some people understand it, for I believe that there is no cure that benefits as much as medicine or any other cause before resorting to cautery. 
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when we administer treatments for certain diseases, and those medicines do not help, and then at the end of the treatment, one administers cautery, which proves effective in that case.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And now from here, it is not true that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, according to the understanding which the common people and many foolish doctors hold.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they said this only because of the purity of gold and the nobility of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the location of the cautery does not matter, but this is not absolutely true, for I have tried this and found that it only works on certain bodies and not others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron as they said; however, when you perform cautery with fire using gold, it is not clear to you, for it ignites according to the amount you want due to the hardness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive heat; and if you place fire upon it, the gold melts from the heat, and some flakes fall into the fire, causing issues for the craftsman due to this situation.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this reason, cautery is performed with an iron that is both lighter and more precisely applied to the correct procedure.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to sections, and I have organized those of the head between the feet, so that I can quickly provide the inquirer with what they seek from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	From cautery for headache caused by coldness and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery is applied to humidity and coldness over the spleen, an accidental part where these are causes, thus it is a cause of rheumatic fluxes called rheumatism, from the head to parts of the eyes and ears that are affected, as well as excessive sleepiness, toothache, and jaw pain, and generally all diseases that come from coldness, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is as follows: first, command the patient to be purged with laxative medicine for three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient, their age, and their habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	Then command that they shave their head with a razor. Then have the patient sit between your hands on a lowered bench and place their hands on their feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	Then place the root of your palm near the nostrils at the base of the nose between their eyes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, when you have reached the middle of the area as mentioned, mark that spot with a probe, and then heat the olive-shaped cautery, which has this form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that over the marked area with tension, in such a way that it descends gradually, with which your hand should be applied little by little, and you turn that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand lightly and look at the area, and if you see any part of the bone exposed, about the size of a grain of barley, then raise your hand, and if it does not return by itself, use that instrument again or another one if it is cooled down, until the bone becomes visible as I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place over it a cloth soaked in butter and leave it there until the heat of the burn is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a tetrapharmacon ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And it has also been said that when the wound remains open, washing it with honey is better, because it is more effective and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them say that the area around the bone should be cauterized, and the cautery should be applied until some part of the substance of the bone adheres to it.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then remove what is attached to the bone, and then clean it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others said that with the cautery, reach the buttock area, pressing strongly on the bone until it gives way, and this is the method of performing a small alfahcuti. 
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that place, vapors escape from the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And if the wound is kept open for a long time, then it should be treated before it becomes consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two types of cautery used on everyone, but only in some people as a method of fear; and leave that aside, you must tell me, it is better for health when it is so; for the head is damaged by the disruption of its continuity just as we have testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head has a fragile nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cautery is safer and better, you must tell me; and from that point on, it should be done in a way that is beneficial to health.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	About the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and prolonged pain affects the entire head of the patient and you have used remedies such as scrapings, leeches, purges for the head, plasters, washes, baths, and poultices, especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that has not brought any benefit; then consider whether the patient's head is naturally of strong constitution and not fragile, with considerable heat. In this case, apply another type of cautery slightly different from the previous one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that area above the horn of his skull with a cautery until the vein is severed. 
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the tendon and expose the bone to the extent we have recounted, and cauterize that area with a cautery at the rear part of the head in the spot which is called the sinus — and it is the location where the suction cup is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And move your hand in this manner, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will find much greater pain from this different from the pain of all other cauteries on the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I want to describe this cautery in its place, because the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is a more delicate cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is its form.
Capitol ters.	Chapter three.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the cautery of non-traditional migraine.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When a persistent pain occurs in the head or extends into the eye, the head should be cleansed with medicines and other treatments should be administered as I have described in the sections on diseases; if all this does not help, then cautery is applied in two ways: either by means of an acute burning medicine or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	And for cautery with burning medicine, you should take a piece of wool, clean it thoroughly, and attach the ends of it to both sides.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then you cut into the painful area on the temple with a slanted lancet, placing it in such a way that the vein is hidden, or rather, concealed.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then apply pressure to it with a bandage using continuous compression, and leave it for the span of three hours; and then loosen it and remove it, and let the wound be open for two or three days, and then place over it cloth dipped in balsam until the area becomes red.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do this with some medicinal substances which I have written about in the two treatises on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Perform the cautery with an iron according to this method: heat the cautery iron, which has the following form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	It is called a "claw cautery" because the head of it resembles the shape of a clove with some curvature, and in the middle part of it, there is a small elevation.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place it on the site of the pain, and move your hand back and forth — so that the artery underneath does not stick — and rotate the iron little by little with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of it that is adhered by the pressure of the chain is such as half of it, lift your hand so that the artery below is not adhered to, so that there is no flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak a piece in salt water and place it over the area, and leave it there for three days; then place a bandage soaked with ointment, and then treat with an unguent until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you do, cauterize with the tip of the cautery knife as a cautery, and be careful not to cut an artery in this non-traditional area. 
Capitol quart.	Capitol quart.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of the ancient method of cauterizing migraines.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat migraines using the methods we have discussed for previous treatments and in the divisions of diseases, and if the treatment does not prove effective, and sometimes due to the disease the first method with medicine or fire cauterization is not sufficient, then you must heat the scalpel-like cautery until it becomes white-hot, and mark the location of the pain with a line as long as half the width of your finger; then place your hand on it for a moment and press it so that the effect reaches the artery and goes deep into the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to be careful with the continuity of the jaw, which is important for chewing, and that the tendon is not adhered and the nerves which affect it are not spasmed.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it concerns the protection and caution regarding the blood flow from an artery that is to be cut, for there is fear in its cutting, especially for those who are ignorant of what they do and are not studious or experienced; thus, one should leave the operation to someone else at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I come with a reminder of the regimen for blood flow accidents from arteries according to its manner, in its place within this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you find that this cautery is not enough for this disease and the body of the patient is tolerable, apply a cautery at the middle of the head as we have recounted, and treat the ailment until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cautery that we have described in the chapter on artery rupture using a cautery with two blades, and this is a better and more appropriate cautery.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the cautery of ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When pain in the ear is caused by cold and is treated with laxatives and other treatments that I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain persists, then apply the cautery. This cautery is called "puncta," and its form is as follows:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then apply the puncta near the ignition, and move it around the entire ear as a wheel is rotated, or along the circumference of each part if the pain is in specific parts.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Lengthen with the cautery of the razor from the earlobe slowly so that you feel the area with your hand.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of these points covers the entire ear, treat it accordingly, and then care for the areas that need to be healed.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol .vi.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	From the cauterization of tumors.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cautery of the kind that can cause drying out or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that kind of tumor with scrappings and purges and fomentations, and if your treatment does not bring comfort, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first at the edge of the ear, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your cautery on the opposite side of the diseased part, for moistening does not occur except in the area that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the method of cautery is to apply the cautery directly at the uppermost tip of the ear, a little above the horn of the head, and on another temple as well, the length of which should be according to the length of the thumb, and then place your hand with the cautery until half the thickness of the skin is burnt.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, which is a type of instrument, the shape of which is described above.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	And yet it is more subtle than what you see a little bit like this; and it requires that in place of excessive thickness, there should be a bit less.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with what has been previously prepared until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	It seems like you've indicated a chapter or section heading, specifically "Capitul .vii.", which in English would translate to "Chapter VII." If you have more text from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to share it! How can I assist further with this content?
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	This title appears to be in a language similar to Medieval Latin or an early Romance language. Here is the translation into English:
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy has become chronic and you have treated it with the methods we have mentioned and your medication does not agree and the patient has no fever, then cauterize that area with four cauteries: on all the corners of their head; and with one cautery in the middle of the head as we have said; and with one cautery on the nape of the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of the cautery is done according to what has been said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauterized around the mouth of the stomach; and it is more towards the back; then it should be treated with what you process.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On cauterization for forgetfulness caused by flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	It is necessary to give the patient at the beginning large seeds and pills that cleanse the kidneys.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then shave the entire head of the patient and apply a poultice of cerate, as described in the treatise on poultices, to the nape of their neck.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And apply that several times, for that is a method of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to that doctor's order which I have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And thus if that healing is good; and if not, then apply three cauteries to the lower part of his head, which should descend from the highest part of the head towards the part closest to the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And place between each cautery the width of a thick finger, and then treat the cautery as has been described.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you wish to increase it and the patient can tolerate that, then apply the cautery in the middle; and if you want to increase it further, now cauterize the area over both sides.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then treat that area until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form previously given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cautery of the bladder and the soothing of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	You should proceed with the soothing of the head using jars and as we have said; then shave the patient's head, and then apply a cautery in the middle of the head, and with a cautery over all sides of the head, and with a cautery on the lower part of it, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the illness of excessive softening of the body and the patients tolerate it and the disease is severe, then cauterize that with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and finally with a cautery inside where the spinal cord is located, and raise your left hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then treat that which needs healing, and this should be done with an olive cautery.
Capitol .x.	It seems like you've provided a section header, "Capitul .x.", which likely means "Chapter 10" in a slightly altered medieval style. If you have text from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, please provide it, and I'll be happy to help!
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Regarding the cautery for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, you must purify the brain of the patient at the beginning with herbs and with the other treatments that we have described in the section when the patient is strong and can tolerate the administration of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who cannot tolerate the medicines, then administer purgatives and masticatories that cleanse the brain, for several days beforehand, with an improvement in diet.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize it with one cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery on the occiput, and also cauterize each temple.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize that area with the cauteries I have mentioned, having produced paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let the cautery be olive-shaped according to what is prescribed.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then apply a gentle cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cauterization for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize that area with the cauteries we have mentioned, producing paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is an excess that turns to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink that purifies their brain according to what has been mentioned in the previous section.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then shave the head of the patient, and properly apply a well-made poultice on the circle [area], and then place that in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should be made to sit down, and be held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then apply an ointment; and it is better to use the grease from old sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm that over the fire with moderate heat, which the said patient can tolerate when it is applied to them.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then place that on the top of their head in a circle, and allow it to be rubbed in so that it is thoroughly applied.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this with the patient once a week for a whole week, along with other good treatments until they are healed; or if you prefer, cauterize that area by making small points according to the worst part of it, but make sure your hand holds a cautery arranged in this way: this is a special kind of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then place that cloth soaked in grease or in goose fat.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the cauterization of water descending into the stomach.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is declared that the beginning of water in the head is indicated by the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient something that purifies their head, and protect it from all moistures.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And have that person sweat in a bath for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that spot with a cautery in the middle of the head; then cauterize that area with two cauters on both temples if it is the beginning of water flowing out of both eyes, or from one side if it is the start of water coming out of one eye.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	And with a cautery, incise all the veins and arteries that are left in the chain; and let the cauters be at that length along the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And be careful of blood flows when it is being cauterized; and if you see any blood flow, stop it using some medicine that is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And come with the wisdom that is in the extraction of arteries and the cutting off of those, along with caution regarding blood flows.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck between two bones with two backward-facing cauteries.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears of the eyes are long-standing and gradually through the veins and arteries that are in the obvious location on the head outside, and it is confirmed that this is cold superfluous phlegmatic fluid, then cauterize that with a cautery which we have mentioned at the beginning about water falling into the eyes, and with a cautery in the middle of the head and with two cauteries on both temples, and with two cauteries on the neck leaving two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need to apply an additional treatment, then cauterize that part on the entire side of the thigh above the outer end of the eyebrow with a small cautery. 
Capitol .xiiii.	The text provided is in an archaic form of Romance language that blends elements from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here's the translation for the given line:
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of the cauterization of nasal odor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that condition with what we have said in the division and your treatment does not improve it, then prepare and give to drink to the patient decoctions for three nights; then shave his head, and cauterize the affected area moderately with an olive oil cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that with a V-shaped cautery using two cauteries on both eyebrows, leaving the hair a little bit.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful of the artery so that you do not burn it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of the V-shaped cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the cautery for softening the eyelids of wounds.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you do, cauterize that on both eyebrows slightly with two cauteries over the entire area, and extend them towards the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand using the cautery, but to the extent that one-third of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol .xvi.	The line "Capitul .xvi." appears to be an indication of a chapter or section number in Roman numerals. It doesn't have direct content related to medical advice but marks the beginning of a new section or chapter.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	From the cautery of the eyelid when the hairs are converted into particles inside and puncture the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs inside the nose are converted into parts within that cause nasal pain, cautery is applied in two ways, either with iron or with burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If with a hot cautery you are to burn it, command the patient beforehand that they shave their own hairs as those who are shaved do, before they are elongated and curled; and if you pinch them by their roots, then hold the skin of the area with a bandage so that it is not damaged until the hairs have grown back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	When the hairs have grown back and are curled, then place the head of the patient in your lap, and then apply something on the eyelids of the area with a tent-shaped sign, which resembles the shape of a leaf of mert (a type of plant), and the beginning of the sign should be close to the hairs. 
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then place something soaked in egg white or in a paste of flour on the wound.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then heat the cautery, which has this form to it.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize over the figure which you have marked, little by little, in small spots, until the surface of the chain, which is as thin as a myrtle leaf, is thoroughly burned.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of health in your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs of it raised due to the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and leave it for three days, and then place something on it with bandages until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if any cause returns through the hairs near their root and the eyelid is softened, then apply the cautery again over that area just as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	And if the hairs are in the eyelid area, then cauterize that area so that it is raised to its natural position and smoothed out, ensuring that the hairs do not irritate the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And the cautery with burning medicine commands the patient to pull out the hairs so that they are extended and smoothed, and then make the shape of a myrtle leaf from cloth paper.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	Then take soapnut and fresh bark, about an ounce or so of each, and thoroughly mix these ingredients quickly so that they do not cool down; then spread this mixture over the paper that has been made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it on one eye or both; and cover the eyelid with beaten egg white, and keep the patient's head tilted towards you.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place your finger on the medicine and press it slightly without removing it until the patient feels the sting of the medicine, for the sting is like that of fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when the patient perceives the sharp sting, then remove the medicine and take it away with your finger; once the sting ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water; now consider if the eyelid has been lifted as needed, and if so, cleanse the constriction with fire or incision, for it is then well done; but if not, return to applying the medicine on the area where it has not yet taken effect and continue until your operation is smoothed out and the eye contracts properly.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place on the abdomen with a bandage so that the chain of adhesion is eradicated, and then treat it with an emollient or another substance so that it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to carefully guard your operation so that no part of the medicine falls into the eye, and if the eyelid near those days becomes softened and some hairs poke into the eye, then reapply your medicine on the area where the eyelid is softened, just as you did at the beginning, and then treat it with a substance so that it heals.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of the mirtla leaf. 
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the veins of men are diverse according to their size and smallness, and therefore according to this your treatment is made.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not hide the path to healing from one who is studying this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cauterization of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula as we have described in the sections on diseases and your treatment does not work, then you must cauterize it according to this method: instruct the patient to place his head on your thigh, and have another assistant hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that the head is neither strained nor moved.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place a cloth infused with egg white or a poultice of lint over the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cautery, which has the following form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be hollow, like the form of a reed or a vulture's quill, at one end with which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you want, penetrate through the other end. 
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to be done in this manner, as I attempt.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But however, that which is concave is better for this work. 
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, draw out the pus, and dry that area.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place on it the cautery which is well ignited, and hold that with your hand a little away from the nose hole at the part of the nostril, so that your hand does not tremble or the patient becomes disturbed, and then place the cautery in the graise (a term possibly referring to the mucus membrane) of the nostril and burn that area.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if at the beginning of your cautery you penetrate into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, as needed; and leave it that way for three days, and then place on that wound with butter and surround it with a drying ointment until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if ten days have passed and it is not healed, then apply a sharp corrosive medicine to it until the bone is exposed and is scraped according to what is appropriate in its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And here is the translation line by line:
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a tube through the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to where it will come to its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	It seems like you've provided a chapter or section heading, "Capitul .xviii.", which translates to "Chapter XVIII" in English. This indicates the start of the eighteenth chapter in a text. If you have more content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, please provide it, and I'll be happy to help!
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	This phrase appears to be describing a medical procedure related to cauterization. Here is the translation:
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	When white spots appear in the fissures of the lips, especially in children's lips. 
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those cracks using what we have said in the sections and if your treatment does not improve, then apply the small knife-cautery according to this form that is shown:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let the cavity be adjusted according to the delicacy of that area.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place that heated instrument carefully into those cracks so that the cautery reaches the edge of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or at the roots of the teeth, an abscess forms and then breaks open, and subsequently becomes old, with pus flowing and a fistula forming, and if you treat it but it does not improve toward healing, then you must heat a cautery according to the size that fits into the fistula. Then place that heated instrument in the tract of the fistula, holding your hand so that the hot iron reaches the edge of it; this is done once or twice at the end. Then treat it with what we have mentioned for treatment until it heals.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And so if the wound is separated and heals, that is good; but if not, it is then necessary to expose the area and remove the corrupted bone as will be detailed in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol .xx.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of cautery of the teeth and of softening of the veins.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the veins are softened by humidity and the teeth are decayed, and you treat those with medicines but do not find relief, then place the head of the patient on your knee, and next ignite the cautery which will come close to this: in such a way that you place the tube on the tooth and insert into it the ignited cautery quickly, and hold your hand slightly so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reach the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then remove your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and afterwards spit it out, for the decayed tooth is fixed, the softened gum is strengthened, and the corrupted humidity is dried.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of the cautery for toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is caused by cold, or if it is frozen or inflamed, or if you do not find relief with medicinal treatment, then apply cautery in two ways: either use cow dung for the cautery, or use fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquele sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that several times until the heat from the fire reaches the root of the teeth. 
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you want, soak wool or cloth in the decoction mentioned above, and place that on the painful tooth, and place a heated iron over it until the iron reaches the depth of the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	And yet the cautery with fire is what you should pay attention to when using an iron or cauterizing agent, and if there is some roughness in the core of it and the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then heat the cautery to the shape it will take, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand inside until the cautery is cooled; and do this several times whether the pain persists or not, either on that day or on another day. 
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary that by the application of that cautery, the patient fills their mouth with good food and holds it for an hour and then spits it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize whichever extremity according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the cauterization of exstrophy.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When exstrophy is caused by phlegm and cold humors and does not respond to treatment with medicines, and you wish to treat it lightly, then ignite the cautery with a shape as follows, having two hooked ends so that smoke can escape from one end while you hold the cautery by the other end. Place that heated cautery once on the tumor, and repeat if necessary until it reaches the core of the tumor.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the tumor is small, then apply the cautery according to the size of the tumor. Then leave it for three days and place a cloth soaked in ointment on it until what the fire has burned is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with ointment, bandages, and cloths until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the cannula or of the cautery should be cone-shaped. 
Capitol .xxiii.	Capitol .xxiii.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	From the cauterization of hoarseness of voice and constriction of the throat.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the moistures come over the region of the lung, and especially when this is due to coldness in composition, then it is necessary that the patient be purged at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize those places by shaving the area around the navel.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to reach the navel with the cautery nor burn too much of his skin.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that area with another cautery over the joint of the neck at the last vertebra.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery of it should be done with a needle according to the previous method. 
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with what is prepared beforehand so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of the cautery treatment for lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by infiltrating humidity, and the patient does not have fever or tuberculosis and the illness is chronic, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the collarbone at the places where the arteries and veins lie; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot between the two mounds; and let the cautery be in the shape of a claw according to the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let your cautery be a puncture using the cautery that is called "puncta," the form of which precedes in the puncturing for ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points inside the thighs at those spots; then treat that area with the method previously described until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And let the cautery have three prongs, with which the cauterization is done in this way: you can make three cauteries according to this form.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the cautery treatment for tinnitus, which is an ailment of the head.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the joint is dislocated due to lubricating humidities and not fixed at the time of its return, you must place its dislocation inside so that it returns as usual, and then with a slight movement, it is dislocated again in such a way that it falls out, just as we have witnessed; therefore, you should first reduce the dislocation, and then the patient should be laid on their back or side; and then raise the chain which is inside the joint towards the upper parts using the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated inward.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cautery having two heads; and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the chain before it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cautery will come to have four heads.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus it is made subtle according to the amount of testing; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to this method, and that is why the cauteries are eight.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place salt over the cautery points, and then bring the patient to tranquility, and do not move the limb for some time until it is healed.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and this needs to be done, then cauterize over the muscle with a clamp cautery or with multiple pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed, moisture is reduced, and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold and various moistures come into the stomach, causing it to deviate from its natural composition and multiply harmful substances within it, if you continue with the methods of treatment without conferring improvement, then the patient must lie on their back, extend their arms and legs, and then cauterize that area with three cauteries: place one cautery below the feet, about the size of a finger, using a clamp cautery, and with two other cauteries placed below each side of the first cautery so that they form a triangular shape; ensure there is space between them to allow for proper drainage.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is about two-thirds of the thickness of the chain.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the shape of the cautery be according to this form with this addition: And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this shall be a cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And if the stomach is to be cauterized in such a way that it scares the one who undergoes this cautery: first, you place your hand on the stomach and prick according to the amount you wish with a probe, then cauterize those points with a cautery; finally, treat that area with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	From the cautery of the cold spleen.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain occurs in the spleen due to coldness or moisture or excessive wind that throws off its usual composition through excess egress, and the patient is treated as we have said but does not improve, then the patient must be placed on their back with a cushion under their head, and three cauteries should be applied with thread according to this form and quantity below the spleen at the hypochondrium, having taken the person's lying position into account.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the straight body.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not press too much with the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount that is added equals half the weight of the chain, and it should not be tighter than that; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them lie down, with their legs already extended, and raise their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a knife-shaped cautery, when you do so with subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to process too much during the cauterization, and let the essence of the entire chain adhere so that the whole body is attached and penetrates into the intestines, for the chain here is subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the puncturing of an abscess in the spleen with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an excrescence or abscess in the spleen and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the spleen or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the spleen, the patient will show signs of heaviness and acute pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the membrane of the spleen, the pain is very acute and often even fatigues the doctors treating it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, the patient should be turned over on their side; then feel the area of the abscess with your hand; then heat the cautery which resembles a rod, the form of which has been described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that type of cautery until the entire vein is constricted, until it reaches the spleen, so that pus does not come out. 
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that by the treatment of other swellings until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not necessary to use this form of cautery except by one whose study in the art of medicine has been prolonged, and in whom most diseases are known; yet this should sometimes be dared by those experienced, but still leave that to us who know better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cautery of pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancients said that applying cautery to the roots of Artemisia for pleurisy was effective according to this method: you should take a root of dry mugwort as long as you can find, and it should be about the thickness of a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then submerge that root in oil and dry it over fire. Then apply cautery with a single cautery at the location between the continuation of the clavicle and the neck; and with two small cauteries, place them slightly downward toward the area below the beard; and with two cauteries on the area declining between the fifth rib and the spine, inclining slightly towards the back regions; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot; and one over the stomach; and with three cauteries on the back areas; and with one cautery at the location between the two shoulders; and with two cauteries on both sides of the foot, placing the cautery that is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And you do not need to hold your hand with the cautery, but rather on the surface of the wound while working.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And the ancients have already said that among those men who use an iron cautery resembling a ray and ignite it, and place it in the location between the ribs, until they reach that swelling or pus-filled area, just as we have mentioned in the case of pleural empyema.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	And in this perforation with cautery there is no fear, for one dies so quickly when it happens at the location of the fistula which cannot be healed.
Capitol .xxx.	The given text appears to be in an archaic or constructed language that borrows heavily from Romance languages. However, "Capitol .xxx." does not require translation as it seems to indicate a chapter or section number (Chapter 30). Here is the interpretation:
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cauterization of the breast.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the disease of the breast with what we have said about the cure in the division and if you do not achieve a successful treatment, then cauterize it according to three methods, all of which are correct. One of these is to make three or four linear cauteries along the length of the breast following the shape of the spleen cauteries, whose figure has preceded [been described earlier].
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And there should be the thickness of one finger or a little more between each cauterization, and the method of the cautery should be the method we have described for the spleen cautery as well.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not move your hand during the cautery; and the patient should be lying on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another method of cauterization is to apply the cautery with two firm movements, the reason for which we have described in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and lift the chain that is along the length of the breast according to the lying position of the patient on their left side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be such that you raise the chain according to the length of the body, so that cauteries may be made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then insert the two heated instruments into that area where you will penetrate with the chain from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Then remove the cautery; thus, four cauteries have been made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize using a cautery with three points.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Then you treat the cautery after it has stopped bleeding for several days, because it is more conducive to healing than other preceding causes.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cauterization of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterization is not used for dropsy except in certain specific cases properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the dropsy using the methods of cure that we have mentioned in the division and if your treatment does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauteries around the navel, one cautery on the stomach, another cautery on the liver, another cautery on the spleen, two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, one cautery in the middle of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the sharpness of the chain.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then leave the cautery open so that it burns for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not remove the patient from treatment near the cautery with which it is covered, so that two intentions are added to it, and it will be quickly aided in its healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized is claw-like according to its form as previously described, and the one with which the back is cauterized is olive-shaped according to its previously described form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cautery of feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen with dropsy and filled with serous fluid, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot between the auricular and the ankle bone, lift your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; then raise your hand, but do not completely return it, for the serous fluid will drain out.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery is in the following form: And then apply two cauters on both thighs, and on each thigh make a cautery with the pointed end of a knife-shaped cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: place one at the top and another at the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound open for a long time so that some water (fluid) may ooze out of it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then treat the patient according to those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cautery of the abdominal area.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdomen is weakened by cold and humidity, which debilitate its functions, such as digestive and retentive powers located in the stomach and intestines, it should be treated with appropriate methods of treatment without delay. Sometimes patients are subjected to cautery to enhance these functions. In this case, apply a large cautery over their stomach according to the previous method used for stomach cautery, using a circular cautery and four cauteries around the navel in a subtle manner, with a delicate nail-shaped cautery; or apply a cautery on the alvine region (likely referring to the rectal area) with a large cautery, or use two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you remove the excessive humidity and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize that on the kidneys and on the intestines, and strongly adjust by placing two cauteries over the stomach and near the inguinal area, for this is a perfect cure that brings quick relief which cannot be wrong.
Capitol .xxxiv.	It seems like you've provided a section heading, "Capitul .xxxiv.", which translates to "Chapter .xxxiv." or "Chapter Thirty-Four" in English. This indicates the start of Chapter Thirty-Four within a text or document but doesn't contain any content for translation. If you have more content from this chapter that needs translating, please provide it and I'll be happy to help!
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	This line translates to:
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When it is in the nature of old hemorrhoids or one caused by thick humors or corrupted moisture, and they are treated with what we have said about division but you do not agree with that treatment, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus near the lower vertebrae and small triangular areas, and with a cautery above the navel using two fingers.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you suspect that the stomach of the patient is chilled and their food is not digested, and their face sometimes becomes swollen, then cauterize over the stomach with a large cautery as previously mentioned; and with one cautery on the spleen, and another cautery on the liver using a nail-shaped cautery, and leave the cautery open for some time, and then treat internally to heal them.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the cauterization of the armpit near the amputation site.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you amputate the armpit, then ignite the cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert the ignited cautery into the amputated armpit, and move your hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, because if they are too numerous, then cauterize each of them as we have recounted, and then treat those with whatever ointments you apply to them until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on any area, it is more detrimental to healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are naturally detrimental in those areas.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the treatment we have recommended in its proper place, and the patient is frightened by it, he should be treated with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when there is an old fistula in a naturally detrimental area that discharges pus and corrupt humors, what is most appropriate is to probe it with a fine探针, and then determine the depth of it with the previously mentioned probe. 
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	And heat the cautery which resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then place the heated cautery into this fistula, according to the extent to which you probe with the probe.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And apply the cautery repeatedly until those corrupted bodies are burned sufficiently, once or twice or three times, according to your necessity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula leads to the body of the bladder or the intestine, then be careful of all those areas; and do not perform this unless the fistula is in a fleshy area and you think it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the area until it heals.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed and the materials are separated from it, and remain that way for a long time, then you know that it is fully cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not removed from it, then you know that it is penetrating or into the area of the corrupted bone, or this comes from those causes which will lead to a recurrence in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capitol .xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of the cautery of hemorrhoids.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When hemorrhoids cause pain due to cold or excessive wind (swelling), and for this reason, the patient's bowel movement is hindered, then it is necessary to cauterize those areas on the hemorrhoids with a pointed cautery applied to each hemorrhoid, specifically as described.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And we strongly cauterize them with a slight separation, so that three linear cauteries will result, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cautery of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When you encounter weakness and softening of the bladder due to cold and moisture such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize in the area slightly above the bladder where the pubic hair begins. Cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left side of it.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the number of the patient's fingers; and cauterize that area with a cautery on the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let the cautery be applied with a clamp as it is processed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol .xxxix.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of the cauterization of the womb.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When cold and humidity come into the womb, and because of this conception is prohibited, and their menstruation is corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and pain occurs at the descent of them, then it must be that the area be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder; and with a cautery over the pubic region below, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be cloven.
Capitol .xl.	It appears you've provided a section marker, specifically "Capitul .xl.", which seems to indicate Chapter 40 (since xl is the Roman numeral for 40). If you have text from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, please provide it, and I'll be happy to help!
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	This line is in a language similar to medieval Latin or Old French and translates to:
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist phlegmatic humors are poured into the area of the ankle, and they become causes of swelling in their location, and a sign of it is that one thigh appears extended compared to the other when they are compared together.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is found where there is swelling.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the area of their ankle with a circular cautery, since you will have marked around the area as it is turned back, and in such a way that the area falls in the center of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And it is the cautery with which one precedes the form of cauterization of the stomach. 
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize that area with three large olive oil cauters.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cautery be done according to the severity of the entire condition; then care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLII.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	From the cautery of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain comes in the upper part, and it is caused by cold and humidity, the patient is treated as we have said and do not doubt this, which is old-fashioned now, at present you should release the patient from thick humors with foul pills or artificial pills or similar ones; then cauterize that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of cautery in this case is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	And it follows two known methods, one of which is to cauterize that area on the broad part with three triangular cauteries in this form; and make with those a good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cautery should be the quantity of the thickness of a finger, and the cautery can be olive-shaped or grain-shaped.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	And sometimes the cautery should be placed on the exact spot at the head of the ankle, making four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you want, cauterize with a circle, which precedes the form in the cautery of the dislocation of the ankle, such that the circle contains and burns the entire length of the tendon.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cautery for gout when the pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	And if it extends into the thigh, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the thigh at the spot where you ask the patient where the pain is; and with one cautery on the calf, about four fingers away from the outer part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is knife-like, and the depth of the cautery should be according to the degree of protrusion of the chain.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient complains that the pain is spreading around the area near the toes of the foot, then cauterize that area where they complain with a cautery using three points or four or more as needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient complains that the pain extends from the ankle to the thigh, then cauterize that area with a knife-shaped cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in any cauterization that you do not use the cautery so much as to burn nerves or major arteries, and by doing so, cause harm or contraction to the patient.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen some who cautery near the ankle and overdo the cauterization, causing the hot ember to swell inside until the tumor reaches the foot, and the heat perforates and corrupts the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	Then a strong discharge from the stomach occurs, and consequently, death may follow.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two separate areas, cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise ones have said about certain things in the cauterization with a circular cautery, of which this is the method: make a circle of iron where the circumference should be half a palm; and let its hole be according to the thickness of a date bone or somewhat less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle is another third; and the space between them is equal to the size of a nut of the foot; and those circles are opened from two sides; and the length of those rods is one or two nuts, and make on those edges of iron decently fitted into the circles; and this is its form:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	And it should be heated in the fire until it becomes red and emits sparks, and then it should be placed on the affected part of the ankle, with the patient lying on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize that area with three circular cauteries at once.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it for three days; then apply a plaster to it, keeping the wound open for several days; and then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Dixit Albucasis: O, sons, of this kind of cautery we have used little due to the fear of its appearance, and because few have found it worthy of attention. 
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	And among the good cauters for him who has suffered, and find with that the spot on him.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	And using a cautery with adhering medicines, you should make two circles having an armula perforated in which they place the hinge of the iron door; let the length of the walls be according to their nature two nuts or keys whichever.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space which is between each of the width of a finger; and they are opened below and above, and they contain themselves in this way according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place your hand on the area of the ankle while the patient lies on their side, and press your hand on the area of the ankle; and then take warm water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that should be near the fire little by little, and keep that for about an hour, and let the patient endure the burning and adjustment — for that finds burning as if from fire — until the burning ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand with the instrument and clean the warm water off the entire ankle with cool water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then let it rest for three days and place your hand on the area until the blackness from the burning is removed, and let it rest for several more days, and pus will run out of it; this is the final stage of healing.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that area with ointments until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is spread in the thigh or the abdomen, apply the treatment in a way that involves water as it is done for the ankle similarly.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the refinement of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Take equal parts of alkali and unextinguished lime (quicklime), mix them together, and place the mixture in a new container, one part of which should have a small hole to allow for the passage of vapor according to the amount that enters it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place the bottom of the container on another perforated container, then pour soft water over the alkali and quicklime until it covers them by a finger's depth. Then compress them with your hand with good pressure, and allow the hot water that drips from them to fall into the part below in the perforated container.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then concentrate all that water, and pour it over more quicklime and new alkali, because this will result in a strongly acidic solution, which is used in many medical procedures and for the cauterization of other body parts, as this operation involves fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And thus, with some medicines with which a broad cauterization is performed, such as tezizic and honey anacrat mixed with quicklime and soap, which are combined together.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gaulus recounts an operation and cure used by one of the ancients for treating pain in the ankle and sciatic vein, and he magnificently praises it as being very effective, saying that no other cure is necessary, and claims that one who is treated this way is healed permanently just as he describes, having immersed himself in a bath and thus freed himself from it.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that green fennel should be taken, and if green fennel is not found, fresh figs should be taken; they should be crushed with a little fat and placed on the ankle where there is pain, or on the thigh, or on the abdomen, and should be bandaged.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for a period of three hours or for the amount of time that the patient feels relief from the application.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then put that in water and when the body is heated, place it in the sun, for the pain will cease and be healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use cautery with these medicines except near the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	But Escorides says that when the vein is cauterized with goat's milk, it greatly benefits; and the cautery should be applied in this second manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and the sore.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Then take dried goat's milk and char it over fire until it becomes charcoal; then place it on the wool and spread it out.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this, and do not stop doing this until the sensation of the bite reaches up to the ankle and the pain subsides.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called cow cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	From the text provided and its structure, it seems like an old medical text that combines elements from various Romance languages. Based on this pattern, let's attempt a translation for the given line:
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	During certain times, pain in the back is caused by various reasons, such as from falls or blows or excessive evacuation, and due to causes similar to these, by the infusion of cold and moist matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery is only used in this specific condition which is caused by the effusion of cold matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, it is necessary to evacuate the patient with pills that are fitted and similar to them, which should be applied on the back where the pain is located in three lines according to its width, and then mark each line with ten points or more for cauterization, depending on the tolerance of the patient and their strength.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And the cauterization should be done with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries using a medial claw-shaped cautery in the following manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On the use of cauterization at the beginning of jaundice.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Spotting or slight bleeding often occurs with this ailment in small children; and a sign of the onset of it in children is that it affects their structure, causing elevation and movement in the eyes.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you will find that the lower vertebrae of the back and spine begin to protrude above the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And therefore when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	And take the cautery over all parts of the vertebra equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery, two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then treat the area in between so that it heals according to what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But beware that cautery should not be applied to swelling caused by nerve spasms.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that penetrate each part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, doctors customarily call this gout properly.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus when gout caused by cold is treated with a method of cure and the pains are not alleviated, then they should be treated with cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is that you cauterize that area near the evacuation in the circle of the foot joint with multiple cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And it is an olive-shaped cautery, of which this is the form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain rises into the fingers or other joints, and this often happens, then apply cautery to each finger with three or four cauteries from all sides using this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you need more cauteries than these, then apply the cautery without pressing your hand too hard on it first, just around the size of a coin.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain spreads into the finger and hand, then apply the cautery that we have described in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is only in the muscles and it is called suagra (likely a medieval term for a specific condition), then puncture around the armpits as they revolve, puncturing along those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain remains in the toes, then puncture around the armpits on each toe and on the palm of the hand. 
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains approach after some days to the joints or the muscles, then cauterize those areas all around with the help of instruments.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not deprive the patient of good regimen and reception of medicines, for if a good regimen is followed and the pus is evacuated with this cautery, they will be healed, may God help.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On the cautery of fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a rupture in the thighs and the intestines protrude before the hernia at the groin, and this often begins gradually, then you must have the patient leave their meal on that day and use laxative causes so that the flux descends from their belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then follow the patient with your hands on their back, and command them to keep their body straight until the hernia or the intestine is expelled or appears.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then, with your hands, return it by pressing the rupture over the bone of the thigh, using a tool whose end resembles half of a circle, applied to the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Until it becomes red hot and gives off sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and then place your hand over the area so that the intestine does not come out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion underneath. Another servant should be on the patient’s chest, and another on their feet, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cautery on that mark with your hand holding the cautery straight, and do so until you reach the bone of the heel in the middle of the wound; and repeat with that again if you have not succeeded in reaching the bone in the first attempt.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And carefully observe the condition of the intestine during your cautery, so that you do not burn it, causing death or another great harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your operation is not successful.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then treat the area of the cautery for three days with ointment until the scar from the fire is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that area with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie on their back for forty days until the area and the wound are fully healed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And it is necessary to control the patient's diet according to the length of their treatment, so that their stomach diminishes, and to prevent the intestine from coming out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	Then, when it is time to remove [the treatment] after forty days, administer a properly made medicine, and let the patient take it for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let them be reduced in labor and the consumption of food and drink, and loud voices, for when they follow this regimen of complete healing, they will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will tell the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if they do not want to heal, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and let what is protruding from the wound be about a third of it; then treat that area as we have said, and do not adjust.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some of the first [doctors] have already said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, since it is marked with a line [indicating where to apply the cautery].
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And it is placed with a straight line that you draw across the widest part of the side above the rupture, and another line below; then place your hand with a claw cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the cauterization of torsion.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain occurs in the limbs due to a fall or impact and that pain persists for a long time without improvement through medical treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And let the cautery be applied to each limb according to its size and smallness, and strength and weakness, and the location of the twist and pain in it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; and if not, then apply the cautery to it again; for it is customary with those pains to puncture the limb near the area affected, because you must achieve this with a cautery before the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the cautery treatment of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some lepers see great benefit from being treated with cautery, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of blood and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And when you want to cauterize the patient, consider if the leprosy is widespread and can be cured with what we have said in the division and does not remain, and you fear that the corruption will encompass the whole body and all the composition of it, then cauterize on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and the second slightly below it, towards the forehead at the end of the hair; two on both temples; and one behind, on the neck or nape.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And place your hand with the cautery a little inside so that it presses on the bone slightly, and from there dislodge the scales, so that the expiration of thick vapors may be alleviated for them; and cauterize over the shoulder as necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then you must cauterize those areas with the cauteries we have mentioned above; and with a cautery on the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on both cheeks, and with two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and with six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and with one large one on the vertebrae near the hip, and one on the hip itself, and with two on the knees, and one on each knee, and with two on the elbows, and one on each elbow joint, and with two on the shoulders, and with two on the muscles, and with two on the tendons of his foot; and cauterize those areas over all the joints of his fingers and toes, and on each heel of his feet, and on the nails of his hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful of the nerves that are on the heel so as not to burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the hip and with another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the spleen.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more beneficial and appropriate it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, unlike they do with others, because their body is already numb.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or few according to the limbs and joints, depending on the specifications of the tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the cautery with crushed ear flour mixed with honey and with the other cure until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the cauterization for stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any limb is numb or paralyzed and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but is not healed, then you should cauterize that numbed limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery enter slightly into the opening of the wound.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with an ointment so that it may be healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes a cautery is applied to certain areas that affect the hands and feet, and the vertebrae of the back, to clear the excretions of the nerves which cause that member to be affected, and the area is cleaned.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not presume on this unless one is knowledgeable in the anatomy of the limbs and the distribution of the nerves that move throughout the body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the cautery of ulcers that are malignant.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When an ulcer is old and does not respond to any of the ointments of medicine, then you should cauterize it using a cautery for a short period according to the severity of the infection, so that the whiteness and color of it are cleaned, and its color changes.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with flour of ashes and lentils mixed with rose oil and leaves of arnica, and with the blood of a dove or the blood of a swan, each in equal parts and all well mixed, and then apply it to a cloth and place it on the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	The line "Capitul .l." seems to indicate the start of a new chapter or section in the text, possibly numbered as ".l.", which might correspond to "Chapter 1" or simply mark the beginning of a new part. Here is how it can be translated:
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of the cautery of hernia.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you want to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around it as it appears.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the latter cautery in the middle of the area; but I have not seen this, for I fear it may ulcerate, and I have indeed seen this happen several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better that it be cauterized around it in a circle as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the cauterization of hernias.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some hernia is delayed in maturation, and this is due to an excess that causes it, or due to the condition of the patient, who is old and weakened, with little blood, or due to time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the hernia; then cauterize around it with small pointed cauteries; and afterwards leave it so that it will hasten in maturing.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you wish to perform the perforation with a cautery, then heat the cautery which has this form: and place it in the most suitable location within so that the cautery penetrates.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery in that most suitable location is left there, so that the arm's body be relieved; and then care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On the cautery of corrosives.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosive is a moving corruption in the limb, which corrodes it as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you find the corrosive in a place that can withstand cautery with fire, then heat several small and large clavicle-shaped cauters suitable for the location where the corrosion is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize it thoroughly until you eradicate all the corrosion and leave no cause of it remaining.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then leave it for three days, and place over the cauterized areas a dressing made with oil mixed until all the scabs are removed and all the corruption is eradicated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then treat it with flesh-generating ointments.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	And if within three days the flesh does not grow healthy and without corruption, that is good; but if not, then apply the cautery again to those areas that are raw and corrupted.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And sometimes it is treated with sharp medicine, for that is used in place of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, cautery with fire is a more reliable method.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already described the treatment with sharp medicine in the section, so use that when you find it necessary.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the cautery of claws and other similar parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Often observed are conditions affecting the parts of the foot that are called claws, which are caused by a severe swelling that turns the foot. Cauterization in these cases is done in two ways: with fire cautery and with hot water cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	And here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place that ignited cautery on the joint, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the joint until the cautery reaches the depth of the joint.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave that for three days until it begins to sweat out [the excess]. 
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a plaster made with crushed wild mallows and salt to that area, and leave the plaster on it for one night, because this will root out its origins.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with an ointment made from generative flesh until it is healed. 
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and many times you encounter this on the surface of the body, particularly in the hands and feet, then you must administer these cauteries with water. Take a quill or a tube made of iron or a feather shaft, and place that over the claw; then pour a small quantity of hot water into the tube, and hold your hand; rotate it with the compression of your hand all around, pressing the edge of the tube against the nail bed; the hot water will find its way to the root of the nail. Let the patient endure the sting of the hot water for an hour, and then remove it, as the claw along with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And in this way, with these, one approaches the other until all of them are reached throughout the entire body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then treat those abscesses where the roots of the claws (nails) are removed using these ointments which cause the flesh to regenerate.
Capitol .liiii.	Capitol .liii.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of cautery for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is a tremor in someone due to cold in the nerves or from a cold fever, or for another similar reason, then you must cauterize that with four or five cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, placing one cautery between each vertebra; and also apply a cautery to their feet, and over their stomach using an olive-shaped cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor of the patient is calmed and hastens the healing of the cold illness.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 5.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the cauterization of various accidents to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When there are swellings and pustules on the body, which are formed from thick corrupted matter; at the beginning when they appear, it is necessary to cauterize over each head of the fistula with a fine cautery using myrtle sticks, the end of which is extended with fire; or with long ash-tree splinters; or with a lens-shaped cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes the cautery is also applied at the beginning of its expulsion in this manner; and they are not considered harmful, and the excess is disrupted by doing this, thereby healing them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it must be done near evacuation with bloodletting.
Capitol lvi.	Capitol lvi.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of cautery for accidental blood flow due to artery cut.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Watch out for blood flow from an artery that has been cut, which can cause the wound to bleed externally, or lead to the beginning of abscesses or the need for cautery on the limb, and similar situations, making it difficult to remain there.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when this happens to someone, you should press with your hand on the opening of the artery, and place your finger over it, squeezing tightly within until the flow of blood stops, ensuring that it does not continue.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Then place the small and large olive-shaped cautery irons in the fire several times, and blow on them until they are thoroughly heated.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	Then take one of those, either small or large, depending on the location and the wound where the artery is ruptured, and apply it over the vein quickly after you have removed your finger, holding the cautery until the blood is congealed and restrained.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove your finger and withdraw the cautery, then take another preheated cautery from those prepared in the fire, and continue applying them one after another until the bleeding is stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and that no other mischief comes upon the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in those places except by one of four methods: with a cautery as we have mentioned, or by extraction when it cannot be extracted, because when it is extracted, the ends of the arteries are burned and the blood flow is restricted; or it can be tied with thread or with a bandage tightly; or substances that have the power to constrict the blood should be applied, and they should be pressed with a poultice appropriately.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	And he who administers appropriate constriction with bandages and tight binding with cloths or through the position of cauterizing and similar methods should not apply it too quickly.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	And if this happens to someone and the doctor is not present nor medicine available, then apply pressure with your index finger on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand that you must constrict it tightly so that the blood stops from the main part of the wound, and do not remove your finger from the artery; and above the artery, sprinkle it with cold water that is very cold until the blood coagulates and thickens; and finally, consider whether cauterization or medication is necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	About incision and puncture and cupping and bloodletting and plasters and their equivalents.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter about all diseases in which cautery with fire is appropriate and with burning medicine, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for them along with the forms of the cauterizations; and I have ordered the chapters from the highest part of the head down to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner, so that the reader may be relieved regarding what they have sought to know about this.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this, son, it is important that you understand that in this chapter, there is a continuation of what was in the first chapter on cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for this reason, great caution is needed, because in the operations described in this chapter, many times bloodletting occurs, which involves the vein from which life depends, or incision on an abscess, or opening for extraction or purification of a wound, or removal of an arrowhead, or the initiation of stone expulsion and their equivalents.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And accompanying all of these is fear and trembling, and in the majority of cases, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this should not happen to you in which there is danger, for sometimes your ways as a person can turn into ways of illnesses. 
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them, some will go with their illness and death is near due to it, and this because of the intensity of what they find in their illness, and due to the length of their illness, and with the illness comes fear which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those is the one who gives you his belongings and says, you hoping with that person for health, and their illness is perilous.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore you should not consent to what comes to you in this manner; and your caution should be greater than covetousness and greed; and do not presume any cause over this unless it is based on certain knowledge that confirms what you owe, and for which praiseworthy success follows.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And used in the cure of all your illnesses, for prognosis and indication to whom health is restored, because therein lies your help towards acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, sons, may God inspire you with His understanding and not remove direction and protection from you, for this is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing by sections according to what was preceded in the chapter on cautery, of the treatment from head to foot, so that it may be alleviated for you what you ask about this and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness often occurs due to childbirth and when the wet nurse tightly binds the child's head with cloth.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it occurs due to hidden causes that are not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have only seen this illness in children; and in all those cases, death was the outcome, and thus it seems to me that it is a fatal condition in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of the child was always so enlarged that he could not support himself due to the size of his head, and the humidity increased until it caused death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture either accumulates between the tendon and the bone, or settles beneath the bone on the spinal column.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation in that case where moisture is between the tendon and the bone and the abscess is small, then you must cut into the middle of the head with a slit horizontally, and let the length of the slit be about two fingers' width so that the moisture can flow out, and this is the form of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And thus, if the humidity is more increased and the abscess is larger, then there are two incisions according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is near the bone, a sign of it is that you see the sutures of the skull open from all sides and water is squeezed when you press that area with your hand on the inner parts and this was not previously noticed by you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	You must make three incisions in the middle of the head according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	and then extract all the humidity through the incision; and then secure the incisions with bandages and poultices; and then wash it over with wine and oil within five days, and then remove the dressing and treat the wound with lint and ointments, and bind the head equally; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, where you consider the size of the abscess and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more in the occipital region, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left side; and thus, pay attention with the incision to where the abscess and the accumulation of water appear, and do this according to what is best possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut into the artery, lest blood flow and the patient dies from that blood loss with evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Capitol .ii.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	From the incision of the arteries which are near the ears, called the temporal arteries. 
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When catarrhs or rheums occur in the eyes or feet, and this has been ongoing for a long time, and you do not see improvement with medicinal treatments, then the final remedy in this case is to begin treatment from those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And thus it is necessary that when you want to incise those areas where the patient has their head shaved, and then rub the area with a coarse cloth so that the arteries become visible, and then tightly bind the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then find where the vein pulses; and the locations of each one over the spots which are near the ears are pressed, and they remain hidden in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then mark over the artery with a thread, and then incise each one with a sharp spathum from each side penetrating into the bone, and do this along the length of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the spathum under the artery and break it at the points of incision on both sides.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers joined, for when any vein is cut, blood is expelled with a pulsating outflow, which bursts out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	And if the artery does not appear at the incision site, then you must measure from the earlobe the distance of three fingers, and then mark it with a needle, and proceed to enter into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And what is necessary to let flow from the blood is an ounce of wine, and it strongly depends on whether more or less flows from him, and all of this is according to the amount that appears due to the strength of the patient and the fullness of his artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then examine the wound, and if any pus-causing matter remains on the bone, remove it to prevent an abscess from forming.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with poultices and linen bandages, and continue to treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an individual suffers from chronic migraines or sharp headaches due to moisture and qualities in the sinuses of the temples, or when these are severe and similar to those conditions, and treatment with medical methods does not provide relief, then we resort to extracting the arteries in the temples or cauterizing them as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of the operation and extraction is that the patient shaves the hairs which are on the temples; and understand the artery that appears in the temple where it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden except in few men due to the strength of cold.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is obscured from you, then the patient's neck should be tightened with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And now take the spatula which has the following form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you carefully scrape the vein until you reach the artery; and then insert and extract it piece by piece until you remove it from the vein and expose it from the tunics that cover it, on all sides.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is delicate, then wrap it with the tip of a needle, and then divide it in part according to how much the extremities are stretched or contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, because if they are not divided, the blood will not flow properly.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate one to three uncii (ounces) of blood.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then you must tie it in two places with strong double-threaded silk or cords tightly, and do not allow putrefaction before the wound heals and the blood flow stops.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then you cut into the excess that is between two ligaments; and do this at that time or another suitable moment.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that area with a cautery between the bone using a knife-shaped cautery before the ends of it are incised, and let it remain in place for the same duration of work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better to perform the work when the patient does not have fever or a heated constitution; for cautery is one of those causes that aids in expelling harmful moisture, and thus it is more beneficial in treatment.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And after the extraction of the arteries, you should fill the area with old catgut, and place them over the wound properly dressed, then treat it with dry medicines that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working another outbreak of blood flows from the artery, then you must act to stop that bleeding, either by using a cautery or by filling the area with catgut, and hold your hand until the bleeding is stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes are present to you, then place your finger on the spot where the blood has congealed, and pour water of intense coldness over the area until the sharp pain subsides, and be firm according to what is needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is lighter in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades, since you have marked the two spots with a probe, and then place them, ignite them, until they reach the bone and divide the vein into two places, so that what is between the ends of it is elongated, for they are not entirely consolidated by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two blades should be similar.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if the sharpness of the two blades is less, it is better, for if they are as sharp as two blades close to each other, they will not cut the flesh quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, since there is some thickness in them, the heat of the fire is retained in them, and the flesh is cut easily.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than all other works and lighter. 
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space which is between two ribs be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of acute and acidic tears in the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When those tears are acidic, and the source of these veins which are on top of the head is external, and you do not find any cause for medical treatment in this regard, often the face of the patient turns red, and they feel a crawling sensation on their forehead as if it were an ant's crawl, and their eyes become strained to such an extent that even the hairs around them are noticeable, and the eyelids are inflamed by the sharpness of the tears. Ancient bitter remedies were used in treating this condition, and I will not enumerate those treatments here.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to remove the hairs that are on their forehead, and then make three incisions in the forehead equally spaced according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is about two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose at the middle of the forehead, the second according to the length a little beyond the movement of the tear ducts which are in the lacrimal area, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful of the beginning of the arteries which are on two sides, and stretch your hand along the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three fingers put together.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloths with which you dry the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the spatula with two sharp ends, of which this is the form of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	The phrase "que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio" can be translated into English as follows:
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Here is the translation line by line:
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then stretch this spatula and insert it into the first incision again using another instrument which is called a knife, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place the sharp side of that against the adjacent flesh, and the other side against the bone, and push it in until it reaches the middle crack, and with that cut all the vessels descending from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	And continue the incision to this part of the flesh, and then do this in the middle crack between another crack.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when an equal amount of blood flows out, press the areas where the clotted blood is located.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place in each crack some old goat hair, and put on those ashes mixed with wine and oil and vinegar, and ensure that it does not cause a harmful swelling.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of warm or tepid water, and then treat it with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil and other things until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Capitol .v.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	For the given sentence:
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When excessive sharp and continuous cathartic symptoms occur, and sometimes the eyes of the patient are weakened slightly, and their vision is diminished, and the eyelids become ulcerated with the hair falling out, and there is acute pain at the fontanelle of the head followed by sneezing, then you should know from these symptoms that the material and cathartic substances do not come but from small veins within the affected areas.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure in these cases is this: command the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision at the center of the forehead, a small one in width (and begin the incision from the left temple towards the right temple; and let the incision be within the bone; and move your hand away from the temples which are painful due to chewing), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth, and then pack between the two edges of the incision with old wool or cloths.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then apply a mixture of powdered material soaked in wine and oil on top to prevent an inflammatory swelling from forming.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you unbind it and see that the abscess has already diminished, then it is necessary to rub between the bones where new flesh begins to grow, and next treat this with a drying regimen which causes the flesh to grow, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and from these make a plaster and apply it to these areas where the flesh is regenerating.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	For the given sentence:
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Every cause that affects the ears is of one of four types: either it is a mineral stone or something similar to a stone, such as iron and glass, or it is from plants, such as sesame or bean, or it is a flux-like cause, such as water and sour wine and things like them, or some kind of animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And so when a stone enters the ear or another similar cause from those causes that do not fit nor grow in the ear, and expose the ear to the sun, and if you can remove the stone, then let it drip with some kind of distilled solution such as violet oil or sizami, and then administer its extract, and make them sneeze with a condition, and plug the nostrils before the occurrence of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear's opening, and stretch the ear upwards, as these methods are often effective with such causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not effective, then administer the extract with an instrument called a subtle epispiral probe, which has the following form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is induced by movement, that is good; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with an ounce of subtle purgation doubled.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore, if it is not caused by that, then make a tube from a reed and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal and seal around the tube with wax and softened oil so that only the tube remains open.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract with your breath using strong suction, for it helps greatly as we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not cured in this manner, then take some quicksilver or an old preparation with which birds are caught in small quantities, and place that at the end of the ear, and then wrap something around it properly placed.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the ear canal easily, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore, if it is not cured by all the methods we have described, then you must consider making an incision before it develops into an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method of incising it is that you first let blood from the patient’s spleen vein according to the method suitable for them, and then make a cut between your fingers, turn the ear towards the upper side, and then make a small incision at the tip of the ear, removing the pus from the deeply pressed area.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the crack of lunar shape reaches the stone, and once the stone is found, remove it with appropriate instruments if you can; then immediately close the crack at that time quickly, and care for it until it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause of the issue in the ear is one of the growths that have grown and become swollen, then administer its treatment and extraction; but if it does not respond to this method, then take a thin, subtle spatula according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and use it to remove the growth that has occurred in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not perform this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor from the ear, and place it in small pieces, then extract those pieces with your fingers or with subtle movements, or by incision as we have said, for the extraction of it is easier.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	However, when water has entered the ear, the patient should begin by using a sneeze with caution, and fill their ear with some old cloth, then jump over the ear in which the water is, and if it is thus expelled, that is good; otherwise, take thin stone pieces and levers according to the length of a finger, heat those slightly in the fire, and have the patient insert one of them into the passage of their ear and jump on one side of that part while percussing with another stone on the stone inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, do not stop until all the water has been completely drained away.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And once the water has been completely drained away, take some paper or hemp, and place one end of it in the ear, and extend the other end towards fire until the middle part of it is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	Then insert another hemp and do this as many times until all the water is completely drained away, and stir it with a tube as was mentioned above regarding the stone extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	However, in the extraction of a small foreign object entering the ear, if it is small and similar in size and appearance, treat it as we have said in the previous section; but if it is large enough to cause pain deep in the eardrum, then administer its removal with gentle movements and pressure, for the cause of this is lighter than all other causes that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	However, in the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it with what we have said in the section and in the tract on distillations and your treatment does not take effect, then you must examine the ear in the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus if any sign of worms appears here, then extract them with your hands or with fine tweezers; but if no cause appears, then take a tube that is narrow at one end and wide at the other, which has this shape:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the thin extremity into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; and then suck through it forcefully, and do this several times until all the worms have been expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	And if you do not obey this instruction, then plug and seal the tube's circuit with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find these in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your effusion be with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, which has the following form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or of bronze, leave it straight, with a small tube in it, and a plate on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus it should be designed to fit into the cavity of the tube that will be necessary for containment.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the rod and wrap the end of it with a small piece of cloth, then pour oil into the cavity of the ear, or juice from some herb, or any such medicine into the tube — which is in the ear — and then insert the rod with the cloth on top and press it gently with your hand until the oil is forced into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And that which is inserted into the ear should already be warmed with fire a little.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the substance you will instill into the ear is not too cold, for medicines for the ear do not tolerate that.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear obstruction.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes, some children are born with unperforated ear drums from their mothers, and this can also happen in adults, where obstruction occurs in the ear canal due to an infection or fleshy growth there. This obstruction sometimes happens at the entrance of the ear canal without touching the eardrum, and sometimes it is on the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs at the entrance of the ear canal, without involving the eardrum, is often in a more difficult condition to heal.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in cases where the eardrum is involved, you should expose the patient's ear to the sun and examine it closely.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And when an obvious swelling appears, open it with a fine scalpel of which this is the form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of it in which the width is small, one part being sharp and the other not; and the spatula be two-sided so that it does not injure the ear. 
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And therefore if the obstruction is due to flesh grown in the ear or in the throat, then use subtle hooks and cut that area with great ease until all the flesh is removed. 
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if there is blockage in the ear canal, then take a thin piece of linen and warm it slightly over fire, and then insert it into the flesh of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And thus if you have detected blockage such that the patient finds it easy to exhale due to gravity, ease the pressure on them easily; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place in the ear a piece of cloth as wide as the size of the tube that you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take some wax, immerse it in rosewater and sprinkle finely ground powder over it and use it; and if you find the ear to be abscessed, then you must remove that wax and replace it with other wax that you wrap in cloth made with anointed oil until the abscess begins to soften; and continue treating it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	And if blood flow occurs, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment that restrains the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol .viii.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	For the care of athezil, which occurs in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you must hold those with towels or cloths, and cut them from their roots with a sharp instrument, then place your hand over the trimmed areas.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	And if pain with a flow of blood occurs, then you cauterize those areas with a subtle lens-shaped cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cautery is performed near the incisions and observed veins returning when there remains any cause of their reappearance; and when they are cauterized with fire, those veins are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for swelling that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Visible spots appearing in the eyelids of the eyes, some cause of which resembles swelling in its strength and hardness, and thus it is called swelling.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the eyelid below and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the procedure for it is to examine whether the swelling is occurring in such a way that it appears from the eyelid and is rough on all sides; and the cause of it is slight.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, make an incision over it along its width, and then gently squeeze it from all sides until it shrinks, and then suspend it with an ounce and cut it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if you are not prepared at the start of the procedure and must penetrate the eyelid with incisions little by little, then this does not matter in any way.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and care for what is inside so that it may heal.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from it because the heat of it restores and reattaches that area.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is decreasing inside the eyelid and affecting the inner surface, then open the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a needle, so that you do not immediately incise from the start, and press on it from all sides; and if the eyelid has been extended by the incision, this does not matter in any way.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Then for the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with something that promotes healing until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the treatment around the upper eyelid of the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you find them lying on their faces all the time, and they sleep with their faces down; and at the edges of their eyes, the eyebrows are wet, which have already been covered by swelling, and an obvious presence of cataract is in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel the cataract inside them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And in some manner of operation, the patient places his head on your lap, and then you place a cloth over him and make it warm. Then create a circle according to the amount that contains arthernach from all sides, and then place that over this and press with your fingers from all around so that arthernach is aggregated in the middle of the circle, and then introduce moisture into the center of that with a spatula inserted through a fissure along its width, and the fissure should not be larger than the one made in flaubotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, remove that with cloths which you have wrapped between the aforementioned areas on the outer parts and roll between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to insert it into the fissure so that with the spatula you do not reach the wound and aggravate it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If the artery does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, then place in the fissure a small piece that will facilitate the process of the artery; and then extract it as we have said; and then apply linen cloths soaked in warm wine and water and place them over the area and press them with powder.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And thus, those who use salt and place it in the depth of the fissure to remove any remaining moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then care for it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	And if an abscess occurs in that area, then treat it with plaster made of cedar until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On methods of applying to the stomach.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When natural hairs grow in the eyelids and become old, these can harm the eye and lead to various ailments such as continuous tearing and softening of the eyelids and film, which can eventually cause destruction of the eye, a condition known as entropion of the eye. This is treated in four ways: by cautery with fire; by acute medicine as previously mentioned in the chapter on cauteries; by creating an atactini through incision and suturing; or by using cannas, which I will explain.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And therefore you must place the patient's head in your lap; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it turns, that is good; and if not, insert a needle into the area where there is thread from the part above the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with the thread over it, and this should be — near the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow — close to the hairs, and pull the thread upwards toward the parts above with the eyelid, and turn that area around.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Then insert into the area inside the eyelid below the hairs using a small spatula from the larger lacrimal duct into the smaller one; then remove the thread and place a small amount of cotton or cloth below the eyelid, and then sew over the eyelid with a needle, and it should be done like a figure of a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, the shape must be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, for this varies among individuals, as some require a large incision from the eyelid depending on the extent to which the eyelid is sagging.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then spread with the spatula over the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the larger tear duct to the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if the fissure is near the natural hairs, as is usually the case with most people.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the needle at one of the two ends of the chain, and then scrape that entire area. Then join the two lips with a suture using fine thread or woolen yarn, and clean the blood. Make what is excess from the threads adhere over both eyebrows with some viscous causes if you wish to do so, and if not, pay no mind.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then remove the suture of the threads between three or four days, and then care for it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want, leave the wound unsutured, and care for it with things that dry and constrict, because the eyelid being raised requires the sealing of the wound and the addition thereof; however, suturing is better. Therefore, this is what the ancients taught regarding treatment.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, one must be careful with the patient, and it is part of good practice, and not done out of fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method in taxation, and it involves raising the eyelid like a myrtle leaf, and then lift the eyelid with three separated and brought together points according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And if it is not possible to do that, keep the hooks, and since this is not equalized, then take a needle with thread and put that in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread near the larger lacrimal duct, and the second thread near the smaller lacrimal duct, and adjust between those threads equally, and then lift your hand with an equal elevation, lifting the entire chain over which it is marked just as we have recounted.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bring together the two edges of the wound with sutures, and care for it so that it may heal.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if an abscess occurs at your incision or your fissure, seal that abscess with wax and similar substances, and with unguents.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes you may encounter an eyelid where the hairs are inverted, then you must use in that case what we have said about incision; however, suturing is more intricate in such cases.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To straighten with canes follows this method:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And it is that you turn the eyelid inside out and split the figure within as I have recounted; then, make two canes or two fine splints whose length should be according to the length of the eyelid and their width should be half the width of the spatium.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already made incisions at the ends of each section where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then carefully add each one on top of what is excessive from the eyelid, and tightly bind the canals of each section with strong ties, and leave it like that for several days, because the bond caused by the tightness will kill it, make it fall off, and decay inside before it falls out on its own.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then break it at the roots, and then treat the wound until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	When it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not poke.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two canals which you will make according to this shape:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and there should be the quantity of the length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On the elevation of piercing hairs in the eye using a needle when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When there are unnatural, hard, and rough hairs that sting the eyes, then the operation on him is that you take a subtle needle and place it in that thread of fine linen and lion’s mane, and then adjust the ends of it and tie each one subtly.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the fields be a quantity of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you apply another subtle ointment on them briefly, and anoint the extremities of that area if you wish to do so.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head on your lap, and position them close to the sunlight so that your work may be clearly seen, for this is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the root of the hair that requires treatment, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid before removing it from beneath the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair up and insert it into the eyelash area, and let there be one or two or three hairs, not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand with it until the hair is moved into the eyelash area of the eyelid along with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if the eyelash area is pulled and the hair does not move, pull the eyelash area towards the sides with the ointment you have prepared, until the hair is moved into the proper position in the eyelash area.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And view that with the sight of the wound, because when you mix ashes and the balm, and sprinkle each and close the wound, and leave the clamps for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and new good flesh grows over it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is shorter, then you adjust a long hair from natural hairs, and lift with that, or let it within so that it stretches towards some space, and then you lift it.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol .xiii.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	For the given sentence:
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When sneezing occurs in the nose, and there is a contraction of the eyelid when it is pulled inward, either to the right or left side, due to poor healing from an injury, dryness, or cautery, and this condition is called leporina, and this sneezing disorder can be natural or accidental, and is caused by poor healing from injuries, dryness, or cauteries, or similar maladies.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	May the manner of the operation on him be that you cut through that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place in there a piece of linen cloth, and tie those until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And it is not necessary for you to treat him through the causes that dry out and constrain; for if you do so, it will cause even more harmful pus than ever before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that case causes that mollify thus as fenugreek is, and foment with the water in which its seeds are cooked along with its leaves, or a liniment of dandelion, which is liquefied with some of the oils, and submerge the affected area in it, and treat with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you should perforate with all devices that are not consolidated according to the form that fire at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have mentioned is nothing but a certain correction of displacement that does not restore the area to its former shape.
Capitol .xiiii.	It seems like you've provided a chapter or section title from an older text, likely in a Latin-like style, which reads "Capitol .xiiii." This translates to "Chapter XIV" in English, indicating that this is the fourteenth chapter of whatever work it belongs to. If you have more content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to share!
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Here is the translation of the provided line:
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This inflammation which occurs on the eyelid is called precisely an "alxacrati"; and it can be either a natural condition or an accidental one.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	But an accidental wound is made by a blow or by a cut or by cautery or by similar means.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the method of the operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and pass it from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch the flesh at the points above with the needle and pierce it with the needle, and incise with a wide spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then return the shape of the eyelid as needed; if not, take the thread and place it in the cut shape, and use that to turn the eyelid, and create the two slits on the side of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of the two slits be at two angles of the incision that you have made where they converge, and form an angle between them so that when they come together, a figure is formed from them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then remove the flesh in the amount that is equal to the length of the sharp object left behind, which is the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then align the separated parts and sew them together with wool thread; and then treat them with what we have said about the mollifying medicines and the poultices until they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you need to incise due to a fissure or suture or cautery, then you must make a flat cut over the skin of the eyelid as indicated.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate with the poultice between the two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In summary, regarding the treatment of incisions that are above or below, which occur during the operation, according to the form in which the incision is prepared, and that form varies in different ways.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the wise artisans always prepare in each manner that is possible for them until they restore the figure to its natural form or close to it, and for that patient according to what is most suitable for the operation and the instruments in their best conditions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in many men, ensure that the upper eyelid is solidified with the white of the eye, and it is restricted from easy movement and its natural functions; therefore, you must insert the tip of a reed under the eyelid, lift that up, or extend it with an uncial.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you incise the adhesion with a subtle spatula, which should not be sharp at the tips of the incisions, keeping it slightly blunt so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and remove the spatula without scratching the skin with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your incision carefully separate that adhesion so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you put salty water on the skin with which you wash it; or drip juniper dissolved in water onto it.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate the eyelid from the skin with a scraper, and place wool infused with egg white on the skin; and on the third day use consolidating treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the incision of the nail and the flesh growth of the lacrimal area.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that a nail can exist in two ways: either it is nervous, resembling a hard and subtle chip; or it is non-nervous, similar to frozen white moisture, which when touched with an iron, or forced to be taken with tweezers, breaks off and the tweezers do not stick to it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both conditions do not begin until from the larger tear, gradually it covers the vision and you prohibit light and movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	And the method of operating in the inscription (likely referring to an incision or marking) is that the patient places their head on your lap, and then you open their eyelids, lift the eyelid with your hand, and then grasp the nail with a small instrument folded twice and extend it towards the upper parts.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert into it a horsehair or ox hair or cow hair, or something similar, or strong thread, or double the small end of the needle little by little and place that in the middle of the nail, and penetrate that with the needle, and bind the nail with thread; and extend that to the upper parts, and scrape with the hair the side of the nail which is the matrix.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And in this way you follow that with the hair inside the posterior of the patient. 
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you incise the remaining part at the root of the lacrimal duct with a fine spatula or small scissors, and clear the flesh around the natural lacrimal duct so that continuous flow of tears does not result from this incision.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail is removed with the sun once extended or with sulfur, as we have said, and then it should be extracted with a lion-shaped spatula of this form:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful not to touch the corneal layer with the spatula so as not to cause a rupture and perforate the pupil.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then the incision releases a little ground salt or ashes made from charred sponge into the eye, and leave that there until the next day; then treat it with what is appropriate until it heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not embedded and you cannot insert the needle, or it is not fixed in that way, then this kind of nail issue is treated with medicines, and it is healed in this manner as I have described and detailed in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise that area, then open the belly of the patient and take a sharp, pointed scalpel according to this form:
am subtilitat.	And with subtlety. 
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you find that it is rarefied and mixed and penetrates into that region, then let it distill from your mouth into the horn of a goat or with a red horn or with crushed salt, and plug the nostril until the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation until everything that belongs to it is removed, except for the opposite abscess which should be cauterized in the wound, because when you leave that, treat the beginning of the abscess until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation on that area until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if noted in the wound as a great harm, should be suspended with an ounce; and incise that from one side, and do not complete the incision so that you do not cut into the tear ducts.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a warm and strong decoction to the lacrimal area until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of a hernia and what is born from tightly adhered flesh in the wound.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the wounds of some individuals, hard flesh grows and covers the pupil, or approaches and presses tightly against the eyelids, binding them together from the outer parts, resembling a barrier.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	More on the operation is that the patient places his head in your lap; then open the wounds of that area and gather all that flesh with appropriate hooks for this purpose, holding it with forceps or tongs; then dissect the flesh at the beginning where everything should be completed with the scalpel, and beware not to leave any wound unfinished due to your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your incision be either with the scalpel that we have recommended in the section about the nail, or with small scissors with which the onion is gathered according to how it will come together at the end of this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if any cause of swelling remains and there is an excessive flow of blood, and you fear an abscess, then leave the wound open and treat that abscess with what alleviates that abscess, and then repeat over it during the operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the adjoining flesh where you encountered this kind of wound.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must ensure that all healing of the wound occurs either naturally or accidentally, through the use of instruments, and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that the limb can sufficiently endure such an operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of pus in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Pus comes from inflamed veins that are hardened over the wound and prevent proper healing, causing the wound to fester for a long time.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at the beginning, it is necessary for you to determine if the wound in which there is pus is strong and if there is no other illness besides the pus; then you should collect that pus.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you command the patient to place their head on your shoulder, and then suspend those veins with an ounce or two according to your discretion; and that ounce should be of fine doubling in this manner:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	Or use two ounces gradually in one dose according to this method:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then those veins should be tied with fine threads carefully, and cleanse the blood little by little until you see those veins emptied of their contents and turned inside out.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful that you do not lead the contents with the extremities of the spatula; and let your operation be in the middle of the day under the sun, and be firm in your operation so as not to incise anything but those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed this, then distill into the contents at the top either green or red wine so that its acidity corrodes what remains of the sabell.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if it is not possible for you to collect all of this at that time, then apply a plaster over the entire area with something that alleviates the pain, and leave it for several days until the pain is subdued and there is no risk of an abscess forming.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the same method to the second one until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the scissors:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of nasal fractures.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat fractures with cauterization or with sharp and burning medicine as previously described in the narration and it is not healed, then do not generate anything on it but rather make an incision over the abscess to allow its maturity, and extract all the moisture within it until the bone is uncovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then, when the bone is uncovered and there is corruption or blackening on it, you scrape it with an instrument that has the following form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called a rough head, and it is made of Indian iron, and its head is round like a sieve which is made by puncturing with a file or by subtly punching (as shown in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place it on the corrupted part of the bone, then rotate it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption is scraped off.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And this should be done several times, and then restore the area with drying and astringent causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore, if the area is stabilized and good flesh has grown there, and the body has separated from the pus and remained like this for forty days, and it does not renew, and does not become inflamed again, and no other accident occurs, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then the goal is not to generate anything but to reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: you should expose the underlying bone using fire or sharp medicine, and once the bone is exposed, then take a splint in accordance with this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The tip of the instrument should be triangular, and the shaft should be gradually narrowed toward the end in such a way as described.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place it over the bone, near the lacrimal area; extend your hand a little towards the nostril, and then rotate your hand with the splint until it penetrates all the way through the bone. The patient will feel this as air escapes when you do so.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, now restore the area with astringent and drying medicines as has been said.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, when the flesh and the area have hardened, the material that was discharged to the outer parts returns inside, thus it becomes a lighter pus for the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the prominence of the eye.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the eye protrudes entirely and there is no damage or diminution to the vision, then it is necessary to relax the patient, and then follow up with applying ventouses on the neck after scarification and bloodletting; and then apply an ointment over the eye that is made of acacia, aloe, ensēs (a type of resin), and sarcocolla, and finally fix the poultice over the eye with small pieces of linen.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method of the poultices is to take strips of linen cloth, and each strip should be folded into four layers; and make those poultices from them.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place those one over the other according to the amount that the wound requires.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then apply pressure on those with a hard cloth with strong binding; and repeat the cupping with suction and scarification; and then remove the cups and leave the wound exposed day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if the bandage becomes loose, then it must be tightened.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then remove the bandage day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if you find the wound already reduced, it is good, and if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and binding and the cupping until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the uveal tunica (part of the eye).
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the uveal tunica, and it becomes prominent and protrudes from the eyelids like a knot of raisin, and takes on the shape of a human figure due to this, and you want to incise it, then the operation should be performed as we have recounted: you insert the needle into the base of the uvea from below to above, and then place another needle with double thread at the lacrimal part. Let that penetrate and leave the first needle in its position; then incise the area of the double thread and lift the part of the uvea around the needle with it, and tighten that well.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then remove the needle and place over it wool infused in egg white, leaving it until the thread comes off with the grape.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat the wound with something that strengthens the inside so that the illness is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes, gather everything around the wound with a circle of cloth tight over a significant swelling, and then pierce it with a fine spatula to reach the core of the wound, allowing the white, watery fluid to drain out, thus reducing the swelling quickly.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the inside so that it heals.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of dislocations.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness, which is called dislocation, is nothing but a swelling that is fixed in the wound, resembling descending water, but it is not actually that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of treating it is to have the patient sit on an adjusted and straight chair. Then take his head in both of your hands and move it so that you see the swelling come to different parts until it dries and does not descend, and leave the light so that the patient sees the causes just as they appear.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend downward, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	And if the descent of the pus has not been prepared as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a fine spatula and use it to separate the panniculus from the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tunic at the limbus (inside the black part), until the pus is drained out.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once it is drained out, then you instill into the nose warm water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be treated with other methods until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of water (fluid) descending from the nose.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the types of fluid in the division and which ones are suitable to be pierced, declaring according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Now you must make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and tie their nose tightly with a binding agent.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your left hand near the eyelid of his eye if the eye with the water is the left eye; or with your right hand, if the eye is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then with your right hand take the almond, if the eye is the left one; or with your left hand, if the eye is the right one.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the tip of the almond near the cornea along the thickness of the ray in the white part of the eye靠近较小的泪腺部分，然后用力压入杏仁，并旋转你的手以完成操作。
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the soft part of the belly and feel if the swelling has already reached because of it.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it is necessary that the measurement of the path from almond to pupil be the same as the space from the pupil to the end of the darkness, which is the crown of the eye; for you will see with that pupil through the clarity of the corneal tissue.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place a cloth in the area where the water is, and then you draw it down once and then again, and if the water descends quickly, now show the patient what he sees immediately, and cover it with his own hand.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a while; if the water has descended, then you rest again before any medication is administered.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then when it is cut and does not descend, you extract the medication easily, and rotate your hand gradually with that; then dissolve a small amount of clear gem salt in water and wash the wound inside with it; then place a piece of cotton or stopper or wool soaked in ointment and egg white on the wound and attach it with that.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we and those of our time place on that sore a crushed poultice mixed with egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if your medication does not penetrate the wound due to its hardness—because there are some people whose wounds are very hard—then you must take the spatula named alberid, which has the following form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce that joint with it, but do not push your hand too deeply into the wound, and do so only to create a fine path for the medication.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then apply the medication as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should complete your work by preparing the patient's dark room where they may sleep on their back, and all movements must be prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause in the nature of the condition so that it aligns with its natural state, and do not move their head to the right or left side at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the binding be according to its placement within the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove the binding in that darkened area and expose the affected sight, and show them some objects, and then reapply the bandage within seven days.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And it is not necessary to do this during the time of treatments or right before the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	However, it is necessary that you dilute this so that the water can easily permeate through, with great and strong attention.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an abscess occurs and needs cauterization, then you must remove the bandage before the seventh day, and treat it with something that reduces the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then cleanse the patient's eye and place a treatment on their face near the eye to regulate their vision for several days, especially if it exists in the darkened area.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then he should be laid down gently from that position and turned onto his side in accordance with the causes [of his ailment].
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in surgery it is not excused from the disciple to see certain things more than once, and then you should be bold during the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has been reported to us by some of those who are from Artach, and some said that they made fire in the Ayrac, a container pierced with holes through which water is drawn.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But however I have not seen anyone in our land who has perfected this, nor have I read this in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of medicines over which those who are ignorant should not preside:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of wax or of proper iron, and their extremities should be shaped in this subtle triangular form, the sharp end thus as that is the shape.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol .xxiv.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	From the treatment of flesh hanging from the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose diverse fleshy growths are formed which can be attributed to a cause similar to that of scorpio motz pes, or to polyp peys; and this illness is called polypus because it resembles that type of peys represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And if it is cancerous flesh from a wound, it appears blackish in color; and what is lion's flesh does not have a blackish color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in the case where the flesh is not fraudulent nor cancerous, you must make the patient sit between your hands and expose him to the sun, and unbind his nostrils, and pierce the area with a needle in those parts of the flesh.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then pull that out from the external parts, and then divide what you have grasped of those with a sharp and delicate spatula between until you know that all the flesh has been removed; so that if there remains any part due to which amputation is possible, then cut that part with one of the delicate instruments easily until nothing remains that would prevent it.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	And if the abscess or inflammatory swelling is accompanied by blood, then you apply what is necessary; if it is one of the malignant swellings, then you cut and cauterize that until the bloody part is amputated and all the cavities are removed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then it should be placed in the nose near the beginning with wine or water.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is opened and you process humidity through to the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is flesh mixed with pus over the bones of the nose to which amputation has not been successful.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, now it is necessary to introduce a thread into the area where there is some swelling, and secure it with knots, placing between each knot the width of a finger or thumb, and stretch the patient and insert one end of the thread into the nostril using your hand or another method that is possible for you.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after this has been done, draw their fragrance into the nostril channels, and sit them on their pillow, for often repeated practices of this action make children do in schools, and it is an easy method for those who wish to perform it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then place the two ends of the probe, one end extending over the nose and the other remaining inside the nose, and then apply a stitch to the flesh using the pins that are in the probe, and do this until you know that the flesh is already held by the pins of the probe.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then remove the probe, and place near the nose at the site of blood extraction a poultice, and do this for three days or more until the ointment has corroded all that is rotten from the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then at the end of the treatment, place a lead cannula in the nose for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If you decide to use drying as part of the treatment, apply it accordingly.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument used for nasal treatments with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nostrils:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make this out of silver or bronze, which should resemble a small open lamp, like a small bowl, and the mouth similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed tube like a cane, and the end of the instrument used for purging should be flat and open; to which you attach a handle at the rear, with which you hold it when you heat it in oil or whatever liquid or substance that is suctionable.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these capipurgi are precious: take from beaver fat, white balsam, ginger, saffron costus, long pepper, asafetida, and thyme each an ounce. Mix them with wheat juice and marrow, and make pills out of them. Dissolve one pill in warm water, and administer it through the nostrils of the patient lying down.
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol .xxv.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	From the growths in the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason, you must incise at the beginning of its appearance and remove all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then place over the area where cautery or burning medicine is applied.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	And if the onset of the condition is delayed until it becomes prominent, then consider whether it has calcified, become hard, dark in color, and shows little sensation; at that point, do not touch it with iron for it is a chronic abscess; because many have been severely harmed by those who incised such an abscess, causing great harm to the person who had it.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is somewhat recent and not dark in color, and incision is possible at all times, then treat the patient and incise it without fear, and care for the area with something that dries and constricts until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On sewing the nose and the lips and the ear when continuity is disrupted by trauma or a similar cause.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when you encounter a disruption of continuity in one of these cartilaginous areas, there is little hope for the operation unless it is in certain individuals.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you encounter any cause of these wounds, you should consider if it is a fresh wound with its own blood, and then you stitch the two edges of the wound together with sutures, and then take care of what's inside so that it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the edges of the wound that broke continuity are already separated and each part is made healthy, then you must clean each part of its visible debris until blood comes out.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then join the two lips with stitches and tighten them, and over those sprinkle dragon's blood powder and mix it well, and place a piece of diafinicon plaster or some other consolidating plaster on top of the powder, and leave that bandage for two days or three, and then remove it and change the plaster until the pus is separated, and then treat with ointment until it heals.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	And the method of stitching is that you close the discontinuity either with needles as we have recommended for suturing the abdomen, or you can also close the discontinuity with thread in a way that is known to you.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the extraction of those causes that appear in the two lips within the partitions.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Often in many men within the partitions of their lips, hard swellings resembling lard appear, and some of them are smaller while others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you must turn the lips and split each of those hard swellings entirely, and then fill the area with ground sage mixed until the blood is constricted. Then wash it with sweet wine and treat the area with a styptic agent until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	From the insertion of the flesh fitted into the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	There are many growths on the gum-fitted flesh which the ancients called alveoli; then you must suspend it with a hook or hold it with forceps and incise it deeply to its root, allowing the pus or blood to flow.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then apply over the area some triass or other styptic or cicatrizant powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if the flesh returns, then incise it again and cauterize it, because once cauterized, it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the extraction of teeth with forceps.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth, both those inside and outside, and between the gums, there are rough and sharp stones, tartar, and some growths that are blackened or turned yellow or green, this leads to corruption in the gum and causes the teeth to become loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And thus it is necessary that you sit the patient between your hands and place his head on your thigh, and scrape the teeth in which you see those encrustations and cause likenesses of sand among them so that no cause remains, and this does away with the blackness and yellowness and other things so that they are cleansed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Thus, if what remains is at the beginning of the reasoning, that is good; and if not, then you repeat the reasoning on those [issues] another day and the second and the third until you arrive at the final statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth require various types and different shapes of forceps according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And therefore, the file with which the tooth is filed from inside is different from the file with which it is filed between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of files you should prepare, which you will see shortly:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the extraction of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Here is the translation of the given line:
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	And when the patient is forced to have that tooth removed, you must be firmly certain which is the painful tooth, because often the pain deceives the patient and leads them to believe it is in a healthy tooth, and if you remove that one, the pain will not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is removed, for we have already seen this through the operation of the teeth.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, you must be certain which tooth is causing pain, and once you know this well, you need to scrape around the tooth with a spatula that has some efficacy, until it separates the tooth from the gum entirely. Then extract it with your fingers or with fine scissors bit by bit until it comes out completely.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then take large, strong forceps for good grip or a strong extraction, and hold the patient's head between your hands so that you have it well secured without any slipping, and then pull the tooth straight out in such a way that you do not break it nor cause greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not easily extracted, then take one of those instruments and carefully remove it from all sides, exerting effort to dislodge it in the same manner as you would at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is loose or corroded, then you must wrap that area with cloth and tighten it with a thin, sharp instrument at one end so that it does not break when you apply pressure to it with forceps.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And it is necessary that you work delicately with scarification around all parts of the gum and be careful with your strength so as not to tear that area and leave any part broken, and return to the patient for the malice to be greater than the initial pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their stubbornness and audacity regarding the extraction of them; for they administer things we have not recommended; because often they bring great illnesses upon men which are more difficult to cure, and the roots of these remain stubbornly, or some of those, or that you must extract it along with some bones from the jaw as we have witnessed many times.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then for the removal of it, wash the mouth with hot wine or sour wine with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is bleeding due to this, just as white spots sometimes appear, then sprinkle some amount of sage over the wound, and if the sage does not help, apply a cautery.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and delicate tongs with which the tooth is extracted at the beginning should be long on the outer end, short in handling, and thick, so that they do not bend when you use them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they should be such that the thick handles ensure that when you grip them tightly, they do not bend, and their outer ends are short.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of Indian iron, properly crafted with straight ends, and at the ends of these, there should be teeth that fit into each other and grip tightly through constriction. Sometimes, the ends of these should have the shape of the beak of a bird called a ciconia, which is a stork, and they are of strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol .xxxi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	For the extraction of teeth and the removal of broken bones from the jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract a broken tooth where some cause remains, then it is necessary for you to place something soft over the area for one or two days until the spot is softened; and then insert tweezers or forceps whose ends are shaped like the beak of a bird called stork or vulture, the form of the tongs:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extremities of iron should be made inside like a file or rasp.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if it does not obey to you with these forceps or tongs, then you must cut into the root and peel away all the flesh and insert the tool which is called an ataly, which is a small lever of this form:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And let one end be thick and short, and it should not be inserted too deeply so that it does not break.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if through this the incision is forcefully opened, it's good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular at the extremity in which there should be some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a finer extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And already it is helped with this instrument having two prongs, of which this is the form, as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments, which precede in the scraping of teeth; for it is also done with this instrument, which resembles a large onion, and this is its form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	The curved or short triangular extremity should be of some thickness and not too fragile so that it does not break.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the instruments for moving teeth are made and similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the skilled and subtle artisan in the art finds for himself, according to what the operation and various diseases indicate to him; for there are diseases for which the ancients did not describe or leave specific instruments, due to their diverse forms and types.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are fractured, or if you can, then treat it carefully in its place with what is appropriate from the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and assist with movements of which this is the form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there is any small swelling, it should be reduced little by little, and it should be constricted or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until all of the bone is fully extracted; then restore the area with appropriate medicines.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if there is a small hole in the bone, then scrape that area around the hole and its darkness, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the treatment of prominent teeth over the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the prominent teeth do not follow their natural course because their form is loose, and especially when this affects women, particularly those who are more venerable; therefore, you must consider: if a tooth is close to another tooth, and it is not possible to pull or loosen it, then root it out; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then incise it with this instrument, which has the following form; it resembles a pig's snout and should be made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let your incision, with which you will cut it over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, be such that it does not damage any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if a tooth is prominently exposed to filing, then file it with an Indian iron file, which has the following form:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it should all be made of Indian iron and the margin should be smooth; and it should be made of finely ground points like a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth should be filed down little by little over many days with ease, so that no other tooth is worn down or damaged.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then tie that part at the end, and shave that area with sharp razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth of which a part is broken and it hurts the tongue, then you must file that inside so that the sharpness of that fragment is removed and smoothed out, and fill it so that the tongue is not hurt and speech is not impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver filings.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When you encounter front teeth that have been displaced or knocked out by impact or fall, and the patient cannot chew on that side where they eat, and you have treated it with astringent medicines but your treatment has not worked, then in order to prevent further deterioration, use gold filings to secure them, not silver, because silver can corrode and will loosen within a few days, whereas gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the filling should be of such fineness and thickness as can enter between the teeth; and the method is to take the filling material and place double the amount between two healthy teeth, and then increase it with two twists of the filling material between the damaged ones, or if there is one or several, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the stitching within the area where you began, and hold your hand with ease and skill so that it is not clumsy.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your ligature be such that you tie the thread so tightly around the tooth roots that it does not slip.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then separate the excess bile from the extremities using forceps or tweezers, and apply those in each area with care, and place them between the healthy tooth and the diseased one, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then loosen that tightly bound area as if it were stretched like a Roman [thing]. 
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	And if it is loosened or broken, strengthen that or those with another thread in such a manner throughout its entirety.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the reaction of two healthy teeth and two diseased ones, as you see these tied together:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it is necessary to reinsert one or two teeth back into their sockets in their proper places, and they have grown back as we have described, and that they fit well.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And this is not done by just any artisan but by wise ones.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes a piece of the cow's bone is prepared, and it is shaped like a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is tightened as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the condition of the ligament that affects the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament that affects the tongue sometimes is natural, with which a person is born, or it is accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation involves opening the mouth of the patient, with their head positioned in your hands; then lift their tongue, and proceed to cut that nervous ligament according to the width within which the tongue is separated from its attachment.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or knotting in that area, and this is due to the healing of an injury, then you insert a tool and split that area across the width where you have cut the ligament and untangled the knot.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful that no cut is made in the layer of flesh and that you do not split the artery here, causing blood to flow.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the remnants of the incision with warm water or with sour wine or with cold water; and then place a linen cloth over it; this is something that the patient should keep the cloth over the wound every night to prevent it from sealing over again. 
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If blood flow occurs, place vitriol powder on the area; but if the bleeding continues, then cauterize the spot with a red-hot cautery, which is suitable for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with other methods until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	From the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on him is that you open the mouth of the patient sixty [degrees] facing the sun and examine the swelling.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it of dark or black color, hard, in which the patient feels no sensation, then do not touch that which is gangrenous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it has turned pale, where there is moisture, then you insert the finger into it and cut that area with a fine spatula, and thoroughly incise it; and if blood flows during your operation, then cover it with crushed zegi trissat, which is vitriol, until the bleeding stops.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work until you have fully removed it, washing it with sweet wine and salt; and treat that area with the other cure until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of abscesses from the ears and those that occur in the throat, as well as other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When they appear in the throat area, these are glands that resemble almonds, which accumulate externally and are called the tonsils. When you treat them with what we have said about division and it is not healed, then consider if the abscess is hard, dark in color, and has little sensation; in this case, do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of a rosy color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron because of the flow of blood; first let that remain to ripen within, and now either you will extract that, or it will break open by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of a white color, pale, and the root is thin, then that is what needs to be cut.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is such that you should consider, before your procedure, whether the swelling has rested from the cautery with complete rest or if it has decreased somewhat; and now make the patient sit facing the sun, with their head in your hands, open their mouth, and the servant taking between his fingers pulls out the tongue of the patient with a noble instrument of this form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or iron, and it should be sharp like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So as you press with that the tongue and the swelling is shown to you, and you spit over it with your spittle, now take some of it and insert that into the swelling, and pull that outwards as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And here is the translation of the given line:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it is similar to forceps, but the ends of it are curved, so that the opening of each one is in line with the other, quite sharp, which is made from hardened iron.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	And if this instrument is not available to you, then incise it with a spatula of which this is the shape: It should be sharp on one end, blunt on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And once you have incised one side, incise the other following this same method of incision, and then the patient will be cleansed with cold water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if bleeding occurs, cleanse with water decoction of pomegranate peel or myrtle leaves and use similar styptic agents until the blood flow is stopped, and then treat it until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes, abscesses may form in the throat or around the ears, and incise them as I have described in the method of incising two sides equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman with an abscess that had formed in her throat, which abscess tended to a dark color, was somewhat insensitive, and had already closed off her throat. The woman was breathing through a narrow passage, could hardly eat or drink water, and was approaching death if it had lasted for one more day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had risen so much that it was halfway between two routes, ready to burst out through two openings.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore, I carefully incised and inserted one of those needles into it, and pulled that out, and a large portion was extracted from him. Then, I cut through the part where I understood to proceed with another incision, and then I closed its mouth, and grasped its tongue, and then I inserted the needle into that swelling.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I cut away a large part of it, and only a little blood flowed from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Thus, it is certain that the illness of that woman is serious, and she should start drinking water immediately, then eat food. So I did not stop incising that abscess many times for a long time, and another abscess would form in its place, which I continued to incise as long as it persisted.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	So I came here and cauterized the illness of him, thus adding to the treatment; then I wandered around and did not know what God would do about that situation near me. 
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capitol .xxxvii.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	From the incision of an abscess when it is inflamed. 
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When they say there is catarrh in the throat, and it swells up and becomes elongated, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the part that is thick and round, then it is called buba.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When it is treated with what we have said in the division, and your treatment does not take effect, and you already see that the abscess has hardened and become subtle, then you must incise around what has been added; and if it extends to that length and is bloody, of dark or black color, and is not in the center, then you must attempt the incision, for there is fear for the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see it according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, make the patient sit up and press their tongue with an instrument whose shape protrudes, then insert the ounce into the new area, and pull that down and cut it using one of two instruments which are called in the cutting of two halves.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And it is necessary that you do not incise beyond what is adjusted to the natural boundary of its addition, for if you cut further, you will damage their speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then for the incision, use what we have recommended in the inscription of two beeswax tablets, and take care that it be healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient was frightened by the incision, it is necessary to use ingenuity in the cauterization of his fear, and the method of the cautery on him is only with sharp water, and that you place the head of the patient on your knee, and then press the tongue of the patient with the instrument we have mentioned, and then take the water which we have described in the chapter on cauterization, and warm it with that live cause, and hold it neither too thick nor too thin, and with that fill the concavity of the instrument which has this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the extremity of it be concave like a spoon's cavity where the medicine is placed, and place the instrument with the medicine on the ulcer, and let the patient lie on their side so that no saliva or mucus from the mouth of that person can flow down due to the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not descend by any such cause onto the throat of the patient and harm them.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then take your hand with the medicine and apply it to the uvula for a short period of time until you see it become darkened and soothed by the action of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take a cloth and wrap it around the end of the reed, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the reed with the cloth into a tube so that the cloth adheres to that tube, and do this as many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the grape, and then leave it there so that it dries and falls off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and then for the cauterization, clean around the grape with a cloth soaked in wine, and modify that which is around it with the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and treat it externally with an embrocation, and internally with decoctions until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this type of treatment is safer than incision and lasts longer in terms of prevention.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the uvula is treated with something more subtle than cauterization and incision, as it can be healed through sublimation in this manner: take cinnamon, hyssop, origanum, rue, sedge arabic, camomile, broyda, and similar herbs; combine all these ingredients or some of them in a pot, and submerge them in sour wine, allowing them to boil. The pot should be well sealed with a decent seal, and place a tube in the middle of the pot on which a concave instrument made of silver or iron is placed.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And insert the extremity into the patient's mouth until the vapor reaches the uvula over the fauces, until the uvula is moved or obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then sprinkle over those dry ashes that are inside, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the formation of abscesses, because it would overly stimulate the abscess, and you should not do this, but rather declare the abscess with a cautery.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if this instrument is not available to you, then take a reed and attach an eggshell to the end of it, so that the patient's mouth can be cleaned, because the eggshell prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of thorns and other foreign objects that adhere in the throat and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Dry particles adhering in the throat or fish bones or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you must extract what is visible of those particles, on which you focus your sight, by pressing the tongue with an instrument in front of light, so that what is in the throat becomes clear to you.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which does not appear and is hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because by doing this, the cause attached to the throat will be expelled through vomiting; or the patient may swallow a piece of onion or radish or lettuce, or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of dry sea sponge, and soak it strongly with honey, then make the patient swallow that, because when it reaches the place where the thorns are located and extracted, they will be expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And also take an eel and bind it with honey, place it inside and carefully extract it; or take a leek, crush it thoroughly, and insert it carefully.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if they are not expelled by those methods we have mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be thicker than a small tube, and at the end of it, there should be a cavity that you can easily insert into its throat.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And lift its head up, and be careful not to touch the bone of its throat, so that you do not injure it or break the bone or spine, or cause any harm with your hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, the patient himself should intervene more, by his knowledge of the location of the adjacent cause and push into it, and pull his hand with the instrument towards it, all of this according to the amount that is prepared for him internally before being purged. 
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol .xxxix.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	From the extraction of bloodsucking attached to the navel.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the bloodletting is treated with what we have said in the section of the treatment with medicines and you do not confer, consider then in the patient's belly under the sun, since you have moved the tongue of him with the instrument that we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you use bloodletting, extract it with a small incision or with subtle gestures decently.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to extract with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the throat of the patient, and then place an ignited iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this as many times (until the bloodletting is complete and the leech is removed from the throat) and abstain from water for the whole day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a vessel full of cold water, open the mouth of the patient over it, and wash the mouth with it; and do not let any of it be swallowed, and move the water back and forth for about an hour with your hand, because the bloodletting leech will immediately release when it feels the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is not cured by what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with camphor or asafoetida using the instrument we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, as it may help. 
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not work, then you repeat the fumigation multiple times, and abstain from drinking alcohol, eat salty foods and garlic, do not drink water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen be strictly followed.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodsucking is performed on the groin when it is seen; and it resembles forceps in this way, except that there is some curvature to it:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Capitol .xl.	Capitol .xl.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the discourse concerning swellings and their incision.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And thus there are differences in puncturing and drying them by two methods, of which one is through the kind of swellings into which you insert; and by this you remove some of the moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is for the areas where bodily accidents occur, because an abscess occurring on the head is different from an abscess occurring on the buttocks; and an abscess occurring in a fleshy area is different from an abscess occurring in a joint; and each of them has its own treatment by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And among abscesses, there are some that should not be punctured until the pus is close to maturity or full development.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And there are other abscesses that should be treated when they are still hard, and not wait for full maturity, such as abscesses near joints. Because an abscess near a joint prolongs its development until you can drain what is inside it; the ligaments or nerves of that joint may be damaged, causing contraction of the limb; or if the abscess is close to a major limb and you delay draining it until it matures, it could affect the main limb; or if it's near the buttocks, then drain it even if not fully matured. Do not puncture one that has not completed digestion but rather one near the buttocks so that its pus does not spread within the buttocks and cause fistulas, or prevent complete healing at its site.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	And you must know the time of puncturing the abscess, and this is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you must know that it is matured when there is the cessation of pain and the cessation of fever, and also the reduction of heat and pulse, and the sharpness at the top of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And you must know that the puncture should be made at the lowest point of the abscess where the pus is collected and from which the pus will come out for the healing of the prominence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the puncture should always be made along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in areas of the hands or feet, and in places of veins, tendons, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all other places where there is no reflection; for in those where there is reflection, use the puncture according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	And when the abscess is in a fleshy area, it is better to delay the puncture until its digestion is confirmed according to the full course, as we have said; for if you puncture it before this, it prolongs the suffering of the poor person from it and much filth, and hardens the lips of it and increases its depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some swellings are pierced according to the depth of the flesh or body where it is necessary, or according to what the limb requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And it is necessary to administer small punctures in small swellings, and large and wide punctures or multiple incisions in large swellings according to the diversity of their size.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And there are other swellings in which the skin must be depressed and incised; when it is done this way, similar to cutting bread, and once it is done, it remains so, much like when you make incisions into growths of tuberculosis or buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised with a section having three angles; and of those in which it is incised in the shape of a miter leaf, such as the swellings on the ankles.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And there are those in which a round incision and a crescent-shaped incision are administered, similar to those methods.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But for those that are not like superficial lion swellings, you must pierce them with a superficial or flat puncture only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, you should pierce it and do not worry about extracting all of the poison at once; first extract part of it, then dress the abscess on the next day, then extract a larger portion, and continue doing this several times according to gradation until it is completely drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in decline, because the animal spirit often dissolves with the discharge of pus, and the patient can die quickly, so you must operate carefully.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Pay close attention to this chapter with great caution, and when you make the incision to puncture these abscesses, it is necessary that you clean the wounds and then assess whether the wound of the abscess is small or a flat section; in such cases, apply ointments made from lime or old goat's fat. If the abscess is large and the fissures from the incision are numerous, then you must place a dressing on each site until they heal together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess a part of the chain is separated or you have hollowed that area around the circumference, then it is necessary to compress it with old goat fat or a bandage made from lime-soaked cloth, just as when you draw out splinters or thorns, moistening them; tighten that after the third day; and then treat it further with the appropriate ointments until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	And if during the time of your operation blood flow occurs, then you should administer cold water and sweet wine in which you soak a cloth, and place that over the area of the bleeding repeatedly.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	And if the flow of blood persists, then you must administer treatment and cure and powders which I have recommended in various places in this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is during the winter season and the location of the swelling is near sensitive nerves, then you must soak pillows in wine and heated oil, and place those on the affected areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you must place poultices soaked with water and oil or with wine and oil, and all of this should be done until the third day, as we have said, and then you must open the abscess and clean it thoroughly and administer to its treatment whatever is appropriate for it until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses universally, but according to the method of distinction, I have already spoken about each abscess individually in separate chapters regarding its specific treatment.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the incision of abscesses which come upon the nape of the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	On the nape of the neck, small abscesses appear, and they are similar to nodes that contain tunics within them; and their contents are particles.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from them come swellings, and those contain a moisture similar to slime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And from those which contain moisture similar to pus, and they resemble each other; and from those which are stony and hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the incision of all of them, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, because the extraction of those does not hinder circulation.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the incision of those is that you express them with an instrument whose form is appropriate for this, which is called a probe, until you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what it contains is moisture, then you should divide it with an incision along its length by making a superficial cut in the following manner:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And it begins at the section of line .B. within line .G. Thus, as the humidity is evacuated, you scrape off that skin which contains that humidity, and do not leave any cause behind, for repeated occurrences return if any cause remains.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then submerge the cloth in Egyptian ointment, if it is available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill the wound with that and leave it there for another day, because with this you corrode everything that is rotten from that membrane.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply over that wound Egyptian ointment a second and third time if you need it, until you are sure there is no cause of any tear in that film; then treat the sore with an ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you should incise it in the following manner:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	using a section in the shape of a cross, and place your fingers between the two lips of the incision and spread it out entirely, and exert your strength in extracting the membrane that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your archery encounters difficulties, then do what I have first recommended to you. 
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly treat the calcified abscess with drying and healing as we have told you; drying on a calcified abscess is lighter, because it has little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes these swellings on the head in some people are not at all due to moisture; which cause is that I once dissected an abscess on the head of an old woman and found the abscess just like a deaf stone, rough, white, which could not be crushed, and if one were struck with it, it would hurt.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other swellings or accidents to the head that do not belong to this chapter, such as the swellings that occur on the heads of children and around the roots of the ears, but the section of these all is a superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the perforation from that lower part of theirs so that the body is relieved of the pus in the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then treat those areas with whatever is appropriate for healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the incision of scrofula which occurs in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Moisture and cold often cause these swellings in the neck and armpits; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck are formed by moisture generated between them, and all such scrofula is within its own proper membrane, just as in the nodes and swellings of the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the types of these scrofula are diverse, for some are stone-like, some contain moisture, and others are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in the case where you find one of good disposition upon touch, wherein the color that appears is close to the color of the swelling, and it is soft throughout, and not attached to the neck's nerves, veins, or arteries, and is not hard, you should incise that with a dry superficial cut from the upper part to the lower part of the body along a line of about 6 inches within a line of about 2 inches, and scrape it thoroughly, then extend both sides of the swelling with your fingers, or use several fingers if necessary, as we have said in swellings of the head, and extract it bit by bit.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more cautious that the vein or nerves are not cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that it does not hurt your hand upon incision, or disturb the patient, and you do not cut what is not necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and stop your operation, then apply ground vitriol or other powders which stop blood flow, and bind up the wound, and leave within that which relieves the sharpness of the abscess so that the wound is softened and begins to become pus-filled.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is constricted or blocked.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation before you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then examine with your index finger if there is any cause of the other small swellings, and then cut those out and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if the large vein is at the root of the large swelling, it is necessary that you do not cut out that swelling from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before that, it is necessary to bind that area with a strong double bandage and leave it in place so that it falls by itself without harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cataplasm that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then care for it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cut out that swelling entirely, it is then necessary to bring the two edges of the wound together and sew them up so quickly that there is no remaining excess material.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is excess material due to the size of the swelling, it is necessary to understand how to cut at the root of that swelling, remove it, and administer stitches as mentioned.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those swellings that contain moisture, pierce them with a superficial puncture where you see the site of maturation, and make an incision to drain the pus at the base of the swelling, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer a puncture, using suppositories with unguents and similar substances, so that it corrodes what is rotten from the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see the wound already cleaned, now you treat it with an ointment of generative flesh until it is healed. 
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol .xliii.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the incision of the pus pocket formed inside the armpit.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients described this incision in the abscess, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has performed it this way.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those [individuals]. 
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	And in men who have hemorrhoids, the extraction of the stone should be avoided, as this would not do good because all the veins and the larger ones of the patient are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to do this, we must incise the eyelid three or four times in small sections across its width between two circles in such a way that the cut is on the ciliary body, not on the cartilage, and this location is suitable for cutting because it lacks flesh and has fewer blood vessels.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is inexperienced, it is necessary to stretch the tendon of the ankle with force, and then cut the tendon until it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any reason to do so.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then incise the ciliary body as we have recommended; it is indicated by the section of the canal through the flame, which comes from that which is disrupted within and by the interruption of the voice. 
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	When the hour is dreaded in which the perforation is feared, add two links from the chain of the wound, and thus only the cartilage remains. 
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow where it needs to be healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the essence of the sermon we have recounted is that some of those abscesses have already blocked the windpipe of the patient, and the patient has come near to death, and their breath is cut off, and some proceed to incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe at the site of the wound by some respiration and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And by this, leave the wound open until the evil of the disease is consumed; and the evil lasts for three days; and then after that, close the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have witnessed in my practice is that a servant took a knife and inserted it into her throat and incised a part of the windpipe with it, and I was called for her treatment, and I found her moaning as one who is dying, and upon uncovering the wound, I found blood that had seeped from the small wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, I must confess that she had not cut any vein or artery, and air was escaping from the wound, and she treated it until it healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And it does not harm the servant if there is hoarseness in the voice, and after some days returns to the improvement of their conditions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the hernia there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol .xliv.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of a section over an abscess that you encounter on the groin from outside, and it is called a groin hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess named groin hernia is a large abscess according to the body's condition, and it occurs frequently in women. 
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is of two manners, for it can be either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, it is not a matter of curing.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental is of two manners, one of which resembles fatty nodes, and the other manner resembles an abscess, which is caused by arterial obstruction, and in that case, there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it is not necessary to apply pressure with iron unless it is in the case where it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should probe and examine it with your finger. If you find it resembles fatty nodes and is not suspended by any veins, then incise it as you would for nodes, and extract it along with the surrounding flesh and bursa; otherwise, thoroughly investigate its entire nature, and subsequently treat the area with whatever curative method is necessary until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the section of various types of nodules.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Regarding the various types of nodules, I have already described all their types in the division [section or chapter] earlier.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is necessary that I recount thus the difference between a knot and a hernia as if there were doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Thus, I say that in a hernia there is heat and fever and intense pain within until the boiling of the excess subsides; and complete putrefaction occurs at which point the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	However, in a knot, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a solid mass which is like a lion's paw in shape.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a seed, and it grows in such a way, whether larger or smaller, and they are of two types, either dry or fatty containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are spots, as I have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Thus, when you arrive at the treatment of a knot, you must extract it and trace it back to its origin using a method called intromission, as its form will be described in the chapter that follows this one.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the method of investigating abscesses and all kinds of knots, which involves taking this instrument and inserting it into the most moist part you find in the abscess, and you will rotate the said instrument little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the core.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then adjust your hand according to the size of the abscess, and then extract the foreign matter and examine what has been left in the wound.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current humidity, of whatever color it may be, is overflowing, then you incise it with a superficial cut as I have said in other cases of abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no humidity left in the wound from the foreign matter, then you know that it is dry.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it with a cut in the shape of a cross as follows:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Do as you have been taught, and suspend it with weights, and squeeze the tube from all sides easily, and protect the skin or sack, if possible, over that, and extract the pus with the knot.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract the pus, and sometimes this happens, and then you must extract it in pieces to ensure that none remains.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if any of it remains, whether little or much, the knot will return as before.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that some small part remains from it, then complete the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders, and place over that which has become an abscess a cautery, and treat that with other healing methods until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if the knot is large, then sew the two sides of it and treat that with something that promotes flesh growth.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the pulse is contrary or non-pulsating, then apply and fill the area with a mixture that includes vitriol, leaving it for two or three days until the wound dries up and the blood boils subside; then return to incising what remains of the knot.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Regarding the forms of the introducers, there are three types: some are large, some are medium, and some are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large introducer is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The way of inserting a midwife is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of introducing something small is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Here is the translation of the provided line:
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experts, and they are named albedo, and one of those is called berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And of three spices, for among them are grain, honey, and a little [amount of something else].
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of great experience, forms it:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of experienced midwife, form of it:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of experience little, form of it:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It seems like this text is written in a mix of languages similar to medieval Latin and Romance languages. Here's the translation based on that:
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And you make round, thick needles, like large sewing needles with which skins are sewn together, and they are made of citrus wood, or of cane or iron, or silver, and the best ones are those made of citrus wood.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And the practice is done with black feathers, which they agree to use for opening the fistulas in the cavity where they are reflected, that they are reflected by their lightness through those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And of three types, for some are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the stricture of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the large lead weight:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the experienced midwife with lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small lead pellet:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of wounds are of various types, for some are simple ones, which have only one curvature, and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And from them are hooked instruments, and they are of three types.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those hooks having two curves, and of three types.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And since they have three curves, and are of three types.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	It seems like the text is providing instructions or describing something in an archaic language similar to medieval Latin or Old French. The phrase "forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu" can be translated as:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a simple emetic:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of an ointment for wounds:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of an ounce of ointment, its composition:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of an ounce having two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of an instrument having three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels with which nodules and abscesses are cut and squeezed, and they come in three types, for there is one that is large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Forma de scapel gran:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of the midwife's knife:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Forma de scapel pauc:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities with which a section is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a manner, but rather to ensure that there is an incision in the excoriation of the nodes without fear of puncturing a vein or nerve, and through this, the patient may be healed and find some tranquility from the burning sensation found during the excoriation of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of ulcers, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of the large ulcer:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of the medium ulcer:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of the small ulcer:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	Let them be made of barley and resemble the form with which alcohol is made. 
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is at the outer edge that you puncture with a hidden spatula and in that area you draw out both internal and external parts when you wish, just as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatimis, which are hidden between the fingers causing the puncture of the abscesses and the patients do not feel them, and they exist in three types: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of cupping with which the blood flow is cut off, and there are three types: large, medium, and small; the forms are as follows:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut, e sian subtils.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that these types of cupping vessels be large, medium, and small, so that through those you can quickly draw off blood flow when necessary, and at the first instance there should be no delay in treatment.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use those for bleeding in all parts of the body, and use them only on fleshy areas, such as in the creases of the arms and thighs, and in the creases of the breasts, abdomen, and knees, and similar fleshy moist folds.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes, those instruments are made in other small, similar scissor-like forms; through which blood is let when performed by phlebotomy, or proper incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made round in the following form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of men's breasts that resemble women's.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen due to the abundance of sleep as they begin to grow soft, and then the breasts swell, resembling women's breasts, and become pendulous and sweaty.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to treat this condition, you must incise those areas with a lunar section according to this form, from line B inward to line G, and then remove all the thickness, and then fill the wound with flesh-growing medication, and then sew the two lips of the wound together, and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here is the line-by-line translation of the provided medieval medical text:
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of what needs to be cut due to the restlessness of the patient and bleeding, then it is necessary to fill the wound with a cloth soaked in corrosive ointment and leave that inside until it corrodes the ruptured parts of the fat, and then treat it so that it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	It appears you've referenced "Capitol .xlviii." which in Roman numerals translates to "Chapter 48". Without additional context or text following this reference, it's not possible to provide a translation or further explanation. If you have the content of Chapter 48 or need help with a specific part of it, please share that information so I can assist you better.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	The text appears to be in an archaic form of Romance language, similar to medieval Latin or old Italian/Spanish/French. Here is a translation of the given line:
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These swellings that come from a type of scrofula, which are hard and contain a kind of sac.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And among those that contain humidity; and those that contain humidity must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all is evacuated that is in the abscess of the pus, then you fill it with old wool and clean the inside on the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the cut should be closed and treated with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is in the glands of the neck and from the scrophulas, then you should incise it as we have said in the section about scrophulas similarly.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the plague has spread to such an extent that it causes putrefaction, then apply a cautery as we have previously mentioned.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the section of abscesses that occur due to arteries or veins.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured, and the chain that is above it becomes hardened, then greenish spots can cause an abscess. The signs by which it is known whether inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: for when the abscess is due to an artery, it extends in a long line along the part of the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a rustling sound within it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to veins appears round on the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And to incise this abscess is an error, especially in those areas near the armpits, and in the knees, and in the neck, and in many parts of the body; it is large, therefore its treatment with iron should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities or on the head should also be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	And for those who have swelling due to the inflammation of the artery orifice, make a longitudinal incision along the chain; then widen the incision with hooks and expose the artery, removing the tunics so that it is revealed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place the needle and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie the artery with double thread in two places — which is a technique I have taught you for the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then widen the area between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood is out and the abscess is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer treatment in which pus is generated between where the ligaments are; and then treat it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess due to vein constriction, then you must hold with your hand as much of the abscess as possible with a cord, and then insert the needle into the location where your hand was, making it penetrate; and let that double thread go through until you pull it out from the other side, and then tie the abscess with a good ligament as I have said to you in the treatment of the grapevine, using both ends of the thread on both sides. 
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	And if you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then insert the needle with the thread through all the abscess up to the initial insertion point of the first needle, and secure your threads at four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess in the middle of it where once what is inside has been removed, then you incise the excess of the chain, and leave what is attached to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place over it the pillow that you have submerged in wine and oil, and then administer the treatment which is performed with plasters and unguents until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	And as for the treatment of the abscess that occurs due to nerve twisting.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Thus, an abscess may occur in arteries and veins, and similarly, an abscess occurs in the nerves when there is a percussion or due to excessive labor, and by similarity.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it mostly occurs in the areas of the ankles or the heel, or in any place where the joints are painful.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe abscess, similar in color to the rest of the body. It often occurs in larger areas and when it is tight with intensity, the patient may appear stunned or confused.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess aggregated in the flesh of the body, and therefore the chain (likely referring to the spread or connection) is left off. It causes pain throughout and does not move forward or backward to specific parts.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, of those that are in the joints, it is not necessary for them to be enclosed in iron, because there they would cause contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	And if it is in the head or forehead, bind it with a spatum (a type of bandage).
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	And if the abscess is small, then take it with forceps and excise that part from the root.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then you suspend it with an incision, and drain that, and then remove it; and close the wound with stitches, and care for it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Chapter II.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	From the incision of an abscess which you find on the cheek that occurs in the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Here's the translation line by line based on the provided instructions and example:
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one where in its belly were two parts that resembled mushrooms more than anything else, and there was no difference between those white, tiny growths.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already the lips of those were turned inside out and split open, and moisture was running from them all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	So I incised those and found one to be about eighteen inches long and the other about six inches long.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And in the operation of their incision, you should consider whether the patient is moist, and if the color of the tissue is white, moist, and of a fine texture; then you should incise it with a broad scalpel, and have cautery irons ready at hand that are heated over fire, because small repeated burnings will dry out the section and expel some blood; and if the bleeding continues, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is weak and fearful, beware of incising with iron; instead, take fresh lead foil, and bind it to the tissue in the manner we have described; leave it there for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then apply pressure to the lead thread at the site of constriction; thus, continue binding the lead tightly against the tissue until it is severed and falls off on its own.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	And if the tumor is of large size, then at the beginning of its treatment there is some cause for fear and terror, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible that you can divide the tumor in half, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then treat the area inside so that the wound may heal.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to incise a tumor that is of dark color, has little sensation, and appears fixed, for that one is truly cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I come with a reminder about cranial issues related to this.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the treatment of a protrusion at the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	A protrusion at the navel is caused by various reasons: it may be due to fissures in the spine that lies above the abdomen, and you should treat it by reducing the hernia or intestine as described in other ruptures; or it may be due to blood flowing from a vein or artery as previously mentioned, or due to trapped air within it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then the situation is quite different from what we have recounted previously, and as you press that area with your fingers, it becomes hidden, and then returns; and when it comes back, it is very noticeable, and there is a significant movement at the entrance of the bath and vigorous work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	And if it is due to moisture, then it is inflamed and does not hide when pressed with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it hard.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to blood, then with these signs, the abscess appears with a declining black color.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is due to undigested flesh, then the abscess is heavy, large, and hard, and it is embedded according to a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is due to wind (gas), then the touch of it is inflamed. 
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on him is that you consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to arterial blood, or venous blood, or wind; at this time it is necessary for you to be cautious with his treatment, because in that case there is fear and dread as I have taught you in the chapter where I spoke about swellings caused by arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or membrane, then you must order the patient to hold their breath and lie extended; then mark with a thread around the entire circumference of the navel; then command them to turn over between your hands on their back; then encircle with a spatula lat in the circle of the navel where you marked with the thread; then extend half of the abscess upwards by an inch; then bind around it with strong bandages or flax and do so properly.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Then press the middle of the extended abscess over the ligament and insert your index finger to find the intestine; if you have located or felt it through the ligament, then gently pull and push the intestine into the abdominal cavity.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the membrane, then take hold of it with an inch; and cut away its excess parts.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to an artery or vein, then avoid that area, and proceed with your operation; take two needles and thread them through with strong threads, and insert the two needles around the circumference you have made around the abscess in a cross pattern, making sure they penetrate; then tighten the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, remove the needles and let the area between them where the stretched flesh can dry and fall off on its own; or incise that which is thinned out and let it drain, then treat that with whatever ointments are necessary for it to heal.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is of soft flesh or due to moisture, then you must hollow out the abscess as we have said and drain the blood or moisture that you find within it, and then treat it accordingly with what is needed and consolidate the area.
Capitol .liii.	It seems like you've provided a section marker, "Capitul .liii.", which likely means "Chapter 53" in a medieval text format. This could be the beginning of chapter fifty-three in a larger work. Without additional context or content from this chapter, I can't provide further translation or explanation. If you have specific lines or content from this chapter that you would like translated or explained, please provide them!
De curacio de cranc.	The phrase "De curacio de cranc" can be translated into English as:
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	Here is the translation line by line:
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in places where it is possible to eradicate it, such as cancer in the breasts or in the thigh and similar parts of the body allocated for extraction of all of it, especially when it starts small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and large, one should not approach it, for I have not been able to cure anyone of that, nor have I seen another who has succeeded in doing so.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is when it is located as we have said, you should precede by leaving the patient and purging them of black bile several times, and then bleed that area if a noticeable swelling is found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient with preparations in which they are placed for the operation, and then incise with the instruments that are necessary for it; and then scoop out from all sides with a good sharp instrument to thoroughly excise so that no cause of its roots remains.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not cut it lightly, and squeeze the areas, and cleanse all the thick blood thoroughly with your hand or with an instrument that is available to you among the tools.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If there is an obstruction of thick blood in a vein or artery, then cauterize that area until the flow of blood stops, and then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
Capitol .liv.	It seems like you've provided a section heading or chapter number, which appears to be "Book" or "Chapter" LIV (44 in Roman numerals). If you need further translation or explanation of the content that follows this heading, please provide the text, and I'll be happy to help!
De curacio de ydropici.	This phrase "De curacio de ydropici" translates to:
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed, in the division, of the types of water-related dropsy, and the signs of each type, as well as the treatment with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is only the type of althitas alone, and it is not treated with iron in the case of the type of timpanists nor the type of yposarcha, for that would be fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this type of timpanist dropsy with medicines and your treatment does not yield results, then consider, for if the patient has already become weakened, or is suffering from another illness along with dropsy, such as in his cough or abdominal swelling similar to those conditions, then beware that you do not treat him with iron, for there is fear regarding this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you find the patient to be of abundant strength, and he suffers from no other illness but only dropsy alone, and is neither a child nor an elderly person, then the method of the operation is that you lift the patient between your hands, and another servant near him presses his abdomen with their hand, pushing the water towards the area below the navel, and then take a spiked spatula according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of dropsy is due to the intestines, because at this point you must make an incision three fingers away from the navel on either side, directly over the pubic bone.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of dropsy is due to a liver disease, then your incision should be three fingers to the left of the navel.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then your incision should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is not necessary for your incision to be on the side on which the patient wishes to lie because the superfluities do not run to that place freely.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce through the entire chain with the instrument, and insert into that section, and lift your hand with the spatula between the chain and the sinus, and you dilate that area; and if it is the quantity of a fingernail or around that size.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the abdomen so that the spatula reaches the empty space, which is where the fluid is located.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the form: 
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it is similar to a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or iron or lion's leather, at the lower end of which there is a small opening, and on its sides there are three openings: two on one side and one on the other side; and the extremity of it is cut according to the manner of a feather, just as you may see:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the extremity of the most superior pus is an annular area, for when the instrument reaches the water, then immediately they say something over the instrument, thus evacuating a small quantity of water, for if you evacuate more than what is necessary at that moment, the patient may die due to the resolution of their animal spirit, or you might bring near death which is approaching.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extract the instrument, and hold the water which is immediately retained by the chain that holds the tube which is on top of the syringe, and recall to you how you puncture it in such a manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the procedure on the other day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days continuously, and be careful to avoid mistakes until only a little water remains.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	And if you are concerned about the patient and leave a large quantity of water, then treat it by burying it in hot sand, induce sweating in a bath, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and treat it with drying medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach, and the spleen and the liver near the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what precedes.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter V.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children whose urinary openings have not properly formed or are not perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes some of the children are born from their mother's womb with their urinary opening not formed (or it is very narrow or not in its proper place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, it is necessary to puncture with a subtle sharp instrument as soon as it is born in this manner: 
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then place in the wound a subtle lead clamp and tie it there, and keep it for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, he should be turned around and allowed to urinate; then return him to his original position.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not hold the tube, it is possible that the urine flowing over the area may not clear this spot.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But the one for whom the tube is narrow should be treated with a lead dilator, as we have said, for several days until it is widened.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But for those in whom the tube is not in its proper place, as mentioned, which causes them to be unable to urinate properly because the opening of the urethra is at the end of the penis and they cannot urinate without lifting the penis with their hand; and it affects their generation, so that sperm cannot reach the uterus correctly, this is a serious illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The method of the operation is that the patient should be placed face down on their back, then extend the tip of the penis with your left hand using strong traction, and incise the end of the penis at the meatus with a sharp spatum (instrument), similar to the cut of a feather, or scrape off some part so that the middle becomes like the head of the penis, and the tube falls into its proper place as needed.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful in your operation for the flow of blood, when you often encounter this; and apply yourself to it so that you stop the bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Capitol .lvi.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the ulcer that occurs on the foreskin at the head of the penis, and of the corruption, blackening, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	White spots occur this ulcer on the penis, and it is an elevation of soft flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	For the non-malignant condition, you must suspend it with a fine thread and cut within so that all of it is removed; then apply to that area submerged in Egyptian ointment; afterwards, treat it with a deflaming ointment until it heals.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the ulcer is malignant and of a leathery color, then you must apply a cautery near its beginning and its root.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If the ulcer is on the foreskin at the head of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the ulcer is inside the foreskin while the other part is outside, then you must remove the ulcer that is inside at its beginning until it is stabilized; afterwards, treat the part that is outside, because when you treat both together with the foreskin, it is not guaranteed that it will not be torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And we have examined accidents in the genitals and in the foreskin blackening and corruption; then it is necessary that you clean all of what has already turned black and what is about to corrupt or what is already corrupted; and then apply over that, on top of this, honey, which is mixed with flour from pomegranate peel and crushed and sieved ash.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then treat that with the other cure until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	And if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery according to this method:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	For a beneficial cautery serves two purposes at once, that is, for blood flow and for a wound when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed, then you must insert a lead catheter into the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in those whose foreskin is tight, and circumcision is not usually required; and when adhesion occurs due to a wound or an abscess), you must separate it with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely released.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to distinguish those precisely, then you must scrape with a spatula some of the cause from the head of the penis and from the foreskin, and this is where the foreskin, when it is thin, is easily perforated slightly due to its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a sharp and thin instrument, which has already been soaked in cold water so that they do not stick together again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then it should be treated with astringent wine until it is healed.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVII. 
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the cleansing of children and the treatment of what happens to those who undergo circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution to the discontinuity like other afflictions: rather, since it is of our operation and our will, and those for whom it is properly performed are children, it is necessary that we assign the best procedure and the least burdensome path to health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books, for they did not use it in their laws, and this is because we have acquired it through experience. The reason I have found most artisans and surgeons to use circumcision and cleansing with a lancet and forceps; and they apply a dressing with honey and anointing with oil.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already examined all these methods and did not find a better cleansing with scissors and dressing with honey than cleansing with oil, because often the foreskin's double layer causes the outer one to come off, leaving the inner layer behind, which then requires another anointing and is certain to cause pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And with the cleansing that is done by scrapers, which are digital and used by surgeons, the incision at the end of the male member is not protected, for it strongly enters into its channel.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	And in the operation with a nail, if you force it too much, you will corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the umbilical cord of the child is short by nature, and often it is born in such a way that no modification is needed, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	Regarding the modification that is done with scissors and sutures with thread, the goodness, my experience shows me, is that the scissors have a proportional blade, so that the sharpness on top is just like the sharpness below; and thus as you press your hand it follows two proportional sharp edges, and incises according to a comparison in one motion; and compression of the thread is done with a figure containing the entire cord of the penis, which prevents any error from occurring.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the method of the first operation is that you should position the child properly, especially if it is one of those who can barely understand a little, so that you only tie the thread on his penis just enough, and leave it there until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make the child happy in every way that is possible for you to do, so that it receives comfort and understanding.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then make the child sit between your hands, prepared and not showing any sign of disgust; and hide the scissors in your hand or behind your back so that the child does not see them or any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into the penis and blow into the tube, and pull that inside so that the head of the penis is set back in place, and then clean it from what is added to it due to dirtiness.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then mark the designated area with double-folded wax, and then place another ligature slightly below that first one, and then press with your finger on the site of the ligature and hold it firmly in place, and incise between the two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the chain slightly and extract the head of the arrow; and then let the blood flow little by little, which is better; and sprinkle powder on it and place a cloth over the powder that has been spread with egg white cooked in warm water mixed with fresh olive oil; and leave that on until the next day; and treat it with healing methods until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the scissors for modification is as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let one end of the scissors be uncut and the other end cut, so that the tip of the nail is not missed, and let the length of the two sharp ends be equal to the length of two equally sized handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in modification is that you might accidentally remove the intrinsic chain entirely or part of it where you should incise.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, you must stretch that area of your instrument with your nail before the inflammation of the spot and incise it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then extract that with a hook and incise that.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	And if three days have passed and the swelling remains under the foreskin as an abscess, then you should wait until the abscess ripens, and then easily drain it, and incise it according to what is prepared for you.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful of the head of the penis, for it should not be affected by that.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And thus treat it with what consolidates the wound, using powders which we have mentioned in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised too much on the scrotum and you observe parts above it, this should not harm him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And thus treat it with what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made by stones or frozen blood, or pus or flesh growths, and similar to those we have mentioned regarding the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and there is retention due to a stone already in the neck of the bladder, then the patient must be bent over their knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then position the feet of that person on their back and extend their abdomen from the part above their back, and the patient holds their head as much as is possible for them.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, when the neck of the bladder is forced, it pushes the stone towards the back parts, thus the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved by what we have said and the cause becomes very strong for the patient, then you must administer extraction from them with an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and its tube should be thin like a reed, similar to a bird’s quill in fineness about one palm and a half long, at whose end there should be a fine canal.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of urination extraction is as follows: take the tube doubled and tie it well at one end with wool or cloth; insert the ends of the tube into the opening of the syringe, and cut with scissors any excess part of the wool if necessary, but insert it forcefully into the canal. Then suck on the syringe with force and use egg white.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And place the patient on the bed, and moisten the bladder and the penis with oily substances, olive oil, and warm water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then gently insert the syringe until it reaches the root of the penis; and then bend the penis upwards at the base; and then push the syringe into that area; and then continue to push it until it reaches the bladder, and this should cause the patient to feel that it has reached the intended spot. If not done according to this order, the instrument may go astray due to the tortuosity of the path.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then extend the bile with the wool little by little, for the urine soaks the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract that and use the urine for treatment, and apply a catheter; do not stop doing this and use a catheter until the bladder is evacuated and the patient finds relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter .59.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of cyst irrigation with clamped instruments and similar tools which are appropriate for this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When you encounter ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood in that area, or obstructed pus, and you want to distill water and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a catheter, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	And here is the translation of the provided line:
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that place three burns are made: two from one side, thus as you please.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	Here is the translation line by line based on the given instructions and similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French:
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, if you want to draw out moisture from the bladder, insert the end of a tube into the moisture, and pull with that what is pushed up into the parts above, for the moisture is drawn into the cavity of the tube.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the tip of the catheter into the urethra as we have recommended in the circumcision; and then expel the moisture with what you use to do so, for that moisture reaches the bladder quickly, and the patient feels it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the subtle catheter with which the bladder is catheterized is as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it is made of silver or brass, the tip of which resembles a small feather, and there should be a canal inside.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take a bladder from an animal, and place in it the moisture you wish to introduce into the bladder, and then tie it tightly with a double thread between two points, and warm that moisture over fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the tip of the catheter into the urethra.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then press your hand on the bladder containing the moisture with适度的力度，让病人感觉到那液体已经到达了膀胱。 
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	And if the bladder is not present for you to use, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; and perforate all around its circumference; and then pour strong pitch into those holes so that it is well mixed; and then attach the circle as if it were an adhesive, so that you can place upon it whatever you wish of the moistures, oils, and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you attach it to the instrument and use it in the same way as you would with the bladder, pressing with your hand inside so that the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed in the division the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of each.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have discussed the stone in which the operation is performed by hand, and incision.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone properly formed in the bladder is that which is lodged within the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I am narrating that with clear exposition and abbreviation. 
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, it says that stones formed in the bladder mostly affect children; and one of its signs is that the urine excreted from the bladder resembles water in its fineness, and appears in that sand; and the patient rubs his penis, and often feels pain, and then it becomes erect; and with this you should move your buttocks around in bunches of these.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is the practice of healing children who are within that period having reached fourteen years; and it is a difficult cure in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	More in the young it is felt because it is among those [affected].
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that one where the stone is larger and the cure is more difficult; And if it is small, it is contrary to that one.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Here is the translation of the given sentence line by line into English:
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then the patient should be lifted by their feet and shaken and jolted gently so that the stone descends into the neck of the bladder, or jumps from place to place a few times.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then place that clyster between your hands prepared, and the patient's hands should hold their own body parts, so that the bladder is made to tilt towards the area below.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then pour that out entirely from the outside.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then you should immediately treat it with surgery.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you cannot remove it entirely with your touch, then you must anoint your left index finger with oil, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if they are a mature adult, and insert that into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And pour out the stone inside while your finger remains in place.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually guide that (the stone) little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press with your finger at that spot and expel it from the interior parts towards the area where the section is.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the attendant to press the bladder with their hand; and command another attendant to extend the testicles upward with their right hand, and with their other hand hold the cord that is below the testicles, at the location where the incision is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a blade in this manner, which has the following form:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And then divide that which is between the anus and the testicles, not in the middle but closer to the left thigh; and let the incision be made on that stone with your finger inside the anus, and make a transverse incision so that the outer part of the cut is wide and the inner part narrow according to how much the stone protrudes as possible, but no more, because you will feel with your finger in the anus when the stone should stop being cut, and it is released due to necessity.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that some stones have angles and edges, which make their expulsion difficult because of this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that, this is like a grain, and it is round, and it is made of the light excrement.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if this is the case where bones and cartilage are involved in the fracture.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not already perforated, then you must bind over that area, or press on that spot properly with your fingers, the tip of which should be like a file used to scrape stone, and do not withdraw from it; or insert into it an intricate instrument with a curved end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	And if you cannot act on that area, then slightly enlarge the wound, and if you see blood flow, bind it tightly with powdered vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	And if there is more than one stone, then at the beginning you press your hand to the opening of the bladder, and then incise over it; and then slightly push near that area; and similarly do so if they are more than two particles.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then it is mistaken to incise that area with a large cut, for you cause one of two outcomes in the patient: either death or continuous urine dripping, because the area is not fully healed.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	And administer the expulsion of what is dislocated internally, or manipulate the fracture with forceps to extract it in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, once you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with pieces of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over that cloth dipped in oil and wine, or in oiled and washed water, so that the swelling may be softened by heat.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then recline the patient on their back, and do not loosen the bandage within the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have loosened it, wash the area with water and some oil, then treat it with a fine plaster and a soothing ointment until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the wound you encounter a hot swelling that is hard and corrosive, and of such appearance as if the blood were frozen in the bladder, thus obstructing urination (and this is known by the discharge of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will cause corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the wound with sweet wine, water, and salt, and oppose every kind of infection with what is suitable for its healing until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And throughout the entire healing process, you must keep both thighs tied and apply the medicines that are placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and is in the flesh of the penis, and it has been embedded in there, and urination is obstructed, then cure that without resorting to surgery, because many are accused of performing surgery for this treatment; and already I have expressed this, which is that you take an oiled iron probe, of which this is the form:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	From the triangular extremity, sharp, inserted into wood.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take honey, and apply it with that to the penis after removing the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the tool into the penis, penetrating easily until the perforator reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the perforator with your hand on that stone little by little, and you will pierce through until the other end penetrates; for the urine will be released immediately.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on the part where the stone breaks outside of the penis, for it is fractured there and flushed out with urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to some reason that prohibits you from doing so, then apply honey below the stone and more honey above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then make an incision over the stone on that penis between two bindings.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then loosen the bandage and modify the clotted blood that has formed in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to have a bandage of wax below the stone, except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and another bandage above it otherwise, because when the wax near the protrusion of the stone is loosened, the chain returns to its place and takes the wound with it.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary for you when you remove the wax above, that you lift the chain to the parts above, or return its full length, and take the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are rarely formed.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if a stone does occur in any of them, then the cure for it is difficult and is prohibited by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of the reasons is that the woman's affected area is virginal (or tight).
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman who is so knowledgeable as to describe herself to the doctor when she is chaste, or if she is among women with husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you cannot find a woman well versed in this art, especially the operation by hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the site of the incision above the bladder in women is distant from the location of the bladder, for which you need a deeper incision, and there is fear [of complications].
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	And if necessity forces you to do so, then it is necessary that you take a woman who is very skilled in medicine, though she is rarely found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that, then seek someone who is very skilled and subtle, or present a woman who is well-experienced in women's affairs, or a woman who has some knowledge in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, present that person, and command them to do everything you instruct, starting with the examination of the stone; this is done to determine if the woman is a virgin, then they must insert their finger into her and check the stone. 
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if you find that [condition], compress it with your finger, and then command him to urinate on that spot.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	And if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the woman's vagina and search for the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and compress that area with good pressure.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, when you find it, you must gradually pull that from the opening of the bladder to those parts with the power of your strength until you reach the root of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then incise at that position in the middle of the thigh where you find the tendon of the leg from whichever side it is present and insert a stone into that part, and do not let the said stone be removed from that place.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that incision, and if you feel the stone, now adjust the incision according to the amount by which you know the stone will be expelled from it.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the types of stones are various: for among those, some are small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and having ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you should know the various types of it through what you understand about that which you want to address. 
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see blood flow, apply powdered vitriol to the area and leave it there for an hour until the bleeding stops, then resume your operation once the powder has been washed away.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And have prepared with you the instruments which are used in the extraction of stone in men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see a flow of blood and know that the expulsion of blood is from an artery that has been cut, then place powder on the area and press it with cushions and tight binding; do not repeat this action; leave the stone there and do not remove it, for fear that the patient might die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	So when the sharpness of the blood has diminished over several days and the area becomes weak, then return to your operation before the stone is completely expelled.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter sixty-two.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the surgery for an incarcerated hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	An incarcerated hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white sac, which is placed below the spermatic cord containing the testicle, and this sac is called the tunica vaginalis.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it occurs in the proper tunica vaginalis, which nature prepares near the testicle, before it becomes another testicle; and it is the spermatic cord between the white sac that we have mentioned, and this is nothing but a hernia. 
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the groin area, because this material accumulates in those areas, and sometimes it occurs due to blows inflicted upon the groin.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity has various colors, for the color of it may incline to yellow or to bloody, or red, or be black and feculent, or be clear white, and this is what exists.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known where this water accumulation is as follows: for if it is in the white part that we have mentioned, then the swelling is round declining slightly in length like an egg shape, and the color appears, because the humidity contains it from all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the proper fat tissue, then the swelling becomes round with parts of eggs and because of this, one thinks it is another egg.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the testicles and the white membrane, then apply a poultice there.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the humidity, then observe the color of the humidity in the swelling with a probe whose form is previously described; and according to what is seen on the trace of the probe, judge of what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	When we come to the treatment of anemia, then it is necessary to command the patient to be bloodlet if this is possible for you, and turn the body of the patient completely. 
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then lay them down on their back on some kind of support slightly elevated, and place a soft cloth underneath.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then sit on the left side of him, and command the assistant to stand on his right side, who should stretch out his arm from one of two sides to the region of the genitals and to the part below the navel.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a broad spatula and split the region of the genitals from the middle point along the length towards the penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the incision straight and evenly distant from the line where you should cut the skin of the genitals, until you reach the white membrane inside.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And retract that area, observe it carefully, and be cautious not to penetrate it; and when you retract it, make sure it hangs loosely and examine it meticulously with your retraction as much as possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then puncture the fully water-filled membrane with a wide incision, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate the two lips of the incision with forceps, and extend the bladder upwards towards the upper parts; and do not touch the chain that contains the genitales, and cut into the bladder in such a way as is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And cut that part entirely or in pieces, especially its delicate side, for if you do not examine the incision meticulously, there is no guarantee that the water will not return. 
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	And if you proceed with the operation from outside of his hernia during the time of your procedure, then once you have completed the section of the ciphac (possibly referring to an incision or a part of the surgical process), return it inside, and then stitch together the two lips of the scrotum's opening, and then treat that as you would other wounds until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the hernia corrupted by another disease, then you must cut the vessels that are near the suspensory ligament, remove the hernia, and then treat it as we have said before.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the fluid is divided into two separate parts, then you should know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part in the same manner as you did with the other one; and if it appears to you that it is necessary to operate, then do so.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Then you should clean the blood and insert wool soaked in oil or oiled wool into the incisions; place over the outside another piece of wool that you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread this over both testicles and the navel of the abdomen; then place cloths folded and pillows on top, and bind them with a bandage according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then two cloths are taken and filled with carded wool according to this pattern; and the ends with which it is pressed with coth or wet wool are made, and they are attached with straps in the waistband of the pants; one end goes from the buttocks between them, and the second takes hold at the crotch area, and two ends over both thighs and two ends on both knees, and all bindings should be adjusted in the waistband of the pants.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery instead of sectioning with iron; and you should take a delicate knife-like cautery and incise the cord of the intestines with it, igniting it as we have recommended until the white membrane containing the fluid is revealed, and then you apply the cautery in the following manner:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it is shaped like the Greek letter gamma (γ).
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce with that cautery, and ignite it until all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the membrane with hooks, and squeeze it with hooks, and cauterize it with a delicate ignited cautery; and incise it as much as you can until you completely remove it; and be careful of the area so that the fire does not touch it.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and results in less bleeding, and is better than an operation with incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	And if this treatment causes inflammation or bleeding during the incision or cauterization, then you must address whatever issue arises through a cure that is appropriate to the situation as described.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is weak and does not withstand a second operation due to its horror, then administer perforation as I recommend here; this is when it is confirmed that you should do so, based on what we have said about the indications, that the hernia is acute.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then you must place the patient on some raised chair, then pierce the abscess at its lowest part with a broad scalpel, and perform the incision according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And make the opening wide enough so that all the fluid can drain out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place something over the area and bind it there, allowing the remaining fluid to drain out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat that which is inside so that the wound may be healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	And if there is an obstruction to the discharge of water at that time, you pierce it: and this is done only when the white membrane in the opening of the wound causes an obstacle and prevents the discharge of water. At that point, you must insert a pin or instrument into the wound with which the water from dropsy is extracted, as previously described; or apply a small device to the compression of the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns and accumulates again after about six months or so; and when it has accumulated again, it should be pierced according to the same method, so that the patient may thus spend their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On the surgical section of a fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the surgery of this hernia, there is great risk of fatal danger in major operations; therefore, in my opinion, it is better to opt for its reduction and save it through a safer method.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I am recalling the operation in that case and the specifics of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Thus, I say that abscesses form in bodies where the veins are involved, and this happens for various reasons: either due to an excess of sharp bitterness that is poured into the veins, or by percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not noticeable in the pain, and it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And often the abscess is hardened, of which the color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by the constriction of the arteries, and by the inflammation of those, as has already been understood in the recall of it, or by the inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which is caused by the inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it should not be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which is caused by the inflammation of veins does not disperse when pressed with your fingers for any reason.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this type of condition a section may be made and on the other flesh; thus you incise the cord of the testicles, then stretch the scrotum upwards towards the parts above, extract that from the white membrane, release the suspensory ligament of the vessels, tie them up, and incise the suspensory ligament after you have released it completely from all parts of the scrotum.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	And if the scrotum is already consolidated with those fleshy parts, then you must extract the scrotum and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion due to some cause within the membrane, or between the vessels, then you must release all that adhesion and incise it with a circular incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is a growth of flesh in the location of the adhesion that is behind, then you must incise all of it and extract the scrotum as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, once your operation is completed, fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine; then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Capitol .lxiv.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	For the given line:
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Vit is an abscess enveloped by some sort of membrane resembling a boil with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult any exercise or walking for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this disease, there is fear due to the recollection of what preceded it.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, one must speak of the operation that follows the initial procedures.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And it is said that you must place the patient on an elevated chair; then pull down the sac containing the testicles; then grasp the spermatic cords with your fingers using cloths that are proven to be gentle on the penis; and have another assistant help, and stretch them vigorously.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then make an incision with a sharp, broad spatula across the spermatic cords where the vessels are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	Then squeeze from all sides as we have mentioned in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	Then insert a needle with double thread into those areas, and tie one end of the thread at the front where you made the incision for the abscess, and tie the other end at the back.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then incise those in the middle according to a straight section along the length of the body, and extract what has been added by the foul and corrupted humidity.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then treat the wound with a method used for other wounds where you want pus to be generated so that it cleans out the vessels which will be dyed by one of two humors, for it is not harmful by doing so.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if you accidentally affect all the vessels, then it is necessary that the testicles be extracted or that the testicles be cut off along with the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and that they be removed, or be cut off so that they are no longer useful.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXV. 
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Here is the translation of the provided line:
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The appearance of this hernia is due to a section that extends from the spine across the abdomen towards the groin area of the belly, because extending intestines from that rupture affects some of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the abdomen or due to exertion by him, and these two types occur for various reasons: either by impact, or by jumping, or by crying out, or by lifting something heavy, or by similar causes.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the hip joint, is that it happens gradually over a long period of time, and does not occur suddenly, and there is a swelling similar within where the groin compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when it is due to the section of the spleen, for at the beginning it causes sudden severe pain; and there appears an inflammation different from the previous appearance around the area, and this is due to the protrusion of the intestine, and the body of it extends beyond the spleen.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes it happens that the intestine protrudes through the membrane, and this type of intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it happens due to gas, and at times the intestine splits open, and here it gets trapped, causing great distress to the patient, and sometimes it leads to severe and significantly worse pain when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of this kind of illness with iron, there is fear, so it must be avoided in such cases.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of the operation for this is that you command the patient to push the intestine back into its cavity with their hand; if it obeys and returns, then have them lie on their back between your hands, and lift their chest.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then hold the cord that connects the spermatic cord above, and cut through the entire length of the spermatic cord; then insert two hooks into the edges of the incision according to what is needed to open the incision with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is according to the quantity that it is possible for you to extract from that the pus may be expelled.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then separate that sac which holds the cord of the testicles, until the white hard part of each side is revealed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And then you insert your finger into the area where the testicle lies, between the white sac that is beneath the spermatic cord and the second sac, separating it from the adhesion that is at the back of the scrotum.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then hold the spermatic cord with your hand towards the outer parts, and with this action extend the white sac upwards using your left hand, and lift the scrotum with the sac to the section area; and command the assistant to stretch the scrotum upward while you break the adhesion at the back completely.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And feel with your fingers to ensure there is no cause for the intestine being wrapped in the hard white sac.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause for it, then you push that part back into the abdomen.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle on which a thick thread made of seven threads is attached, and insert it through the back end of the sac, which is below the spermatic cord where the section lies; and then cut the ends that protrude from the thread until four threads remain, and arrange some of them in the shape of a cross; and bind with this the sac that we have mentioned as being beneath the spermatic cord with a strong suture on both sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the extremities of the veins and bind them tightly with a strong bandage to ensure that none of the vessels that nourish these areas can transmit any cause so that from here no abscess may occur.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And again apply a second bandage according to the first bandage, about three finger-widths away; then between these two bandages leave from the scrotum, where the testicles hang, an amount equal to the size of a finger, and cut off all the remaining part following the round shape, and remove the hernia from it.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then make an incision at the part below the scrotum where blood and pus will flow out, as we have described in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound; administer the bandage that we have described (and sometimes the white scrotum is cauterized, which we mentioned near the beginning of the fear of blood flow, for such occurrences often happen) and leave the bandage until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the treatment is delayed, then bathe it with warm water and place it on the area until it falls off as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound with another treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	It seems like you've provided a section marker or chapter heading, specifically "Capitul .lxvi." which translates to "Chapter LXVI" in English. This indicates the beginning of Chapter 66 (LXVI in Roman numerals) in a text. If you have more content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to share!
De hernia ventosa.	This phrase "De hernia ventosa" can be translated into English as:
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, none has been seen who dared to undertake its cure with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones said that it is done as we have recounted in the hernia case with the thread; which is that you tie the vessels near the section where there is ease for him; and then dry out in the middle area around the abscess, using what opens that up, while the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the plague as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the disruption that occurs in the ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes, as we have said, a rupture occurs in the ankles, and you should examine the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not attribute any cause of the hernias to the groin; and if you do attribute a cause, it is minimal; and it returns at all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the condition persists for a long time, there is a fixed rupture in the spine where the hernia descends into the spine; this happens due to the extension of the spine which occurs in the ankles as we have said, which causes the spine to stretch and then soften, and the area becomes inflamed, and you should examine it.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of it is with a cautery, as was mentioned earlier in the description.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is treated with fire according to this method: the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then you dry the inflamed area of the rupture by drying it horizontally according to the quantity of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then apply the white cloth that is under the belt so that it is uncovered. 
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the probe and place it over the prominent part of the spine, and press that against the front of the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then mark the two prominent points at the end of the spine's segment, and align those points with each other using a suture. 
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the end of the thread, and do not incise entirely through the skin, nor extend the wound, nor cause any other harm as I will teach you in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then treat that with the treatment of wounds, and when you incise the abscesses, cleanse that area and restore the wound before it solidifies; for the skin contracts and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this area, for it is more conducive to healing.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the spermatic cord.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Often the spermatic cord is softened in some men because the flesh between them is softened, and this is attributed to its care.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for one who is skilled in its treatment to have the patient lie down on their back, and to incise the entire softened cord over the natural cord; then to suture the two edges together.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, in the beginning, soften the excess of the loosened ligament with three or four heat applications and with a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then cut between the sutures; and then treat for the healing of other wounds until it is healed and the pus subsides.
Capitol .lxix.	Capitol .lxix.
De castracio.	From the context provided by the medieval medical treatise, it seems that "castracio" is related to the act of castration. Here's a translation attempt for the given line:
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that in our law castration is excommunicated, but for a reason it seems necessary to me to remind you of it in this book; and there is no need to remember it except in two ways, one of which is so that this may be part of the knowledge of the doctor when questioned about it, who knows the cure for the one to whom it happens; and the other way is that we often have a need for castration of other animals for our use by them, such as mules, oxen, and pigs, and similar beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And thus I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by attraction, or by cutting through incision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in the one that is done by attraction, the method of the operation is to have the animal immersed in hot water until its testicles are softened and become loose and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then take them with your hand while they are still dissolved and do not let them appear to the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration performed by incision and cutting, you must hold the animal and press the cord of its testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then apply the suspension device, and make an incision on each bone with a cut between two joints.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then incise that pus which you have squeezed out.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any cause on those with sciatica except the subtle sciatica which is on the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better, which is done by atrophy, because atrophy leaves no cause from the testicles for the animal to desire copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one is when it appears in the space where the scrotum of the testicles is, between the two testicles, resembling a female vulva with hair.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes urine flows from that area in the scrotum of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, it is of one kind: the female vulva above the penis appears as two male testicles slightly to the right at the opening, like the foreskin of a man and two testicles. 
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three types: two for men and one type for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is necessary that you incise those tight muscles so that the swelling of that area is released, and then treat them with the cure for other afflictions.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second type for men, where you urinate from an area located in the region of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On swelling and protruding flesh due to causes in women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Swelling appears suddenly due to natural causes, during which it is pressed and treated with care; and sometimes it is enlarged in some women to such an extent that it spreads similarly as in men and even extends to intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then it is necessary that you hold the excess swelling with your hand or with scissors and incise it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not delay in making the incision, especially near the region of the genitalia, so that it does not cause a flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then treat that with the treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	New flesh is flesh that grows in the wounds of the mother until it fills them, and it often appears on the external parts resembling a tail (and for this reason, some early practitioners called it "tailed disease"); therefore, we must incise it as we would lentigines, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII. 
De curacio de alratica.	Of the treatment for arthritis.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	And accidental [pain] is due to illness that has preceded it, and that which is caused either by improperly fitted flesh or by a subtle or thick foreign body.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is caused either in the region of the womb, or on its sides, or on its upper part, or on its lower part, and you prohibit coitus, pregnancy, and childbirth, and strictly forbid menstruation. 
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is gained by observing the midwife, if the obstruction is visible, it is clear; but if it is not visible, then you seek that with your fingers or with a probe.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	And if the obstruction is by subtle phlegm and approaches both lips, then you should cut and break that obstruction.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you place cushions under both labia, and then place your index fingers of both hands inside.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman is on her back, her thighs spread apart, and then spread the two lips with force so that that subtle barrier is broken and the obstruction is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and soak it in oil and place that on the area, and keep it for a day so that the incised area does not become hardened.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the barrier is thick and dense, then you must incise it with a spatula or with a myrtle leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to flesh, then suspend it with forceps, and incise it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use the medicines that stop blood flow from bites, such as hellebore, dragon's blood, and enses, mixed with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide lead cannula so that the affected area does not become slightly hardened.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep it for several days and administer dried calf's horn.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then it is treated with the other method of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes it happens in the major growth of other flesh, and then you must incise according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if this is due to a chronic abscess, and the chronic abscess that is in the main area should not be treated with iron in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids and tumors and red boils that occur in the area around women's genitalia.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are understood to be from the openings of small veins through which blood continuously flows; and when hemorrhoids become old, they harden. 
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already mentioned in the division the types of those and the signs of those, saying thus those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and tumors when they are in the region of the large intestine and do not appear to the senses, then surgery should not be performed on them.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are near the opening of the large intestine and can be felt, those are the ones that can be treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And you must put the woman in cold water and then extend the tumor with forceps or with a rough cloth, and incise them with the scissors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	Then sprinkle on them to stop the flow of blood one of the powdered substances used for incising, such as gallnuts and similar items.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Then fumigate their feet for an hour, and then place them in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then have them sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate rinds and walnuts and similar items.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Then take flour of oats, mix it with honey and sweet wine, and make a poultice with that for the back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is separated, that is good; and if not, cause adhesion with two cupping glasses, and on the breasts perform scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and submerge it in the juice of coriander or in the juice of angelica or in the juice of guarravier with fermented wine and apply it to the area; and then treat the place with ointments until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May this rough instruction guide you to inscribe what appears to you as I have described equally in the text. 
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that which is inside so that it may be healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	It seems like you've provided a section marker, "Capitul .lxxiv." which translates to "Chapter LXXIV" or "Chapter 74" in English. This likely denotes the seventy-fourth chapter of a text. If you have more content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to share it!
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	This phrase appears to be in an old Romance language similar to Medieval Latin or Old French. Here is the translation into English:
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Here is the translation of the provided line:
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already spoken of these diseases and their types and the signs thereof, and their treatments in this section.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And I must say in this treatise about an abscess that comes on the breast when it is one of those abscesses from which pus can be collected, and if you want to know how the operation with iron is performed.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then you must consider whether the pain of the abscess at its onset is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and sometimes that reddening occurs, and if you press on it there's a feeling, then do not treat it with puncture, and cure it with what aids maturation until the acuteness of the symptoms ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And now you must have the woman sit on a chair that has two footrests; and she should recline on her back and position her feet towards the lower part of the belly, with her thighs spread apart, and place her arms under her head, and bind them with suitable bandages.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife should follow the right path and administer the instrument with which the opening of the mother is dilated, the form of which will be described in the following causes.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this instrument, you should insert it gently into the entrance of the mother's vagina, and the part of the instrument that enters the mother should not be larger than the entrance of the vagina and should guide the patient. 
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	And if the instrument is larger than the opening of the uterus, then you must place pillows on the texture of the uterus's opening so that the entry of any instrument into the uterus is prevented.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And it is necessary that you stop the flow that runs through the upper instrument and that the minister holds the instrument and rotates the flow until the opening of the main area is exposed.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the pus appears and is touched with the hand and it feels hot and wet, then you must dry that area by scraping off the top of it with a spatula. 
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus is evacuated, then you must place on the wound a cloth soaked in rose oil or olive oil that has some astringency; and apply a bandage to the incision at the site of the main area.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place outside the wound and over the perineum clean wool submerged in water in which mallows have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be treated for about two days with an ointment that you must apply until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the wound and the affected area that is infected are washed with water and honey, then with water in which a piece of iris or longwort has been boiled, and then return to using the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is inside a swollen area of the body, then you must abstain from treating it with iron, instead cure it using what we have mentioned in the section.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach the midwives how to treat unhealthy embryos when they appear according to an unnatural form.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary for the midwife to recognize the signs of a natural childbirth from the beginning. This is so that when you see a woman expressing the parts and desiring to smell the air, and she becomes restless due to what is happening during labor, and hastens the expulsion of the embryo, then you know that this birth is according to a natural form, with the head coming out first, followed by the body either hanging or suspended from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see those signs, then it is necessary that the patient’s belly be compressed so that the embryo descends easily because when they descend on their head, tell them the second part [of the process], and clean them of those excesses with a good cleansing. 
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	Here is the translation line by line:
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	When there is a necessary cause for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those matters, and that she guards against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I am showing all the figures of those [conditions], and what mechanism is in them by which they are signified by that and stand upon that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the seed is ejaculated on a woman's head due to natural exercise, and when it is intense for the woman and done in a difficult position, and sometimes the power of the man is already weakened, then one should apply this remedy, or let women take it, and evaporate its semen with fenugreek juice and humid oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then the midwife inserts her finger between the small bones of the spine and splits it with that second finger, or she uses her nail to scrape away the moisture within.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	And if it does not descend, then the woman must be treated with a mixture of psyllium mucilage and fenugreek mucilage.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Then command the one attending her to press and make her sneeze with pepper; and hold her mouth and nose for about an hour, for the fetus will come out soon.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two hands of the fetus come out first at the beginning, then you must gently reduce them back little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if it does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a chair and lift her feet up, and then shake the chair on the ground; and the woman should be held so she does not fall due to the shaking.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not brought back inside and the fetus dies, then cut those [hands] off and extract the remains of the fetus or tie the body of the fetus to its hand with a cloth and pull it out evenly, for it will come out soon.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of the embryo's secretion onto its feet. 
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When you are working on the patient's feet, then you must press them down, and then fold the cloth slightly, and then smooth it out, and then take one of their feet and stretch it little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When you have thus entered between the thighs, then you command them to strain, and cause that to be expelled with effort, for it will be purged if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not purged by what we have recommended, then you gradually return the cloth until you place it in its natural position again, for it will be purged with a gentle insertion at that point.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is not resolved by all that we have recommended, then take some alum and dissolved gum, and pound everything in the mortar with good pounding, and then apply this mixture to the woman's cervix, at the lowest part of her abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Then have that person sit in tepid water until the hypochondria (the areas beneath the ribs) are warmed.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when you see that the parts of him are softened, then perform fumigation with myrtle and apply it to him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have the sub-fumigation for an hour, then make her sit on a chair, and then make her sneeze and open her mouth wide, and lift her up from that position, and press the lower part of her abdomen with slight compression, because the matter will soon be expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the procedure will be carried out according to this method, then you gradually insert their small hands; and the woman should be laid on her back, with her feet hanging down, and she is lying on a light surface, and cover their hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press on the abdomen little by little, and then extract what remains under their feet between the ears into a prepared container placed below. 
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the wind is not expelled, then take their feet and shake them vigorously, and then press what is above the hypochondriac regions little by little until the wind rises to the upper parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert your fingers and slowly unblock the obstruction, and command the woman to strain as the blockage is being removed.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Extract the obstruction longitudinally using one of your fingers.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Attempt to reduce the swelling with your hand, but if you cannot do so, then elevate the woman and help her walk.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot walk, then have her lie down on the bed, and vigorously shake her thighs with percussion, and then administer ointments that I recommend, made from mucilaginous substances.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the childbirth has occurred, then have her sit on a stool, and work on reducing the swelling, aligning the obstruction according to its natural form, and make the woman sneeze and command her to strain as it is being removed. 
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Exuding from the neck over his body spread out his arms and the surface of him is on the side of his mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	It is necessary that the midwife hold the hand of the fetus and then turn it little by little, so that this happens with ease.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is mixed and thoroughly combined, then apply over his nose what we have recommended of oil and poultices.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then you command them to moan little by little, and once you have done that, place that poultice on a plate and command them to lean over the right side, and then command them to be compressed; and make that person sneeze with conditions.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The exit of the prepared fetus over the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When they say to remove the horribles from the main area according to this method, consider it, and then you cut with your nail into the second layer so that the humidity is evacuated.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the hernia is hanging over the face and neck of the patient, then you incise that part of the navel area so that it does not get trapped and cause death.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then push the hernia into the parts inside where you need to place it, and instruct the woman to compress herself several times, and it will come out on its own with a light emission, if God so wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The outcome of twin births or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four are born, though this is rare and seldom happens; however, their causes are natural, not supernatural.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, even if they are multiplied, as a second entity, and they are separated by a membrane. Distinguish them entirely at the navel of each of them. And sometimes they come out on their own just as one hernia would with a light natural emission, and they often emerge in this way without causing harm, as we have described.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some of them are difficult to deliver and lead to what we have said about unnatural presentations, then you should treat them as we have described.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and does this with ease and subtlety, and with care, and is inventive according to every figure according to how it is prepared by the bringing of health. 
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembrance of what is formed in the womb from embryos and abortions.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Here is the translation of the given text:
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all of this must be known by the midwife who often sees something similar to this, and therefore she applies herself to it in the way that is necessary.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Capitol .lxxvi.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	From the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat a dead fetus as we have described in the section on medication and it has not been expelled, and you must use manual intervention, then you need to consider whether the woman is of sound health and not subject to any of the conditions that could lead to her harm.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then the woman should be placed face down on the bed with her head lowered and her thighs raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister should hold her in two parts or tie her to the bed so that her body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then you should moisten the birth canal of the mother with humid oils and with a mucilage of coltsfoot and fenugreek and its seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then anoint your hand with those oils and mucilages, and then gently insert your hand into the mother, and then search with your hand for the place where you can grasp the fetus with your fingers.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And the appropriate places for this are: then you consider if the device is prepared so that it descends upon his head, and now you insert the hooks into his nostrils, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or under the beard, or in the collarbone, or in the areas near the ribs, or under the hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the ailment is in the patient's feet, then it occurs in the heels or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it is necessary to hold the probe with the right hand, and place its curvature in the spot that is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand easily and place the probe in one of those places we have mentioned, until it reaches the swollen cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and keep another person in the appropriate position next to him, or a third if necessary, so that the traction is equal, and not just according to its straightness alone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And it should be massaged all over, so that the patient's discomfort is alleviated just as it is done in dental procedures for the extraction of a tooth.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And one must apply to the area between them so that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then one must have the midwife anoint some of her fingers with oil and skillfully insert those fingers and rotate with them what is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if a part of the fetus is stuck, then the positions should be changed until it becomes easier; do this until the entire fetus is delivered.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if one hand is extended before the other and it is not possible to reduce it due to its contraction, then a cloth should be wrapped around that hand; then extract it until all of it is removed, and incise it either at the joint of the hand or at the wrist.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And in this way you must do it with the other hand and with both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And if the head of the boil is large, or you encounter constriction during the exudation, or if there is water tightly sealed in the top, then you must insert between the fingers and split the head to drain the water, or use an instrument called “alundat” to scoop it out. The form of this instrument will be shown along with the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly, if the boil has a large head by nature, then you must incise it with a lancet, or take it out with an alundat as we have said; and then remove the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head has emerged but is constricted by the skin, then it should be cut open so that the moisture within the foot can be drained out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated and does not require exudation, then you should incise the head as soon as it becomes possible for you to do so.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the lower part of the abdomen is swollen with an abscess or edema, then you must pierce that area to drain the fluid within it.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	And if the condition affects the lower legs, then the attraction of it is slight and the direction of it towards the mouth of the vein is mild. 
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	And if the abdomen and feet are constricted, then you must extract that with cloth which you will have wrapped around your hand, and cut open the abdomen and feet so that what is inside may flow out. 
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	More if the other limbs remain and the head returns, then the midwife inserts her left hand; but if the mother's mouth is opened, then she inserts her hand into the womb area, and with that seeks the head, and pulls it inside the mother’s mouth with her fingers, and then inserts one or two ounces, and pulls it in with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the womb is constricted by an abscess that has occurred at the opening, then it should not be disturbed; first, you must administer an effusion of moist and fatty substances.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer plasters; and follow up with baths that soften and moisturize.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the procedure is on the patient's side, then it should be sutured: and administer what we have said to the fresh wound.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if this is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And it is necessary that you do not leave any cause within the second layer.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operations, then administer what we have said about the treatment of the swellings that occur from the incisions.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if bleeding occurs, then bathe in styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen a woman whose belly contained a dead fetus, and soon after became pregnant again, and then another fetus died.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to him that a swelling occurred in his abdomen; and it swelled inside where an incision was made, and he began to discharge pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called for his care, and treated him for a long time, but the plague did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I placed some strongly adhesive plasters on him, and drew out a bone from him, and after passing several days, I drew out another bone; and I was very surprised because there were no bones in his abdomen.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were the bones of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I treated the plague, and extracted many bones from him, the woman existing in his very delicate conditions, and he lived in this manner for a long time, cured of a small part of his arm. 
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I do not intend to be strange, but rather because in this lies knowledge and assistance for the doctor who administers treatment with skillful hands.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form with which the mother is cut open:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a stretcher on which the legs are tied, with two loops at the two ends of two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this loop should be finer than the strap, and it can be made of leather or willow wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each piece should be two digits and the margin of each by two is one digit, and the length of each is one and a half palms; and in the middle of the two pieces are two joints made from the same material which are already fastened, each of whose length is half a palm and a little more, and the width of each is two digits or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additives should be inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is opened with them when you rotate the two prescribed instruments.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Make it of pieces of oak or of sticks according to the resemblance of forceps. 
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	And yet at the extremity of his two additions thus as often, and the length of those additions is each one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the womb with those methods, then you make the woman lie down on the bed with her feet hanging off, and open what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the instrument just as you would with scissors, evenly according to the amount that you want from the estimation of the mouth of the mother between which the midwife does what she wants.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of dizziness which the ancients called:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of expulsion with which the fetus is expelled:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran  
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to a forceps which has teeth at the end, like pincers, and sometimes it is made long like a forceps according to this form, like pincers, which have teeth like those of a saw with which it is cut and compressed.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	It seems that the phrase "Forma de amesidat pauc:" might be a mix of languages similar to medieval or old Romance languages (such as Old French, Old Spanish, etc.). A possible translation into English would be:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of an ounce having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of an ounce having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps with which the jaws close, with which the head of the fetus is compressed:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Forma de dos espatums latz:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when more types of those are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, it is lighter for their operation and better suited to people according to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not use those instruments anywhere you should prepare yourself, for the necessity of those is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of the extraction of the tonsil.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the tonsil is preventing swallowing, then you should command the patient to hold their breath, and then make them sneeze with force, and place your hand over their mouth and nose, and if it is expelled by this means, it will be good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a reed and pierce the top to create a small hole, and place in it burning herbs such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, Arabic scammony, and cinnamon bark.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All of these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the reed, and place that over fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Then place a cane tube in the mouth of the reed, and keep it there until the vapor reaches the cavity of the mouth.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	Then make her sneeze as we have said, and the tonsil will be expelled quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	Here is the translation of the provided text line by line into English:
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before it is necessary to move the right and left sides with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust the amount of traction, for it will obey and escape from adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the wound is constricted, we have already recommended the treatment with sneezing and with medication using herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not expelled by all the causes which we have recommended, then be careful not to strain excessively in attempting abstraction. However, it must be that what has been squeezed out from him reaches the mouth of the wound and then apply a unguent and tetrapharmacum; for this will make it rot within a few days and dissolve, thus being expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	However, when it rots, the bad humor rises to the head and to the stomach, causing harm to the patient; therefore, it is necessary to administer fumigations and appropriate treatments for this condition.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	However, some of the Ancients have already prescribed fumigation with southernwood and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Method of using an instrument to fumigate a woman suffering from retained menses and secondary infertility:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And let the narrow end be placed in the container and the wide end over the fire, and the fumigation should be placed over the embers of the fire. 
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that inside so that the sub-incineration may be consumed and repeat another [process].
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	For the treatment of the unperforated infant's anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that spot with her finger; and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula, and be careful not to touch the membrane.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then place over that wool soaked in wine and oil; then care for it with an ointment to ensure it heals.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear it is blocked, then place a catheter in the tube for a few days, and remove it when the child wants to urinate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And it may happen that the anus is blocked due to consolidation of an ulcer or an abscess; then it is necessary for that consolidation to be incised, and then it should be treated with what we have said about treatment and the use of lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	On the treatment of fistulas that occur below.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that occur in the lower part below are narrow and thick, most of which appear near the anus externally or in the space of that part.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or multiple fistulas.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that swelling is old and comes from moist white phlegm or subtle putrefaction, and sometimes these fistulas penetrate deeply.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those penetrating are known by what is expelled from them through excretion and flatulence; and sometimes the patient uses excretion, and strongly it expels those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of those fistulas found in the space penetrate into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and some of them penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the area near the hip.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And that by which a penetrating and non-penetrating fistula is known, is that you insert your index finger into the anus, and introduce a slender probe of wax or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	And if there is tortuosity in that area, then insert a slender probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel anything with that probe and do not find any sign of discharge, worms, or gas as we have said, then you know it is non-penetrating, and then apply treatment accordingly.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the urethra of the penis, then its significance is the discharge of urine from there and the prevention of that area being consolidated with medication.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	And if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the area, then the sign of this is that the probe goes through there without tortuosity into the bone, causing pain in the region of the affected part; and that pus continuously flows from it; and that medication does not help, nor can it be consolidated with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those fistulas not every cure is complete, and the cure of those is the work and vanity of the inexperienced doctors upon whom they rely.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	And in that which is not penetrating and not old, healing with iron is hoped for according to what I will recount to you, and this which has already been proven.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between your hands upon his back and raises their thighs towards his chest, with the knees inclined towards the belly, and then insert a lead probe, or an iron one if it is in the twisted fistula, until you know the location where the probe reaches.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels pain around the neck, then you must insert your index finger into the neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel in your hand the attempt already by itself to penetrate openly, or what you feel between your hand and that skin or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that area, for there is no cure there, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But however some say it is healthy in some men temporarily.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And of the treatment by which improvement is hoped for in him, you ignite a fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was previously mentioned, and insert that ignited cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; then repeat this action two or three times until you know that all those fistulated tissues resembling feather quills have been properly adhered together.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	Then treat it with poultices wrapped in bandages until all the adhered tissues come out, and then treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh. If it is healed, that is good; if not, it will never be cured by any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe is inserted and does not penetrate your finger which is in the anus, and between that finger and the probe, there is a kind of flesh or pus membrane, and turn the fistula so that it lies on the surface of the chain. Now dry the chain from the beginning of the fistula, and you will dry it with the probe, placing it inside the fistula until the drying reaches the point where the tip of the probe ends, and through this process, it is freed and cut.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those fistulated flesh which resembles a bird feather quill and do not damage any of them for any reason.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	And if blood flow should come between you and your operation when you are cutting those tissues, then the best thing to do and the lightest instrument is to cauterize with fire or with sharp medicine, for a cautery with fire fixes two good things: it is an adjustment of those tissues being joined together, and a cutoff of blood by drying out the humidities.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	Then treat that area with cloths wrapped in boiled or finely ground linen until the place stops bleeding, and then treat the wound with ointments that generate and consolidate tough flesh.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And thus medicines in which there is styptic and drying power; when it is restored, it is healed and you do not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already penetrated into the rectum and extends from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the rectum and examine it with that.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And thus if you feel resistance and between you and it there is merely a veil of tissue or flesh, and penetration is blocked, then the operation should not be performed but rather through means of faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	Here is the translation line by line of the provided text:
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: it is when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is on the side of the buttock around the surface of the body with the chain and at the margin of the buttock, then take a probe with a perforated end, which is thus like a needle for preparing the cores in this way:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert into that wound wrapped with five leaves or around it; then try to insert a leaf into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	If it is necessary to penetrate the margin of the anus from inside, then you extract the gall from that place as if you were inserting your finger into the anus; and you pull out the end of the gall and align both ends equally, and squeeze each one, and leave this for a day or two, and when it is necessary to cut the gall in the flesh, tightly bind that part so that the flesh which is between the two ends of the gall can be incised and removed. 
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then treat the wound before it is fully consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the openings of the fistula are not penetrating, then make them penetrate in whatever way you prepare, but not so deeply that you injure the tendon, for it is not for you to do this so as not to cut the tendon; and then treat it until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The method of using a spiked spatula with which the fistula is split: the curvature of which is sharply pointed and the other part is not sharp, so as not to injure what is not necessary, just as is sometimes done.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	On sewing hemorrhoids in which blood flows at the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are treated in two ways, for they can appear around the anus similar to coal, or they can be like pieces of raw meat.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those, some are small and some are large, and blood flows continuously from them. They are numerous, and they can be outside the anus, and at its extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	And however those that are related to the anus are due to a lack of moisture in the months, during which yellow water or a little blood comes out continuously, and according to the color of the body. 
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for that which is inside the anus is to command the patient to sit and to strain such that the anus stretches and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you cut and suspend with hooks or hold them with your fingernail, and then incise those veins at their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the nails are not held in place by moisture and softness of those areas, then take those with rough cloth or wool batting, and extract them using tweezers, and then cut into them and sprinkle some powders that are appropriate near the incision, so that they can act there instead of cauterization; or cauterize them according to what is detailed in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the rectum does not expel [properly], then use a clyster with a small opening, and wash it with water that is in the colon and which allows for slight expulsion when the patient exerts themselves.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the rectum, then their cause is slight, and you should take hold of them with your fingernail or use tweezers to grasp them, cut into them, and then treat them with what we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And for the one who requires an incision, you must suture them in the following manner: take thread wrapped and insert it into a needle, then pull out the hemorrhoids to the upper parts, and make that penetrate with the needle at the edge of the other part. Wrap both ends of the thread on the side further from the needle, doing so transversely; tighten the hemorrhoid with strong pressure, and then knot the thread and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this for all [affected areas], and leave one untouched and do not sew it up, so that the excess blood may flow out from there.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then place over the buttocks a cloth soaked in oil or ointment; and put that on the wound and command the patient to lie still.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then place that inside the container; and when it is cooked, treat those with ointments or other treatments until it heals.
De curacio de fistulas.	On the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	White spots occur due to drying of the skin or natural constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And when they are old and no longer respond to that medicine, then you must scrape those areas with the tip of a spatula or your nail until they become moist and the scabby pus on top is removed, which prevents them from healing; then treat those areas until they consolidate.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you remove those areas with more forceful scraping than the first until they bleed and are raw; then treat those areas until they heal.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids, this is crucial.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that alamermar, which is like a nail, and it is not just any round spot according to the color of the body resembling the head of a clove, and it appears all over the body but mostly in the areas near the feet and toes, and because of this pain, people suffer from it.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then it is necessary to incise what is in the area around the nail, and hold it with scissors or forceps, and root it out from its base; then treat that area.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize the wound that is described in the preceding chapter. 
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	More like a wart is a small, rough, tubular, round prominence on the surface of the body, and white spots appear on the hands of children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the cure for it is that you stretch and incise that area, or that you bind that area with a thread or with cloth inside which feces are placed.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already the opposites and non-opposites have been removed with the instrument that I will describe.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	And the formica is a small hairy or large fistulated prominence on the surface of the body moving in the urine, and when the cold encounters it, it causes pain resembling an ant bite, and it forms around the body. 
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the cure for it is that you take a quill from an eagle or a vulture, and let it be strong, and place that over the blister so that the circle of the quill contains the affected area; then rotate your hand with the quill until you cut out what is within the circumference of the blister, and press that into the flesh's swelling, and eradicate the blister from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, do this with a reed or iron tube according to this method:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the part above the tube be tapered and closed (that is, unperforated), wrapped in such a way that when the patient holds it on their finger, the rotation of that (tube) is facilitated.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the blister, do so as mentioned in the cauterization of atrophied tissue in the chapter on cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	On the shape of the instruments that are used to give chrism.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes chrism is made of silver or lead or molded or hammered reed; and sometimes it is made in small and large sizes according to those to whom it is administered, for that which is administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and for those whose anuses are inflamed or painful, the chrism containers for them should be small. 
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and small chrysters:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the cannula above which the bag is tied should be wide according to this manner; and it should be at a distance where the bag is tied thus as usual.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the lower extremity of the pus which is inserted into the rectum should be closed (that is, not open) to prevent leakage; and on one side there should be two channels, and on the other side one channel, and the width of the channel should be according to the thickness of the rays, with the thicker ones being a little wider.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicines are placed should be made of animal bladder or sheepskin, and its mouth should be one palm wide.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced with several channels as described; and the space between the channels should be about the thickness of a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Then insert strong raw fiber, made from ten fibers or so, into those channels; and adjust the bag with it. When the bag is placed on the patient, it should be tight at the top of the catheter between two distinct points with strong compression, and then catheterize each channel with it. However, the quality of catheterizing with it is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity tolerated by the patient; be careful that it is neither too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient is laid on their back, and raise their legs up and place them on a pillow or a cushion; and then anoint the tip of the cautery with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or similar; and then gently insert that into the rectum; and then the minister should take the bag and squeeze it with both hands and forcefully until everything inside the container is evacuated into the intestine; and then remove the container and the patient lifts their legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces it to excrete, let it do so as much as possible; and if one sleeps with that for an entire night, it is better for recovery.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	And if you treat those suffering from diarrhea and the discomfort caused by it, then you should repeatedly apply the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a gentle and strong enema, of the kind used to cleanse children.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the treatment of the plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	Here is the translation of the given line:
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it says that the plagues are diversified according to how the plagues are made and according to the location upon which the plagues fall.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for many times plagues are made as such: by throwing of stone, or incision with sword or knife, or打击与枪矛，或用棍棒，或用箭矢，或类似众多原因的此类行为。
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I am recommending the treatment of some diseases for which you should apply this reasoning and rule to other ailments.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I begin with the simple headaches, for the discussion of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, when you encounter a simple headache in the head and it is not due to a fracture, then consider: if it is caused by a blow or similar, and has already stretched the sinews so much that it becomes a severe pain and you fear that an abscess might form, then be careful and perform a venesection of the cephalic vein immediately, do not delay this; extract according to the amount of strength in him unless there is some prohibiting cause for venesection, especially if the blood from the pain is small.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And the venesection should be performed on the opposite side of the affected area; and ensure that the patient is protected from relapse and from wine and heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if some reason prohibits due to delicacy, then reduce the food intake and avoid meat and wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place on the affected area, if an abscess forms, some wool soaked in olive oil or in wine that has been stypticized.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	And if you are sure of an abscess, then place it over the wound, if it is recent with its own blood and the air has not changed that powder which I will mention shortly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that condition, then place poultices on it until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	And if the wound is large or is due to a separation and similarity, and the edges of it cannot be brought together with pillows, then bring those edges together with stitches as I will describe regarding the stitching of them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound has already exposed the bone and sinew, and it is not retained by anything but a small suspensor, then incise that area and subsequently treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh near the wound site. Command the patient to eat foods rich in nourishment: soups and formed cooked items similar to them until it is composed (healed).
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the wound that does not adhere to the bone, then you should incise all of that rotten part and remove it, and subsequently treat it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which bleeding can occur and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then you should probe the artery. If you find that it has not been cut, then incise it with a spatula or ligate it. And if necessity compels you such that what we have said does not work, then cauterize until the bleeding is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these sores are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; in such a way that you powder over those this powder, which solidifies before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of the powder is as follows: take oil from vipers one part, dragon's blood two parts, unextinguished ashes three parts; let all be well ground and sifted, and with it fill the wound, and apply a good binding so that it adheres well to that area, and let it coagulate with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then bind that above with poultices and leave it like that, and do not unbind it while it is thus, until it is free from swelling, because the medicine will not be removed from it until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes this is done with just a cautery, when you do not have vipers and dragon's blood available.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this method of operation is performed on large wounds when it is necessary to place it over them and keep them tight, especially fresh wounds with their blood, which have not been altered by the air.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially during summer, then this powder method is not intended for use. Instead, treat them as we have said, by placing certain ointments or powders made from flour mixed with water and honey over them until they stop putrefying; and then continue to treat them with other remedies until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	And if you encounter a fracture in the bone due to an injury and it is small, then you extract that with gestures.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will speak of the treatment for skull fractures in what is venomous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the ailments of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the ailment affects the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and it is similar to a simple ailment of the head.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerves or arteries of the neck are cut, then if it is a nerve, no treatment should be applied that causes strong astringency, such as zinc and vitriol, which bind and contract those nerves.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not apply any source of cold to the ailment, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuation is connected to the brain, which is the most sensitive part of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is treated with mild medicines, such as washing with warm water, sometimes infused in oil, whether boiled or unboiled, and thyme when washed with warm water, along with other small stones according to this method, and apply moist ointments.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the ailment is severe, then administer stitching or compress the edges of it, and then treat it with powders until it heals.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	And if in the wound there is depth or you encounter rotten flesh in its lowest part, then pierce it at the deepest point.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if in the wound an artery is already cut and bleeding occurs, then separate or dry it out, ligate it, or cauterize it if the situation necessitates such action.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you have already cut the vertebrae of the neck or all of it, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you should sew the edges of the wound over the bone of the neck without touching it; first align it and return it to its natural shape, then secure it with proper binding, and leave it for several days; then treat it with ointments that have astringent and stimulating properties until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has caused a protrusion in the bone, then you should percuss it; and if there are fragments of bone within it, extract all that you can; leave what cannot be easily removed until the wound becomes putrid, and let it separate on its own so that the protrusion is alleviated.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle over it the powder that has been recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	And if an ulcer forms in the wound, then treat it with the method which will be remembered and discussed later in its own section.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Regarding wounds to the neck or similar ones that occur between the shoulders, whether caused by a sword, dagger, lance, or similar weapons.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a puncture from a lance or a sword, and you measure the depth of the wound, then consider whether gas escapes when the patient breathes; if so, know that the wound is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if the wound is not deep and it is fresh with its own blood, then you should apply powder to it within the first hour; do not strain it so that the blood is not retained in the depth of the wound and returns to the heart, which could harm the patient. Instead, apply an attractive ointment and cleanse it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not available to you, then apply a piece of cloth to the opening of the wound to absorb the moisture that comes out; and have the patient sleep on the side of the wound so that what is inside can drain out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	More if three days or more have passed since the plague and you do not see in the patient spasms, nor a bad heart tremor, nor constriction of the breath, and you observe other good signs from him, then know that the plague is safe; and then treat it with poultices and with other treatments until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of it is unnecessary, and it has been open for a long time, then know that it has become a fistula; therefore, treat it according to its chapter [meaning to follow specific guidelines or procedures for treating a fistula].
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the plague is caused by a cut from a sword or knife, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with stitching if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if it has already caused an inflammation in the bone and parts of it are embedded, then you should probe the wound and attempt to extract those pieces if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then leave them inside until the wound becomes pus-filled, which will make their extraction easier.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidental plagues in other members, the aid in cure is the aid of what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the ailments of the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen can be either severe, slight, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	In severe cases, you will see the intestine or the nerves of the intestine, because their insertion and the suture of them need to be more forceful and more delicate.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small rupture is made difficult by another method, and it is known that their reduction is more difficult if you do not attend to their insertion into their proper place immediately, because they swell and become thicker, making the insertion difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	Therefore, the best rupture is moderate, because in that case, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, just as it is difficult in the two previously mentioned types.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the suturing of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two of these sutures are common and similar to the sutures used for other ailments of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other specific sutures are similar to those used for other ailments, but they are more specifically applied in the suturing of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you each with explanation and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Thus, it is said that when the hernia is small and some part of the intestine protrudes because of this, and it becomes difficult to reduce it, then it happens in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the tear as we have said, or when the intestine swells due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And thus, when it is so, then you must warm that area by soaking a sponge or cloth in warm water alone, or boil water with squill, cyperus, and spic, and apply it to the hernia until the swelling is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes it is done in the way that has astringency, and it is better than plain water for reducing the swelling.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And thus, when you see the swelling resolved, then moisten the hernia with water in which mullein and mallows have been boiled, for this alleviates the internal part of it with little effort.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	And if it is necessary to use the instrument for this treatment, then cut the rupture slightly with an instrument with which you usually incise hemorrhoids.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first cure is better when it is appropriate that there be no drying, and no occupation to dry near necessity and deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	From the instrument, make its form dry:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the sharp wound, and the other part not-sharp, and the extremity subtle, and it is not as subtle as a spatula, rather it should be slightly blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And thus when the swelling has increased and you have taken out the intestine, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form, in its proper place, if possible over this, for it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	And when the disruption is wide and in the lower part of the belly, then you must make the patient lie on their back, and raise their hips higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you raise the head and feet higher than the other parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then always focus your attention and consideration on this so that the part where the swelling is becomes higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you must administer this in severe swellings and in moderate swellings as well.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small swellings, apply what you have prepared, then have the minister place it between your most compassionate hands, who holds the entire disruption with their hand and brings the edges together, then sew from one side to the other without any gap. 
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: first take a needle, or as many needles according to the quantity of the width of the wound; then leave the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger untouched; hold the needle firmly so that you do not insert thread into both ends of the chain. With both ends of the suture that is left from the chain parts inside, make it penetrate through one part; and you have already brought together both ends of the chain and both ends of the suture, thus making four rows. 
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then strengthen the double thread around the circumference of the needle, and sometimes on both sides together, and then join the two lips and the wound by a neat approximation; and then leave the thickness of a finger and put another needle there, and then tie that with thread as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if it is necessary until you have completed the entire compression of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be of moderate thickness between thick and thin, for thin needles easily penetrate the flesh; and thick ones are difficult to insert into the wound, and therefore they should be of moderate thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not necessary to insert the needle at both ends of the wound too deeply, so that the flesh is not cut too easily and the wound can close before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And let the stitches not be too long so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then sharpen the ends of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient during their sleep; and place on the stitches small pieces of cloth from all sides, which hold the ends of the needles; and leave them until you know that the wound is already healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these types of sutures with needles in this manner are more suitable for small wounds, where only one or two needles suffice for the suture or around those areas.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the second suture is communal: it is that you administer with a suture the four extremities, of the chain and two extremities of the spine, at once, with a needle on which the thread should be wrapped equally in fineness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when you have penetrated these four extremities with the needle, withdraw the needle from that same part where you began, so that the thread pulls the pus from the deepest part to the surface of the wound, so that the suture is like stitching cloth together with which the cloths are held tight.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture the width of the smallest finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is known to men. 
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with such a suture, I sewed the wound which was inflicted on a man in his belly which had been struck by a knife, and it was a disruption of the wound larger than one palm, and it extended around two palms from the center area of the intestine and there was a disruption in the middle of the member; and then I returned it after the intestine had protruded for fourteen hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated in about fifteen days, and I treated it until it healed; and after that, he lived for many years, and his condition improved.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and yet, he was healed by a miracle, for I did not treat him with ointment, for there was no place to find ointment or any medicine, but instead placed on the wound an old cloth twice a day and washed it frequently with honey water until he was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will describe two types of suture specific to the narration of Paraula.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And you begin with a chain suture, and insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so when the needle penetrates into the spine and at that moment it is inserted straight and along the entire length of the body, and leaves the tip of the syringe in which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from inside to outside at the other end of the wound.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made that penetration, now you make another penetration at the same extremity of the wound from the outside part to the inside part; and leave the extremity of the needle in this position, and penetrate the needle into the other extremity from the inside part to the outside part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make the penetration with that needle with which you penetrate into the needle at the extremity of the wound that is on the inner part so that all of it penetrates. 
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin from this side of the wound and sew that with the end which is on the shirt on the other side, and extract the needle from the chain which has penetrated, and then return it into that chain and sew the end of the shirt which is on the other side with this extremity of the thread; and extract that from the chain which belongs to the patient.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once and another time, and do this once again between each other time until you sew everything that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this method of suturing is that you sew with a suture of sinew with which you sew the skin, ensuring that you sew the wound once from the part of the extremity of the chain, and leave the other side until you have completed it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	And here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Cover that you place the needle at the end of the incision from your side of the outer part, and make it penetrate to the inner part in that area, and leave both ends of the suture; then rotate the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside through both ends of the suture.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then rotate those flaps, and make each part inside penetrate the outer part at both ends of the wound except where it is on the opposite side. 
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of suturing is better than common thread suturing, and it is a suturing that precedes记忆。 
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the section about Gout.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And if the wound is called alcus (a type of hernia), the abdominal suture is corrected using two needles, so that you insert a thread into each one, and begin with the insertion of the needle on your side, and make it penetrate through to the other side according to the suturing method where the threads are evenly stitched. 
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when a rupture occurs in the middle of the abdomen, then缝合它比腹部其他部位的破裂更困难。
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the treatment of plague medication is judged by other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	Here is the translation of the sentence you provided:
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply ointments to that area which you have at hand before they form hard stone and expel the bile, and consolidate and observe them; and then treat it in the same way as the treatment of other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if you do not have the medicines at hand, then apply something to that area immediately, as it begins to exude pus and becomes old, and change that twice a day, just as you are taught, until it is healed, for you would not need other medication in many cases when the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the wound may spread to the major limbs, then you must soak lion's wool in high-quality tempered oil or in anointed oil, and apply that around the areas between the joints and leave them wrapped.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, for this often occurs, then treat it with a styptic black tear (likely referring to a type of medicinal agent), especially if the corruption has spread into the intestine and has penetrated into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that the one that is of the large intestine has a lighter healing process than the one that is in the small intestines. 
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal when the intestine which is called “gegunu” does not receive healing from any kind of medicine; and this is because of the great number of veins that are in it and because of its size where these veins are, and because of the subtlety of its body, and because of its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	And if what you process from the medicine is cloth, and you obtain that fresh, adjust it according to your prescription with which you similarly treat the intestines.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed into the space and is already green or black, then when you bind that with a thread over the area that is discolored, to cause blood to flow, because in the cloth there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Then cut what is another layer of the ligament, and place the two ends of the thread hanging from the part where the medicine is outside, so that the attachment of the cloth and the discharge of the arm from the medicine are relieved. 
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the plagues when they occurred in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When an intestinal rupture occurs and it is small, it can be restored in some people; for this reason I saw someone who had been wounded in their abdomen with a lance strike, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had become a fistula, causing gas and bloating.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I considered the treatment of him already because he was not confident in his own recovery, but stopped subtlety intervening within what fire heals and the area is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I put that you see the area already stabilized, beware of the patient suffering an adverse incident in his abdomen; and he does not suffer from this unfortunate accident by falling into bad habits eating and drinking, then bathe moderately and exercise with his duties.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And already some experienced ones have said that when there is a small ulcer in the intestine, it must be treated in this manner: you should take ants with large heads; then adjust the two lips of the ulcer and place one of those ants with its mouth open over the two lips of the ulcer; thus when it grips onto them and tightens its mouth, cut off the head of the ant, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Then place another ant next to the first one, and do not cease to do this with ants placed one next to the other according to the quantity of the entire ulcer.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then reduce that and sew up the ulcer; let those heads remain attached inside the intestine until it is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine be sewn with fine thread made from the gut of an animal attached to it, as it is finer than a needle; you should take the end of this gut thread, and let it be stripped of flesh, then tie the end of it with thread wrapped around, then insert that thread into needles and sew with that the intestine, and reduce that in the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of sewing with ants is nothing more than a secondary way of faith and hope. 
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the inflammation is large and widespread, especially if it is in one of the delicate intestines, for then there is not a remedy but subtlety, and it is not a complete cure.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of the treatment of sciatica and fistula.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any plague or abscess when it becomes corrupted and old, and turns into an ulcer, and is not consolidated, continues to discharge pus constantly and does not heal, then, in whatever part of the body it may be, it is universally called a fistula, and we call it azukem.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And truly, a fistula is a hardened, whitish swelling that is painless and has a cavity like the hollow of a bird's feather; therefore, we call it alcus rizatz, which means hollow.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in some people, there is moisture that discharges pus; and often this moisture is stopped for several hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And at times this moisture is thick, scanty, coarse, and fine.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already said before in the division when I listed the plagues that any ulcer that does not heal or is not on bare flesh is so due to one of these causes: one of which is either due to a lack of blood in the body; or because of the malice of the ulcer itself; or because there is hard flesh between it and the edges preventing the growth of new flesh; or because it is thick pus; or because that ulcer internally has rotted and the material within it is of poor quality; or because the medicine used for its treatment is inappropriate; or when corruption settles in the region, making it pestilential; or due to the nature of the region, as seen in Saragossa, where the digestion of illnesses is difficult and the natural healing of abscesses is delayed; or because there is a bone within it or multiple bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And it has shown all those causes and their signs, and the cure of them through medicines in this section.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And it is thus necessary that I make you understand the treatment of fistula, which is done through surgical means with my hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; for among them are those that affect large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spine, or the intestines, or the bladder, or some of the ribs, or some of the vertebrae of the back, or any of the compound joints such as those of the hand and foot; and these are the ones that relate to the proximity of the main limb and its likeness.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And thus, those fistulas that follow this manner are among the diseases difficult to heal, and do not receive proper treatment; the occupation associated with them is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if there are some fistulas whose depth does not reach the locations mentioned, and you hope for and trust in their healing, and wish to understand them better, then take a thread of linen or iron, and if the fistula runs straight, trace it using this method.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a thin lead thread, for lead, because of the lightness of its body, is flexible and conforms to the twists.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has horrifying growths, it is not possible for you to determine its nature by touching.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	So cleanse the orifices through their own openings, for the moisture with which you cleanse that area should come out of the other orifices and flow from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then inquire carefully in whichever way you can to know if there are bones or nerves here, and whether the cavity of the fistula is deep or close, or if it is a fistula that has multiple openings and is located over all this with the full extent of your strength, through your examination, with which you examine the patient, and the discovery of the pain should be compressed by your hand on the area, along with signs and accidental causes leading to the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood over all those causes with true understanding, now proceed to the treatment based on confidence: it is that you consider now whether it is an apparent fistula close or in a salty place, deep from a joint, or from a nerve, or from an artery, or from a vein, or from one of the places which I have told you about.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Now you dry the fistula as was said before about the discharge from it, and remove what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what has grown in the openings of the flesh, or of tissue and similar things, and treat that inside so that it may be healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of great depth and straight, then you must incise it as much as possible in its entirety, and subsequently remove all of its corrupted flesh; and then apply poultices wrapped with sharp medicines, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have probed with an iron instrument.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from the corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with ointments that will generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by this method, then you must cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must confirm this, then you should investigate it and dry it out as we have recommended, provided that you do not interfere with any vein or nerve or main part of the limb, as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness in it, then you must scrape it until all the corruption is removed; and then treat it with something that will cause flesh to grow until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if the arm is not healed and thrown away as it should be, then you know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; and then you examine further and carefully analyze the cause of it and clean it thoroughly with your final strengthening remedy, and then restore it. 
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And so if it is healed, well and good; but if not, then you know that that corruption is in the deep recesses of the body, which has not been reached, and then there can be no remedy for that except to abandon it.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is within your ability to pull it out, then you should pull it out with delicate forceps which are suitable for this task.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are multiple bones, then carefully extract all of them, and do not leave any behind due to any reason, using your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if any cause of moisture hinders you, and at the beginning there is neither fear nor error, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are present, and free the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if it is not the time to set the bones, then apply something to the wound that can help heal the wound, and leave that within so that it surrounds those bones with flesh and ligaments, and take care of the wound so that it does not become hardened, and keep the section you have incised in your operation constrained.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	However, if you fear, apply to the wound something soaked in crushed garlic with oil, or a cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment, or any of the green ointments, for when those ligaments will heal and the bones are separated from them through ablation, and such traction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If it is a large bone such as the thigh bone or hip bone or similar to those, and only the surface of it has been corrupted, then scrape away that darkness and corruption solely from behind inside until it is removed, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if a large part of it is corrupted and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that area and cut inside at the place where the corruption has spread, and then treat it until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you what happened to a man in his thigh so that you may use this as an example and guide for your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	There was a young man, about thirty years old, to whom pain occurred in his thigh. The corruption spread from inside the body until it reached the thigh, and it was an abscess filled with pus, and there was no external cause for this condition.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the condition persisted for a long time due to the mistake of the doctors until the abscess was opened, and pus began to flow from it. His recovery was slow until his thigh became fistulized, with multiple openings through which pus and bodily fluids continuously drained.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then many doctors treated it for about two years, but none of them knew much about the art until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And you see his chest and the materials that were flowing from those orifices due to a great wound; and already the body of that man was entirely discolored and its color was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I insert the probe into one of those orifices and bring the probe up to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I carefully examined all the orifices and found those that lead to the chest from all parts.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I prepared and made an incision on one of those orifices where I discovered a part of the bone, which was corrupted; it was already brittle, corrupted, and discolored; and a part of the chest that had penetrated into the marrow was already corrupted.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I treated that which was discovered and prepared of the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I ensured that only the corruption in the bone was what I cut away and treated, which I had already identified.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I applied the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I repeated the procedure and re-examined the bone beyond the initial exposure, and found continued corruption with the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I will address that which appears to me from that corruption, and then I was perforated to perform the cure of it and its restoration, and it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I uncover on the other side and do not cease to cut the bone little by little particularly and perforate its restoration, and it is not restored until I cut around about a palm of it, and that which is extracted along with its marrow, and then restore that using medicines, and it is lightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And iteration in the operation and section of it is not necessary except due to the disposition of its frailty and the lack of tolerance and fear of death, for sloth affects at all times by the excess of evacuation causing fainting.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus it is healed by complete healing, and there is no place where bone has turned into hard flesh; and its condition is well established in its body, and the function of it returns; and it is transformed in its conditions, and does not cause any contradiction in movement nor harm in any way.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	However, if there is a protruding bone in an already injured part of the body, then you must cut it according to this method: take a ligament and tighten it at the end of the protruding bone, and command someone to pull on it; use a thicker woolen bandage than the first one; then wrap the bandage over the flesh that is below the bone, and stretch the extremity so that you pull the flesh apart, thus exposing the flesh over the area where you wish to cut, ensuring that the saw does not touch the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a stick or board under the bone properly, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to use the saw without cutting the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And it is necessary to gradually apply the binding over the corrupted area, because if corruption is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear on its surface, and may require another binding session.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, before one part is connected to the other, and the corruption is in the middle or in some part of it, then you uncover all the flesh from every side; then place a stick under it, and then bind that first part where the corruption is until the binding of the other part is continuous.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the binding be according to the location of the corruption a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and bind the bone where it continues to the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation between two joints, then it is not reasonable but rather a complication.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you, and you should open that area, and clean it according to whichever method is possible for you, and with every complication be corrected by you, unless there is a vein or nerve that would oppose this.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know what are the incisors and the saws used to cut these bones, which vary according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the subtlety and the size and the smallness of those, and the hardness and their rarity; therefore it is necessary that you prepare every kind of instrument suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you should know that this operation requires knowledge of the type of instrument you will need; when you have great study and long experience and understanding of the methods of this art, and testimony of the ways diseases manifest, because then you already apply what is appropriate from the instruments to every illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I advise you, at the end of this chapter, to list the instruments with which you will work simply and with which you will proceed in your practice, which you will test on others.
Forma de serra:	Form of the saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Forma de autra serra gran:
Forma de ray:	Forma de ray:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Make the head of this vein in the shape of a star-shaped nail head, and the points on it should be according to the form of the asterisk marks. 
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not appropriate that only the ends of the joints be rubbed when they are corrupted, or if the large opening is wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Forma de razori major dels autres:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	It seems that the provided text is a mixture of languages similar to those in the Romance language family. Let's attempt to translate the given line into English:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.
Forma de lu:	The provided text appears to be in an archaic form of a Romance language that has elements reminiscent of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Based on this style and previous translations, "Forma de lu:" likely refers to some aspect of medical treatment or anatomy related to the body ("lu" seems akin to "lo" meaning "the" in these languages).
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Forma de razori autra subtil:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another curved tool for treatment:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of instruments with which bones are cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of incisors or smaller tool:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incision tool; this resembling a saw, and the end of it is like a pair of scissors, and it is applied in various places along the line of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio dequel que es perforat dels osses:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the end of it is triangular and has a sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly, all the causes we have mentioned for razors, scissors, and saws apply.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the incision of extremities and the suturing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	Extremities may decay either due to intrinsic or extrinsic causes; if you have treated that corruption with medicines for healing and the cure does not work, or sometimes the corruption spreads to a member without any apparent cause, then you must incise that member where the corruption adheres, so that the patient might be saved from death or severe malice which is a greater defect than the loss of the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of the one to whom this happens is that the member turns black within, as if already burnt by fire, or it may turn black before the corruption spreads throughout that member and affects the whole body. Therefore, be quick with the incision of that area.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if the corruption is caused by some venomous creatures such as marine scorpion, viper, or toad and similar.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the affliction is in the extremity of a finger, then you must incise the finger and do not give space for the corruption to spread into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if you access the hand, then you incise it at the base of the palm, and do not give space for corruption to enter within the arm's palm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you need to do that, then incise the arm between the elbow and the joint. 
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption spreads further and extends around the knee, then at that point it is the death of the patient; and administering any other treatment for this in cure is an amount of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly treat the foot when corruption invades the toe of the foot, then you incise it between one of the joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if you take hold of the instep of the foot, then you incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	And if it enters into the knee, then you incise the leg between the joint of the knee.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread over the knee, then there is no remedy but submission, and leave the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of incising or amputating the limb is that you tighten the bandage at the part just below where you want to incise, and place another bandage over the area; and have an assistant extend a bandage on one side of it, and another assistant extend a bandage on the other side; and you separate the flesh between the two bandages with a spatula so that all the flesh is exposed; then proceed to incise or amputate.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it is necessary to place cloth on all sides so that the area does not touch anything, and that the patient receives a well-adjusted and properly cauterized lesion.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	And if bleeding occurs while you are operating, then you cautetrize the area appropriately, or place some powders that stop the bleeding on it; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I remind you of what happened to a man in his foot, this accidental event which I and you recall, which is that an accident turned his foot black due to burning that resembled fire combustion.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that accidental corruption first affected his toe and then spread to the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared himself for various pus to come out as part of the healing process by applying force to the member because of the intensity of the pain and burning he experienced, and he cut that foot up to the joint, and fire [cauterization] healed it.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long ago, that same corruption occurred in the index finger of his hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then he came to me, and I perforated it to expel that excess with what was placed on his hand of the medicines, followed by cleansing his body; and the excess did not stop but began to spread to another finger and then throughout the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And the patient begged me to cut off his hand, and I did not want to do so, hoping against the reaction of that excess, and more than fearing the incision of his dead hand, for the strength of the patient was in grasping.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And after he was dismissed by me, he returned to his land and it came to me that this man prepared and amputated his entire hand, and he was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have added this narration only to be helpful regarding what can be done for this illness, and its meaning by which it should be understood and according to which it should be acted upon.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	About the treatment of the sinuses and the quality of enemas with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it collects pus, and then it breaks and perforates, and the pus is discharged from it, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin above it resembles thin cloth, and no serious corruption has occurred, nor has it affected the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not referred to as a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged to the point where corruption affects some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment of it is to incise that skin entirely as it twists, especially when it becomes thin like cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And when you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm that you use should be of fragrant odor, then cleanse that with an Egyptian medicine which is made of sweet oil, wine, and ziniar in equal parts, and they are mixed together in a vessel, and heated over the fire until the medicine becomes warm and reaches the consistency of honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Then take the amount that is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; cleanse the sinus with this mixture, strengthen its opening, and leave the medicine inside for a quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	Then extract that with a scraper; do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the pus is completely removed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is cleansed with ashes water when this medicine is not available to you; take the ash of vines, put it in water; then mix that and cleanse the sinus with it until you are confident that it has been thoroughly cleaned.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then cleanse it with water and honey, and mix in ground ziniar, and cleanse it with a mixture of wine and honey, for the property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and the wine makes the sinus adhere better, especially when the wine has an excess of astringency and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this several times and are satisfied that the sinus is already cleaned out, then cleanse it with something that promotes flesh growth.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is that you take some unguent of diafinicon and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine; or that you administer it as an enema mixed with certain medicines and other ointments that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the sinus opening is narrow such that theclyster tube cannot be received, then you should gradually enlarge it with a small tool, and place linen wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment over it until it has been enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly, if the opening is wide, then you should sew the lips of it together and leave enough space for the enema to enter additionally.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice through which the blood flows is raised towards the parts above, then dry it at the lowest point in it so that the blood can flow into it, because when the blood is compressed in the depth of the sinus, the flesh is generated within it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus within the area around the lower bone as you wish, then you must prepare the limb with a preparation that allows the fluid to flow out lightly according to what is prepared by you and ensure that no cause of swelling remains retained in it.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that should be placed on the sinus appropriately for what you wish to extend them on a linen cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such quantity as to cover the entire communication of the sinus; then, cut with the scissors at the right place of the sinus opening a bit wider than the sinus opening itself; then spread another piece of linen over the incision and apply a lion's unguent according to the size of the cut, placing it near the far end of the sinus opening so that the discharge of fluid from it is lightened, and do not change the large cloth except after some days once.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	But the one that is over the sinus opening should be changed frequently so that what is retained in it of the fluid comes out.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you may know whether what flows out of it as fluid is too much or little, or if it is digested or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And with this you should consider the location of that vein, if the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is an abscess in it.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the material that is placed over the sinus orifice already adhering, or about to adhere, then on the second day, or the third day, you should loosen it, and when you remove the dressing, change the cloth and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if from the sinus near that space there is a subtle virus, then do not despair of its adherence, for its healing is approaching, for in some people, the generation of flesh on their wounds takes time, and in others, the opposite occurs.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if for many days the sinus continues to discharge undigested matter, then you know that the sinus is not adhering; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and this prolongs the cause, then you should adjust by drying out the medications. If the medicines are moist in their substance and virtue, they should be dried like diafinition ointment, when the excess addition of grease is properly adjusted.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the most recent method of treatment is to take some ointment made from diaphyton and dissolve it in rose oil, and apply that ointment onto the affected area as if it were smeared on its surface, then massage it into place, and use it thus.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it seems in that action, when there is no arm [affected], take ointment of diaphyton and honey which has been boiled until thickened, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe and ashes, mix everything together, powder it over the honey while it is on the fire, then spread this over a cloth and apply that to the swelling; and spread that with the honey which you have cooked until thickened, powder it over a cloth and bind that [cloth] tightly.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes they are administered with long-leafed aristology [likely a misnomer or archaic term], roots of celestial lilies (and it is indeed the celestial lily), flour of rue, and centaury. Use these simples or mixtures, crush them, sieve them, and powder them over the honey that has been boiled; then use it thus.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the swelling persists and is not healed by this treatment, then you know that the corruption is in its vein. Then make an examination of the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then cure it with a fistula treatment, as was said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	For the treatment of boils and inflamed nails, and for the addition of a finger incision and amputation.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici is an abscess that arises from under the nail of the toe or finger, and often appears on other fingers as well. And when it prolongs without proper treatment, or becomes a chronic abscess, or corrupts, it can cause pus to ooze which corrodes the base of the nail, then corrupts the entire area, and through its corruption affects the bone causing a foul smell, and makes the tip of the finger or toe crooked, turning its color dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And so when you have that abscess as we have described in the division and your treatment does not work, then you must incise with an iron all the excess that remains of the nail, and then cauterize the wound near it, for pointed cautery is helpful in this.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the edges of the nail are already pressing on the flesh inside, causing it to pierce and hurt, then you must place a thin splint under the angle of the nail that is piercing the flesh, and push it up. Then incise that part of the flesh easily, and apply caustic and corrosive medicines over what remains of the flesh until it is completely removed; then treat it with ointments until it heals.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	And if the corruption has already entered into the bone, then you must cut into the bone and extract it, for it will never be healed as long as the corrupted bone remains within.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corrosion and corruption have spread to the finger, then you must cut it at one of its joints according to which allows for better recovery, and then treat it until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if the nail has suffered trauma or friction, and there is intense pain in it, then at the beginning you must bleed the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp spatula using a transverse cut from top to bottom. Be careful that the cut does not go deep into the flesh beneath the nail, for you would cause severe pain to the patient, and it may lead to excessive growth of flesh around the area; then treat that spot with something that alleviates pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	However, the finger that is born with a lot of flesh in many men is mostly fleshy, and to a great extent it involves the bones or the nails. 
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or its birth is in some nodes of the said [joints].
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	More than those born in certain joints do not suffer, and those who are affected in the strong joints are more afflicted.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are born fleshy, the incision is light, and it is so that you should incise that one from its base with a spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But for that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore beware of amputating it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But in one where it is born between the toes, you must incise the flesh at the beginning with a round incision around the bone, and then cut it with one of those appropriate saws, and then treat what is inside so that it heals.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	But consolidation which occurs between the toes due to continuous friction or by nature at birth, or by consolidation from an injury or combustion from fire, or similar causes, then you must dry out that consolidation until the toes return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between the cloths that are infused in rubbed oil so that they are not lightly consolidated, and separate them or place a thin sheet of lead between them until it is consolidated as required.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if consolidation occurs in the fingers with the palm, then you dry out that consolidation according to how it is prepared and conforms to the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From the inscription of vices, those are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then it is necessary that you administer purification of the body from black bile several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The sectioning (bleeding) of the patient is done in this manner: at the beginning, wash the chest with warm water so that the thick blood, which is feculent from the chest, may dissolve. Then bind the patient's chest tightly at the highest part of the thigh towards the side of the knee with a bandage. And then cut the vein at one place, or two, or three places widely. And then draw out the black blood with your bare hand from below the chest upwards and downwards until as much blood comes out as you wish and it is sufficient for what is needed, and which the patient's strength can tolerate.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then apply water to them, and command him to abstain from foods that generate black bile. 
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is noted in the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the chain at the right of the vein by drying either in the leg or in the buttocks you should remove pain, or in the lowest part you should remove the swelling.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then tie the chain with hooks and squeeze the vein from all sides until it appears to the touch, and you should observe how that which you are doing turns to black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then when you remove and from the chain you take that white thing which is a cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you place that area under which it is elevated and tied from the chain, and suspend that with an ounce of ointment lion.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then make another incision near that incision by three fingers, and then stretch the skin above the vein where it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then lift that and incise it at the back section below the ankle, and then extract that and lift it until it is severed by the second incision, and then remove that from the incision above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract that from the incision that is the highest of all the incisions, until it is completely severed; and then incise that.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you cannot extract and lift it, then insert a needle with a strong double thread and tie that and pull it out, or insert the probe and rotate your hand in all directions until it is loosened.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to lift it out, and harm will come to the patient because of this damage.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And once all of it has been completely removed, then place on the wound site wool soaked in wine and anointed oil and unanointed oil, and care for it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted with tortuosity to which it coils in parts, and is not straight as we have said, then you must make incisions along all the parts of its tortuosity and at the points where it coils, and then suspend that part with hooks while you elevate it entirely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful with your incision so that you do not cut into the vein and do not damage it, for it will be difficult for you to repair it; and use your discretion in this matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The given text appears to be in an archaic or constructed language that borrows heavily from Romance languages. Here is a translation of the provided line:
Forma de unci orp:	Forma de unci orp:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of vein extraction from the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the thighs in warm lands, such as in Al-Andalus in the land of Arabs and in the warm and dry lands of India with little moisture, where there is no grass or tree.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is also generated in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its generation is from putrefaction that comes from the blood, just as serpents, worms, lice, and other worms are generated between the blood and the flesh inside the body.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of susceptibility to the occurrence of this vein is that there is a violent inflammation in the thigh where it appears; then, the area becomes blistered; and subsequently, the vein begins to emerge from the site of that blistering, resembling a root of a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then when the end of it appears, you must wrap a piece of lead, weighing one drachm, over it, and attach it so that the lead hangs suspended from the thigh.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as you find any cause outside of the parts, wrap that in lead and seal it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the wound is prolonged, then you cut away a part of it and wrap up the remainder; and do not cut that which has adhered until it comes out, for if you cut that which is contracted, it goes into the flesh and causes abscess and putrefaction in the area and a bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	For this reason, it must be treated carefully and extracted bit by bit until it is completely removed from the wound, so that no part of it remains in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, it has emerged in some men that its length is about five palms and ten, and I have heard of one reaching twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut during its treatment, then insert the needle into the channel of it and pierce that with a long channel through the flesh until all that is in the material is evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; then treat that according to the cure for abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has branches, and especially when it approaches the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes out with multiple openings, and a branch emerges from each opening.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And thus treat that as we have said in the division and with what has been said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Regarding the section on worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called in some places the bovine disease because white spots appear on the buttocks and it is a kind of worm that is born between the skin and the flesh, and moves throughout the body up and down, and is felt moving from one member to another until it breaks through the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is by the putrefaction of some humors, just as worms, serpents, and worms like roundworms and ascarids are generated in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared because of its malice, for when it moves through the body and rises to the head, reaching the eye, it can cause a strong irritation in it, entering and destroying the eye, which results in white spots.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And thus when you want to treat it and extract it, you do so based on its movement and appearance as felt, and then you must bind what is above it and below it with strong bandaging and constriction, and then dry it out and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, then you place a cautery with fire on the spot where it remains, and the greatest fear is corruption of it by which the area becomes corrupted as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From the phrase "De sectione super aegritudinem nafir," it seems like this is discussing a procedure or treatment for a specific ailment. Here's an attempted translation based on the structure and the context:
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called nafir in our land, and it is pain that comes to some members, and then moves from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that second thing which I am about to recount.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to see a sick woman in a village, and after uncovering her arm, I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm. After staying there for about an hour, I observed that this swelling moved just like a worm ascending from one place to another, though more lightly than expected, as if it were quicksilver moving from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then it moved to the pain in that area and entered the muscle, and then it stayed there for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it moved to the other arm before reaching the other side of the body.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then it returned to me, moving throughout her body as I observed; and I was greatly amazed by its transformation and the speed at which it moved from one member to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had seen this before in my other patients in the same manner; however, I have observed many cases where the pain is transferred from one limb to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But do not examine this with the fingers as in a woman. 
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not think it to be anything else but that it is because of this that the woman was weak, or rather of dry body and exposed veins, and in this way she feels this altered wind.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this reverse cure does not appear in those who are delicate and have a moist body with engorged veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to cure him, and the patient feels that pain, at this time it is not apparent to you by smell as we have said, then press on that area lightly and cut into where that compressed air or gas has risen, and cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	And if you do not feel it with your hands, then treat it by shaking the body and expelling air, and medicate those areas with foul-smelling pills and pills of senna and similar substances. 
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse according to their types, and according to the areas of the body in which they strike, for their diversity is such that some have large tips, others small, concave, or blunt points; and there are those with three prongs, and those with barbs; and among them are those with crossbars.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And the manner in which they affect the members and parts into which they strike is twofold: for the members can be principal organs such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, bladder, and their likes; and thus when it strikes one of these organs and signs of death appear to you, which I will describe shortly, then you must avoid extracting the arrow in those cases where death is certain, especially if it is in a major organ. And when these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded within the member, then you extract it and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the signs of injury to the skull are when an arrow strikes it and penetrates the bone, piercing the dura mater which is over the brain; for there follows severe headache, blindness, vertigo, burning in the eyes, inflammation and burning of the tongue, spasms, confusion of understanding, vomiting of bile, sudden loss of speech, destruction of voice, and a white moist substance like powder oozing from the wound site, making the skin around it appear wet.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore if these signs appear to you, then abstain from the treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	And the signs of the arrow when it strikes the heart, so that it is near the left nipple, and you feel that it is fixed in a hard place, and not in a soft area; and strongly, the movement of the arrow resembles the pulse's movement, and black blood flows from the wound, and there is coldness in the extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting; therefore, know that death comes swiftly.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are spitting of frothy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the neck become inflamed, and the color of the patient changes, and they expire a large breath, and they seek a draught of fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow strikes the membrane that is in the feet, and the pain is then near the small bones, and there is great swelling with intense pain and sighing, and not all the muscles of the limbs are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if you catch an arrow in the stomach, then immediately remove any indigestible food from it.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow is embedded in the belly, and it is stuck inside, make some incision at the wound site, or the fabric, or the intestine that is ruptured, and there is no hope for the extraction of the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow hits the bladder and urine comes out, and some process from it causes something to happen outside, and severe pain occurs in the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	And the other members, such as the face, neck, jaw, shoulders, arms, vertebrae of the back, collarbone, thigh, chest and similar parts of the body, are saved according to the greater dispositions when the arrow does not find a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will recount to you what I have seen about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand this in relation to your treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that in one case, an arrow was embedded in the lacrimal of the eye near the base of the nose, and I extracted it from the other side, leaving the groove of the ear intact, and he was healed, without any harm to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had embedded itself in the groove of his eye, leaving the eyelid somewhat intact. The arrow was already hidden, and only a small part of it could be reached to which I attached a handle, as it was a large sharp arrow of the Turks, with a lion-shaped iron head that had no grooves.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And it is beneficial for the patient, and not accidental that a bad accident happens to him in his health.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had been shot in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, which is the kind with ears; then I cut around that between two cartilages, and it was already submerged in his throat; then I manipulated it carefully, and then I removed it, and thus the Christian was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who had been shot in his abdomen, and he was thought to die because of it; however, after thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition due to any other causes, I cut around the arrow and manipulated it, and he was healed, and no further adverse incident occurred to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow had lodged in his back, and the wound had become solidified over it; and after nearly seven years, the arrow was embedded at the root of his thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had lodged in her abdomen, and the wound had become solidified inside her, without changing her condition, and the woman did not experience any harm in any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And you see another man in whom an arrowhead has lodged in his face and the wound is settled and you break off the arrowhead, not finding any pain here, and similar cases are like this.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And extract the arrow from the man of the king's princes that was embedded in the middle of his nose and had slightly shifted to the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called for his treatment shortly after the arrow wound within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I found the arrow wound to be quite deep; and then I explored it with a fine probe, but did not feel anything; however, he felt a prick near his right ear, and then I suspected that this prick was due to the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied a poultice with a plaster that has attractive and digestive properties, believing that the area will become inflamed so that the location of the arrowhead becomes apparent, as it rests on that spot.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And there was no significant accident at the location where the arrow had reached; and I continued with the plaster on it for many days, and no accident occurred; and the wound healed during this time, and the patient recovered from the injury for many days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and reported this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I applied an acute corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it opened up, and with a probe, I examined it, and found the tip of the arrowhead, which was attached to the bone.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I adjust in the wound opening with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrowhead becomes visibly apparent to me, and I proceed with this method for the duration of time between four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then increase the heat and make it possible to insert the scissors into it, and remain there without feeling any emission, because I did not cease to delicately and ingeniously work on that in various ways of skill, until one day I managed to grasp it firmly with forceps that were made appropriately, according to how their form will be shown at the end of the chapter, before extracting it; and then restore that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored, but I restored it and the wound was consolidated, and the patient was healed completely, and there was no failure in any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting certain arrows for which you should pause and consider the meaning behind what I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions thereof are not understood through mere narration nor are they fully grasped by the book alone.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise artisans compare a little with motion; and with what is present over what is absent; and they find new operations and novel instruments by tracing back to the foreign causes of the art when such accidents occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not removed from the limbs in which they are embedded except in two ways: either by attraction of the place into which they enter; or by the opposite at the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is pushed out from where it entered, or is a discharge coming from the flesh, and is thrown out and expelled.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not obey the urgency of the time when you cut, then it is necessary to leave it for several days until the flesh around it rots, and the attraction of it is lessened and its exit is eased.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it is embedded in bone and you do not obey the urgency, then leave it for several days and repeatedly move and agitate it every day, and it will be expelled.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey the urgency for several days, then it is necessary to perforate around the area of the discharge in that bone from all sides with a fine awl until the area is enlarged enough, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the discharge is embedded in the bone of the head and has already progressed into one of the brain's ventricles, and the patient exhibits several of those symptoms that I mention, then abstain from extracting the discharge and leave it until its condition stabilizes for several days; for if the discharge reaches the spine, then death will not be long in coming.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not embedded in the bone itself but only in the flesh and does not penetrate into the marrow, and the patient remains like this for several days without any of those complications occurring, then you should focus on the entry point of the arrow and on the wound.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And if it is a deep puncture and does not yield to extraction, then you should administer threads around the arrow's path as we have recommended, and then care for the area until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrowhead is already embedded in the part of the body and is hidden from feeling, then you seek it by touch, and if you feel it there, then pull it out with hooks that are suitable for extracting it.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the probe, and there are no bones or nerves or veins here, then you should work on enlarging the wound so that it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if there are earrings with which it is held, then you should free the flesh in which it is embedded from all sides using every means you can; and devise a method for this, if you cannot extract the flesh due to the fracture of the earrings or their torsion inside where they are stuck.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any location where it is lodged, then you should use the strength of your hand and forceps in all directions until it obeys; and be careful with subtle skill so that the arrow does not break and that the extraction is not made difficult for you.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do it at that moment, then leave it for several days until the parts surrounding it can soften, and then repeat the procedure when it has become easier to handle.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if bleeding occurs contrary to expectations, then you should administer what we have said about treatment in the previous chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And observe the source of the injury, whether it be from a vein, nerve, or tendon, and administer any means possible to prevent the arrow's penetration; and do this with ease, calmness, slowness, and firmness as I and you have recommended.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore, reverse the arrow so that the patient is positioned according to the figure in which you should place the extraction of the arrow, for it is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if this is not possible for you, then administer whatever is possible according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But for arrows that are embedded from the opposite side or have already protruded partially outside, or if the tip of the arrow becomes sticky due to the sensation of the part above the previously mentioned chain and it swells; then you cut on that area; and make the cut according to the amount that the forceps can grasp; then pull it out, for it is made to come out easily this way.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it is retained within the bone, then you twist the tool according to the opposition where the arrow presses into the bone, and widen it as you insert further, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for several days, and then repeat the process until it comes out.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is in there, then you push it out with it.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft has fallen off and you want to administer an impulse, then insert it; if it is deaf (blocked), use a concave instrument so that it enters the cavity of the arrow's head and then push it out with it.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	And if the arrow is concave, then you push it out with a strong instrument inserted into it, for the arrow is loosened by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is embedded, then you must hollow out all the flesh in which it is lodged, if that is possible for you, and then treat it with whatever is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow hits in the feet, or in the stomach, or in the bladder, or in the side, and it is close enough that you can touch it with your hand, and it is possible for you to cauterize over it, then cauterize over it and be careful not to injure any vein or nerve, and extract it, and then cover the wound if necessary, and treat it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps with which arrows are extracted:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let the ends of them be like a bird's beak, which are made like pincers so that they grasp the arrow without letting it go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of those, various special sizes are made, large, small, and medium, according to the size of the arrow and its thinness, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of the area.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of a concave implement at this end curved like a bird's quill so that the insertion of the arrow into it is eased, and the impact from that is softened:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of treatment for a numb extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	And in this way, so that the internal part of the patient is relieved in the concave sagitta and is pushed with it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of course, let's translate the given line:
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	Here is the translation of the provided text line by line into English:
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence line by line into English:
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of those is placed at the curvature of the hound's ear on the outer side; and the second is sophena, and its location is on the inner side of the domestic leg; and the sciatic vein, and its location is on the outer side of the wild leg; and in the thigh are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The treatment of veins near the ears is for ancient and emigrant catarrhs, and scaly and ulcerous old diseases of the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those is according to what I recommend to you: it is that the head of the patient be shaved, and the head of the patient be rubbed at the back of the head in the location of both veins with a wide cloth with good friction; then bind the patient's neck with a bandage such that both [veins] appear and their locations are near the ears in two places close to the head; and seek those with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those with your finger, here is the sign by touching.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you take the lancet, which is sharp, and then insert it into the vein until the bloodletting reaches the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then elevate your hand with the vein and the bandage to the parts above and incise the vein with a sharp incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the width of two fingers together or around that; and let as much blood come out as you desire.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then bind it with pillows and leave it until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already at the beginning of the book, the incision and its cauterization have been discussed.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	And of the two arteries that are in the temple, the help of bloodletting is for the ancient migraine and similar evils and frequent ophthalmia and the excesses of acute humors poured into the eyes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of bloodletting those [veins] is according to what I recommend to you: have the patient tilt their head forward until the two veins appear prominently at the surface, and make sure that your finger can feel their pulse; and then you may proceed with the procedure.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you lift the skin above the vein with your index finger at the parts above it, and insert the bloodletting instrument next to it, elevating the vein upwards; and incise it in the same way as you have done for the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity needed.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then loosen the compression on the patient, and place your finger over the vein for about an hour; then apply a cloth and powder to it and bind it tightly with strong pressure, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And already preceding is the recollection of them, and of those the inscription, and the attraction at the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And thus the treatment of venesection from the frontal vein is near to the venesection of the cephalic vein for old diseases of the face and migraine and fever and foul ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the phlebotomy is as I recommend to you: so it is that the patient holds their neck with a band until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a lancet, of which this is the form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the tip of the instrument that is at the end of the probe over that vein and strike it with a peg or with another implement in the manner described, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you desire; then close the puncture wound of the patient and ensure that it heals properly.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And sometimes it is opened with a flebotomi (bloodletting instrument) of the leg, but the flebotomi should not have a sharp end like other flebotomis; rather, its end should be flat, and you should perform the bloodletting transversely because the bone is very close and strong, and it could break if the flebotomi were too fine.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	However, the treatment of the two veins that are near the tear ducts of both eyes for eye ailments caused by itching and inflammation in the eyes, and for facial illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The procedure for bloodletting is that the patient should hold their head with a bandage, and then perform the bloodletting, while you stand above their head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the bloodletting should be performed transversely, a little along the length with a small bloodletting instrument, because there is no flesh in that area; and if the instrument is too fine, its end could easily break.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let blood as much as is necessary for you, and apply to those cuts, and bind them for one night, and then loosen them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	And the nasal venesection is suitable for acute fever and violent heat, and for illnesses of the face and migraine and inflammation that occur in the face, especially when they are chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the bloodletting is such that the patient holds their head and then you place your left hand under their nose, and take a fine long bloodletting instrument and insert it into the middle part of the tip of the nose according to straightness, for the vein does not appear to the senses here, and the blood begins to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	You must withdraw your hand with the small bloodletting instrument little by little and let the blood flow according to your need; then bind it for one night, for it is easily restored.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	However, bloodletting from the two gums is beneficial for alleviating swelling and the onset of leprosy and various other diseases, impetigo, and nasty corroding ulcers, such as herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the phlebotomy for those is that the patient should hold each one in their own arm with a ligature; and the surgeon stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a seat.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then perform venesection on the vein with a small, wide-bore lancet little by little; and then extract blood in a timely quantity or according to what you find necessary for that situation; and then do likewise with the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then loosen the ligature and strengthen the two veins with a medium tight tourniquet so that the patient is not suffocated, and leave it in place until the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the treatment of venesection from the larger veins helps with small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and bad ulcers and cracks, as well as bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the venesection from those veins is such that you make the patient sit in front of you, and tie a band around their neck. Then separate the lips and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; the indication for each is by the darkness of each of both, and this is more evident where small black veins are around them. And then incise each with an oblique incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	But if there is doubt left in you, and you do not know which one it is among those, then you should proceed to the incision of the larger one, and from that, the pus clearly manifests.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the appearance of the two veins that are on the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	But it is more customary to incise the two veins that are on the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	But for the two veins that are below the tongue, the treatment is to perform phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for premonitory signs in the throat, diseases of the uvula, and other illnesses of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of phlebotomy for those veins is that you should place the patient between your hands facing the sun, lift their tongue, and look below the tongue where one vein is on one side and another vein is on the other side, and the color of each is tending towards black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then phlebotomize each one; be careful not to linger with your hand during the phlebotomy of those veins, because below those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are bled from in the calf are those through which it is customary to bleed all men, and their bleeding is performed in two ways: either they use a lancet for bloodletting with a sharp olive-shaped tip; or they cut with a lancet blade, and this method is called alnessil, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this instrument is what you need for the incision, and of those kinds choose thin and subtle ones according to the width of the veins and according to the tightness of them.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	It seems like the text you've provided is the beginning of instructions or a description for a medical procedure, likely a form of phlebotomy (bloodletting). The word "fleubotomi" closely resembles "phlebotomy" in English. Here's a translation for the given line:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Here is the translation of the given line:
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of olive oil flebotomy:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this flebotomi is of lesser width and has a finer tip, and it is suitable for flebotomy of fine veins that contain thin blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is necessary for the phlebotomist, when performing phlebotomy on that area, to be very careful and cautious in doing so because there lies an artery; if he makes a mistake and punctures with the phlebotomy needle, he will cut that artery and cause a flow of blood, therefore it is necessary not to perform phlebotomy there with a piercing instrument but rather with a cutting one first.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the vein does not appear by clear manifestation, then you must leave that area and move to another, or seek some other part of the arm; or perform phlebotomy at the end of the arm where it is visible; and proceed with phlebotomy using a cutting method as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	But if you wish to perform phlebotomy on the patient, then before constricting the arm, touch the area between where you know the pulse is located, and then press on it with your thumb; and then stretch out the arm and cut the vein using a concave section with a cutting instrument as we have said; and be careful not to hit the artery's location by any space due to percussion.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see that by tightening the bandage, there is swelling in the place where you have pressed with your finger, then that swelling is due to the artery, and therefore it should be avoided.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flow during phlebotomy as thin as a child's urine and the blood is fine red, then know that it is arterial blood; and then you should press and place your finger on it for a long time; and then remove your finger, and if the blood flows continuously without interruptions, then strengthen the arm and leave it be.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And protect the patient from catching a cold, and place them in a warm environment and do not let that harm them for several days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	And if the blood flow is not stopped, and sometimes medicine is not available for this purpose, then you should incise the artery, if it appears to you; for the extremity is contracted, and the blood flow is interrupted; or that you take a piece of lint (or flax), and prepare that, and take one half and apply that over the vein with tension using a bandage and with poultices until the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the blood flow is stopped, that is good; and if not, then treat it with methods previously mentioned for remembering the location of powder applications to stop the flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And stopping the blood flow is difficult in many situations due to the small location of the wound and the possibility of bandaging the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	However, for the dark vein, phlebotomy is beneficial for drawing blood from the upper part of the head and from the lower part of the body; because it is composed of branches of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And the phlebotomist must avoid that which is over-sensitive in the patient's phlebotomy, because there is a nerve there; and if the puncture of the phlebotomy hits this nerve, it will cause stupor to the patient, and it is difficult for them to recover, and many are not completely healed. And this nerve sometimes appears to the touch; and if it is hidden from some people and is subtle and not easily seen, then you must hold the phlebotomizer with which you perform phlebotomy using a section of annellus (possibly referring to an instrument or technique), and avoid the nerve with your skill.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you puncture the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and helps with ailments of the eyes.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And it is proper in this case, if you want the phlebotomies to be performed with an olive phlebotomizer or a myrtle phlebotomizer; for it is the safest of all veins, as there are no arteries or nerves nearby.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	And yet you must be cautious with phlebotomy; when performing it, do not just puncture the head of the vein lightly. Instead, seek a spot that is more yielding, and avoid hitting bone unless it is found through the first percussion, which should be done several times over the area where phlebotomy will occur.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, sometimes an abscess can be present in some individuals, when phlebotomy does not occur at the first attempt, but do not hit that abscess repeatedly.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	However, the quality of the phlebotomy in that case and its consequences must be considered for their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first thing you should know is that phlebotomy is administered only for the preservation of health and with hope and caution regarding the onset of diseases. Phlebotomy should be performed on one of the veins in the arm, specifically: cephalic, saphenous, or basilic. Additionally, phlebotomy should be carried out at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in spring and autumn, and in winter close to meals when signs of repletion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And if a phlebotomy is performed, it should be done on the third day or at the earliest in the morning after three hours have passed.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	And for phlebotomy which is administered, only when it brings convenience and necessity to do so, whether at night or during the day, at any hour and in any time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it must be that a child is not circumcised until they are 14 years old, and a pregnant woman should not be circumcised except between the fourth month and the seventh, and elderly women who have already passed 60 years shall not be circumcised. 
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wishes to undergo bloodletting in any manner, it is necessary to cleanse their intestines before the bloodletting with a strong cathartic, if there are any retained fecal matter inside, so that the veins do not pull excess substances into the blood during the bloodletting of the cleansed intestines, which should not corrupt the main limbs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And bloodletting should not be performed on patients who are newly pregnant or drunk, nor when they are suffering from a disease or intoxication until those conditions have been alleviated, nor if they suffer from dropsy. Moreover, bloodletting should be avoided near colic pain and vomiting, and near the abdomen, and near excessive intercourse, labor, exercise, fasting, or sleepless nights, and any cause that diminishes their strength, whether bodily or otherwise.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And also consider the purification of humors before this if the blood is thick, through food and drink, and through medicines if it is possible to do so.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And then enter into a bath if there is no cause prohibiting it, or be exercised by some exertion so that the blood may be refined.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And perform phlebotomy (bloodletting) on him in the morning around the hour of terce (approximately 9 AM), as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And it is necessary that the foot of that person be protected on that day from all evil accidents, such as distress, anger, fear, and from all bodily exertions, such as excessive labor, hardship, and similar things.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And in his seat, let there be present the causes according to the use which it is customary for people to have with aromatics and fragrances and with balms and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the phlebotomist onto a cushion that is higher than the cushion of he who is to be bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then pull out his arm, and the phlebotomist should rub that area with their hand two or three times; then tighten the ligature with a strap and wrap it around twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And let the binding be moderate, for if the binding is not equal, or the binding is due to excess, then it prohibits blood flow; or it should be softened, and then it prevents the escape of blood from the body.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And before the binding, it is necessary that the person who is to be bled should rub their hands together until the veins are swollen and can be distinctly felt.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then the phlebotomist should anoint their lancet properly with a little olive oil; and then place their index finger of the left hand on that vein, at the spot where they want to perform the phlebotomy, so that the vein protrudes slightly, and the pulsation can be felt clearly, as one would feel a cord under the skin. The veins that are full of air will contract when the lancet is placed upon them; those veins should not be opened, for if they are, the vein will narrow.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, for this reason, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be firm and attentive in all these matters.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then remove the flebotomi [likely referring to some form of bloodletting tool], but if the vein was properly opened in one go, that is good; and if not, you repeat this another time after leaving that spot a little alone, or apply a compress over it, if the area is not inflamed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the area is inflamed, or the patient feels faint, then you should wait for one or two days, and do not tighten the binding, because it could attract more inflammation quickly, nor should they enter into a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the bloodletting if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the opening is small and blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will come out as desired, then you repeat the bloodletting in that area slightly adjusted to the opening, and do this with a compress before the area becomes inflamed, because in many people, an inflamed area requires a smaller opening.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if you find that area already inflamed, then do not repeat the procedure there, because it will not help and may cause harm; instead, apply a part of an oil bandage over it, because it alleviates the body from blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place to use oil and other ointments.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, administer a mixture of oil in all phlebotomies with which you bleed the veins to prevent the flow of blood from the body, and use theriac, aloes, and sage when placed on the area where the blood is refined and coagulated when it becomes thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large abscess is generated at the site of phlebotomy, it often happens that this occurs, especially in someone who has not been bled except on that occasion, or near the surface of the vein, and then you should cool it down by placing a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly warmed, over the area for about an hour, as it dissolves [the abscess].
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And it is necessary to do this near the emergence of blood from that vein with the completion of the bleeding or from another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if some blackness or greenish color remains in the area for several days, do not worry about it; and if you wish, apply to that area some mixture of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some mixture of juice from mint or calamint or something similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And when white spots indicate abscesses or swellings, perform bloodletting from a vein in the basilic region.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then place your hand on that area, and if you find softness there, apply pressure to it, because that prominence is evil and bad; and then be careful not to press on that for any reason we have mentioned, for fear that blood will flow from the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make a poultice with something that is styptic, so the area becomes hardened, and then treat it with another cure until it heals.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And it is necessary to extract blood from every person according to the quantity of their strength and according to the prevailing color over the blood as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	When the blood is black, then you should let it flow until it becomes warm; and similarly if you find it thick, then you should let it flow until it becomes thin; and similarly if it is sharp (acrid), until the sharpness of it is reduced.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And it is necessary for one who is full and strong and has the need for blood extraction in a single session that the venesection of the vein be enlarged and the venesection be wide.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in that which is cold, the opposite should be done of what was mentioned, and it must be expelled through frequent warm baths, and the treatment must be strict.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best method administered in venesection is that the incision should be transverse, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of venesection is safe from blood flow and nerve damage, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than venesection according to latitude and longitude. 
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And it is customary for fainting to occur before bloodletting, and you must treat this before the bloodletting with a little piece of bread infused in pomegranate juice or simply heated honey water; and extract the blood in three or four stages.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is chilled due to composition, then take before the bloodletting an infusion in myrrh syrup or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or in an aromatic and sweet-smelling syrup.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if you encounter fainting due to bloodletting, which is caused by the loss of much blood, then it is necessary that they drink water and an aromatic syrup; and use aromatics with ale, and anoint their feet with that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the section on fainting due to evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And for those who wish to thin their blood and dissolve it gradually, it is suitable for one from whom bloodletting is a significant evacuation, and its property is cold, which evacuates the blood little by little, according to the strength of its virtue over several continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But for those who wish to thin their blood and draw it a second time, and whose body is strong, this should be done approximately seven or nine hours after the first bloodletting.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	And if one wants to draw blood from the body in the opposite direction of where it declines, it must be done on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	And here is the translation of the given sentence:
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, since the vein's orifices are already closed and it has become difficult for the blood to flow out, do not press on that area with great force and extend it slightly bent, for this is too harmful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	They place the incision such that it is opened gradually; or they remove this with the sharpness of the lancet which coagulates the blood in the opening of the vein; or they apply some theriac alfarach, or sage, and press that with light compression until the blood has been fully expelled.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if the necessity arises to perform secondary bloodletting and it is not avoidable, then you should bleed that area at another location on the same spot or in the other arm in a different vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called the "sinew of the arm" is incised at the site of the fossa or basilic vein, when those are not found or are hidden, as it is composed of those veins.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the bloodletting is such that the patient should dip their hand in warm water until the pulse reddens and the vein becomes clearly visible.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then apply moderate tension on that area with a bandage; and then perform the bloodletting transversely, neither laterally nor longitudinally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the incision be wide, and perform the bloodletting such that you make it slightly above the joint of the hand.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if you need to stop the flow of blood, then soak your hand in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your goal.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	And if you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from the repetition of placing the hand in warm water, and instead the body is immersed in warm water during the winter season.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, because there is neither pulsating vein nor nerve here.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the vein in the right hand is relevant to diseases of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that you stretch your hand with a ligature or with your hand, after which you place it in hot water until the vein is swollen and clearly visible to the eye; then perform the phlebotomy across it; and if you cut through it entirely without damaging anything around it.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And be careful not to end the procedure with your hand during phlebotomy, because it would leave the nerves of the fingers exposed and without flesh. 
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then wash the hand in warm water and let the blood flow into it, for if you do not wash that hand in warm water, the blood will clot at the opening of the vein, and it is prohibited from flowing.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is drawn according to the necessary amount, then you place oil and salt on the vein so that it does not close too quickly; and similarly, you should do this along the entire straight path of the vein.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	However, the benefit of performing bloodletting from the left hand is that it is beneficial for illnesses of the brain.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in the bloodletting of the eye as you have done in the other [procedure].
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the benefit of bloodletting from the vein saphena is for illnesses in the lower part of the body, such as ailments of the uterus, and for the retention of menses, and for diseases of the rheumatism and ulcers of the thighs and old sores on the legs, and for similar kinds of illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient should immerse their foot in warm water and perform friction on it until the veins become visible; then tie a bandage around the ankle; and at the site where the vein becomes clearly apparent, you should place your finger, from which point it branches out across the surface of the foot in several directions.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And thus perform the incision to drain the pus from the largest branch or leave it in the chest area below the ankle and the swelling, whichever is better and more effective.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform a puncture on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are located there on the surface of the foot, and carry out your puncture in such a way that you do it across, as if you wanted to cut through.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the puncture be performed thus.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if bleeding is prohibited; then you should soak the foot in warm water and let the blood flow into it until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the puncturer makes a mistake on the first attempt, then repeat the puncture slightly higher up, for the area is salty; and do not fear any mischief, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly, do the same with the poultice on the other foot.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And regarding the sciatic vein, the location, as we have said, is below the ankle bone behind the outer part of the leg.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the treatment of the puncture is for hip pain when it is caused by blood.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient enter into a bath, and hasten and strain the thigh of the patient on the side of the ankle above the talus with four fingers under a long thin bandage, for it appears only by this.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And so when it appears, then you perform trephination on that area according to each tool at your disposal and across the transverse plane, which is better; or incise that area through an incision or cut that area through a section, for the location of it is shallow.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in many men moderately veined; and if you find that one, and it does not appear to the senses as a whole, then perform phlebotomy on some part of it, which appears on the back of the foot behind the area where the ring finger would be.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be careful of the nerves, and let as much blood flow as you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then loosen the constriction and place a pad over the area of the phlebotomy, compressing the area tightly, for it heals quickly.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Regarding ventosation and the qualities of using those methods. 
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, or de veyre.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And bloodletting is performed in two ways: one of them is by incision and extraction of blood, and the other is bloodletting without incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this bloodletting without incision is done in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the bloodletting sites that are performed with incision and extraction of blood are fourteen places on the body, among which one place where bloodletting is applied is alnocrati, which is the back part of the head; and another site is on both sides of the neck; and bloodletting from the chin below the jaw, below the mouth; and bloodletting from both armpits; and bloodletting from alohoster, which is above the end of the spine; and bloodletting from both elbows, which are on both arms; and bloodletting from both calves; and bloodletting from both thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And bloodletting does not extract blood from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and by doing so, you do not weaken them, just as it happens with phlebotomy; nor should bloodletting be performed with or without fire in any disease caused by repletion until the whole body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	Here is the translation line by line:
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And thus when dealing with any of those causes, and particularly if it is in the third month or a bit later, then I command that ventilation be performed more than two or three hours after the day has passed.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the treatment for ventosuction of the neck is that when you apply pressure to the head and cause it to sink into the pillows; but it must be close to the evacuation of the whole body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this cupping is in the location of the cephalic vein incision.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not good that he uses it who has a cold constitution, or in whom there is catarrh, for it brings great harm to him.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this reason, it is not suitable for old people to use it, and in the heads of those who have cold illnesses.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But for those on whom it is continuously applied, forgetfulness may occur; therefore, you must command the cupper to pause his hand slightly from the cupping at certain intervals to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	However, cupping with alcohol is used instead of phlebotomy of the saphenous and basilic veins: therefore, it is applied for asthma, constriction of the lungs, rupture of lung tissue, cough, and congestion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And the alcohol cupping should be slightly removed, for if it is left in place, it can cause weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And cupping with alhagdahan (likely a type of herb or substance) is applied for accidental pains in the head, ophthalmia, migraine, suffocation, and pain in the tooth roots; and it is used instead of phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And you must command the surgeon not to press his hand too hard during the incision so that he does not pierce the artery and cause a flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And the swelling of the chin comes from alcohol in the mouth, and the corruption of the gums, and it resembles the diseases that are in the mouth, and it is located where the tracheotomy would be, between the two lips. 
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	And the swelling that is caused by the two spatulas should be treated with cataplasm, which is made by the accumulation of warmth.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the inflation of the two parts inside the veins contributes to the benefit of phlebotomy from three veins, which are the basilic, saphenous and cephalic, because those attract blood from all those smaller veins that are in the flesh, and those small veins from other larger veins until the attraction reaches the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the blood-letter not to proceed too much in scarification, for the area is devoid of flesh, and leave its nerves and arteries untouched.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a cupping where suction is applied over the thighs and extends to the hemorrhoids of the anus and the pus-filled ulcers.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And you must command the blood-letter to make a large wet-cupping, and that it be of an area where strong drying is needed; and perform subtle cupping movements and apply superficial incisions with scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Here is the translation line by line for the given source sentence:
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, fever weakens the whole body and causes fainting in many people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And for the treatment with cupping, it is commonly applied to the cupping points on two sides of the back.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the placement of the cupping is such that you place the cup at the beginning and draw out the fluid quickly and not for too long, but place them lightly and remove them gently so that the humors come to the surface evenly.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not stop repeating this process until you see the area become red and swollen, and the coagulation of blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you should scratch the area and gradually repeat the suction, and also take into account the condition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that person who has delicate skin and few pores, you should scratch them once and not more, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And instruct the cupper to deepen the scratching slightly and increase it a little, and perform the suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if there is thickening in the blood, then you must scarify twice, for in the first time the path for the refinement of the blood and its moisture is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second examination obtained from the extraction of thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very thick, then a third incision should be made so that it can achieve the last stage.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract blood slowly or in small amounts, a scarification is enough for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we do so with extensive scarification; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we must use deep scarification.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term "scarification" refers solely to the depth of the cut.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the vein is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, it is necessary that the areas for cupping be anointed with more soothing, opening, and resolving substances; if it is summer, such as aloes oil or violet oil, or double almond oil, or hawthorn oil; and if it is winter, then narcissus oil, or lily oil, or camomile oil, or blood oil, and similar ones.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick and cold, then the oil should be amber oil, or balsam oil, or aloes oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	And if the area where bloodletting is performed has large pores and tender flesh, then it must be prohibited to use oil, and it must be ensured that the places for the bloodletting around the site are washed with warm water or cold spring water, or with water from a cypress tree, or with water from dew, and similar things to those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for the one whose blood has too much humidity, wash their bloodletting sites with sour wine, or with water from myrtle and sumac, and similar things to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for the one whose excesses are thick, wash their bloodletting sites with old wine, or with water from thyme, which is marjoram, or from an infusion of dill, or chamomile, and things similar to those.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it must be ensured that bloodletting is protected before bathing; often, it must be administered just before the bath by one or two hours, and it must be arranged for the patient to rest near the site of bloodletting.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is necessary is that the bloodletting site be regulated before the actual bloodletting.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Consider the following translation for the given sentence:
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And limit their foods as much as possible, and serve them poultry meats, and foods seasoned with herbs, and similar things.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for those whose condition is hot, it is necessary that they drink herbal infusions of fennel or aniseed infusion with seeds, and sumac, and wine moderately aromatic between old and new; and it should be recommended to them to use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid foods like pork, hemp, beans, small birds, and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is necessary that on the day of bloodletting and venesection, the drink should be more than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is necessary to give certain people in specific hours thyriaca alpharac, or medicines of musk, such as mastic, or alcelita before bloodletting or before venesection or afterwards, so that the main limbs are comforted and the blood is made more subtle; and they should not take that which is heated.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	And the bloodlettings that are performed by scarification should be done on areas such as the liver, and on the spleen and gout, and on the navel, in the regions of the joints, and at the pit of the stomach, because these parts cannot withstand scarification directly upon them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired for these but rather the attraction of blood from the member, just as we place a bloodletting on the nipple in the illness of nasal bleeding; and we use this to dissolve cold and viscous humors in the member, just as we place [it] on the abdomen and navel; because this rarefies the member, heats it, and removes pain when resolving those humors.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is already placed over the lungs when you encounter their obstruction or pus, for by virtue of strong attraction, it helps to clear the obstruction and eliminate the pus from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly, it works when placed over the liver to expel harmful air trapped within those areas.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these suction cups are administered with only suction; and sometimes they are applied with heat.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And sometimes they are applied filled with warm water in illnesses related to air or gas. 
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is why the cupping vessel should be filled and made larger, whether with hot water alone or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of cupping administered with fire: the diameter of the opening should be two fingers wide, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of air should be half a palm; and it should be placed on his side, in the location that is along the circumference, halfway around; the hole should be small so that a needle can enter into it.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It should be made of hard wood or citrus, with thick edges, smooth, equal, and clean so that it does not move the member from its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And in the middle of the transverse bar of wood or iron, a candle should be placed with fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this cupping device should be larger than the one we have recommended; and it should be smaller than that according to the illnesses and the age of the person using it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the cupping devices for children and those who are weakened are different from the cupping devices for young adults and those with larger bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this cupping device with fire on the member is to extend the ember with fire from decent wood in front of a small candle of wax, and place that in the middle of the transverse bar at the center of the cupping device, so that the fire is lit around it without burning the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then it is placed on the patient's limb, and the finger is on the spot we have mentioned, such that when we have the cups and do not want to hold the finger so that vapor comes out over that spot, then the cup will dissolve immediately.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then apply heat to the joint according to its condition, and repeat that if you need to do so.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	In the case of cupping that is administered for pleurisy, it should be done with water in which there is no crosswise or submerged wood, and it is only filled with water, then placed on the limb just like that.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of it: The larger the cupping vessel, the better, because it can hold a greater quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter XCVM (97).
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting is not administered on many parts of the body but only on those parts where cupping cannot be positioned due to their small size, such as the ear and gums and similar areas; or on parts devoid of flesh, such as the fingers and nose and their likes.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of the leeches that you have found should be used if they are from clean waters, free from putrefaction.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then they should be left day and night in fresh water until they become hungry, and ensure that no impurities remain in their bodies; then the body should be purged at the beginning with phlebotomy and cupping; then rub the patient's limb until it reddens; and then place them on it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and spilled. 
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suction the area with a cupping glass, it is more beneficial for healing.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the area with wine and then with clean water; and let it be rubbed and squeezed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the flow of blood continues to the application of leeches and it is still oozing, then soak a cloth in cold water, and place it over until the oozing stops.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is flowing heavily, then sprinkle vitriol powder or gall and similar astringent substances over it until the bleeding stops; or place the pods of cooked broad beans over the area and leave them until the beans adhere to the site, and the bleeding ceases.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And it is necessary, if repeated applications of leeches are required, to change them when possible.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if leeches are prohibited due to suspension, then rub the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the spots until blood flows; and then apply them, for they will adhere as soon as they sense any blood.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to fall (meaning for something like boils or swellings to rupture), sprinkle a little ground alum, or salt, or ashes over them, and they will rupture soon.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the section of the third part: on restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is frequently necessary in the art of medicine; it is about the restoration of fractures and dislocations in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	O, son, know that this chapter is boasted by foolish doctors and common ones, and those who for some time have not regarded the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this method of the knowledgeable is kept private in our land; and I have not forgotten it at any time nor entirely; and I did not adopt what follows simply, but through extensive reading of the books of the Ancients and study to understand them, from which I extracted their knowledge.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then I directed myself to experimentation and study throughout my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that my knowledge contains and on which my experience has passed; since I have summarized this for you and freed it from the length of elaboration; and I have summarized this at the end of summarization; and shown this at the end of declaration; and formed various forms of treatments that are administered, as is done by adding to the declaration, just as I have done in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	Capitol primier.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Cover therefore we must speak in the preface of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to the understanding of which at the beginning it is forced upon the artisans and stands on the truth of those; such are you and those who are quick who knew or learned this noble art other than you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore it is said that when you encounter a fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain, then at the beginning you should apply trepanation or extension to it, or both together, unless there is some prohibiting cause, such as weakness of strength, or if the one who has suffered the injury is a child, or an elderly person in decrepitude, or if it is during a time of intense heat, or of intense cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	Then one should be content with food such as fresh herbs and the meat of birds and crabs; and we prohibit heavy meats and filling oneself with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you are sure of a matured abscess cautery, and if you do not fear an effusion of matter into the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their original regimen with which they were accustomed.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And therefore as the broken bone begins to heal, then the patient should be fed nutritious foods that are rich and heavy with viscosity, such as foods made from baked wheat with water, rice, beans, fish, cow's stomachs, eggs, fresh cheese, thick wine, and similar items. With this regimen, fracture coagulation occurs more easily and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that bones that crack in men who are in their prime and in the elderly cannot be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the dryness of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature for the entire time due to the drying of those members, and in this way they continue and consolidate those that belong to them at the end of the softness, just as the bones of young children do.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nature itself adjusts and you should bandage over the broken bone from all sides with something similar to glue in which there is a thickening substance that adheres and strengthens that within which they are simultaneously conglutinated and bonded together, until strength and firmness come, just as fire at the beginning, until nothing prevents it from completing its work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to stop the foods of the patient, foods which are heavy and viscous and large, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Describe the diversity of fractures according to the diversity of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the bone of the head is different from the fracture of the bone of the shoulder; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly all other limbs are different among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I will include a recollection of every type of fracture, explained in its own chapter distinct from the other.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Note the diversity of fractures within itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the types of bone fractures are diversified within themselves; for there is an arched fracture, which occurs in the stars [likely referring to the wrist or carpal bones]; and sometimes a fracture follows the length of the bone: and these are the fractures of the phalanges, metacarpals, and proceeding and non-proceeding adductors, just as it is done on the pen when it is prepared for writing, and there is a fracture with inflammation and disruption at the head, and there is a small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And each type has its own remedy or treatment in the restoration, which will be recalled separately in their respective places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Sign of a bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by this is known a bone fracture: its deformity, and that prominence and change in appearance when you touch it, and pain when you press it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And thus when there is no apparent deformity in the location and no pain is found with your touch when you move the bone and the patient does not experience great pain, then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	Sometimes there can be a deformity or small crack, in which case you should not manipulate it with your hand and through compression; sometimes place on it some medicines of which recall to mind around that moment when you need to apply them to the area; and then bind it tightly with a subtle bandage.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that when the area is bent but not split into two or any other condition that does not affect its stability, such as when the entire part of its connection remains intact, then you should begin at your earliest convenience to correct it, sometimes letting an abscess form first.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an abscess forms, then leave it for several days until the abscess subsides; and then treat it in whatever way you can with care and ingenuity.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration and healing of the flesh is quicker than that of the bone where the injury occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen that second part so that the memory of it returns.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if the injury is in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from both ends, whether it is an arm or a leg; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two ropes or one rope and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And you should position the limb in such a way that it is held according to its natural shape while the broken parts are being stretched, so that you can effectively return those additions with skill and in whichever manner you can to their proper places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful according to your strength that you do not cause pain or injury to the patient through your operation; and strive according to your ability to align one bone with its companion in their best possible forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it is necessary that at that moment you skillfully touch with your hand the affected area, and if there is any other cause present, correct it and adjust it according to the extent of your ability.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And there is a strong extension and compression, just as some foolish doctors do who at times cause an abscess to occur due to their operation, or cause a contraction in the limb just as we have seen this happen through their operations many times.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then attach, and bring about equilibrium and a proper operation and restriction of that limb, and rest and tranquility; warn the patient about this and make sure they avoid any movement of that limb during their waking hours and sleep, and watch over its rotation and agitation, and prevent all his evacuations, and prevent all his movements with all his strength; and wait until the position of the limb is one in which pain is assured, which happens when it is in a position that causes pain or injury; then change that to another position where there is no pain; and ensure with this that the position of the patient's limb is straight and equal so that no curvature occurs to the limb when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the restriction of the tranquil limb is what I recommend; so that you know that broken limbs vary in their smallness and greatness and in the form of them.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small, such as the arm and the foot and the finger and similar ones, then the wrapping should be of very fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And for those that are large, such as the thigh or the hip, then a thick and hard wrapping should be used, because a thick binding connects the large and strong limb firmly on all sides with equal restriction, in such a way that no flaw enters it.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, before your evacuation of the dislocation, to place a suitable bandage on the area of that fracture with three or four layers according to what the limb requires; and hold your hand slightly over the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then place your hand at the highest part of the fracture site, and hold it firmly so that your bandage does not loosen where you have secured the area of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then lengthen the area of the fracture slightly with wrapping, and gradually loosen the bandage little by little until you have straightened a large part of the area.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap it again over the broken area, and place the wraps toward the lower part of the fracture; and perform your operation in tightening the wrapping and gradually loosening it as we have said for the first wrapping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place between the layers of linen or cloth something that matches the curvature of the fracture if there is any curvature; and if not, do not place anything in it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place another bandage over it, and then apply properly made plasters to these coverings immediately if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area. And if there is an abscess present, place that which reduces the abscess and the swelling; leave this for several days; and then strengthen the area with the plasters.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the plasters be made of half a cane reed, carefully formed; or they can be made of pine wood; or of palm branches; and let the width of each plaster be according to this form and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the splint that is placed over the fracture should be slightly thicker and wider than the other splints, and the length of the splint according to what suits the limb in size; then secure the splints with another bandage according to your initial tightness; then cover it with pitch properly as we have said about tightening, which means that your tightening should be tighter at the site of the fracture, and as you move further away from the fracture, the tightness should decrease.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And it is necessary that the threads be moderate in thickness and fineness, and they should be made of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen some unskilled practitioners do by using ropes instead of fine threads for binding, it is a great error, for it disrupts the equality of the tension.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And fine threads are not suitable, because you will not be able to accomplish what you want due to the tightness with those, and there should not be less than a finger's width between stitch and stitch.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is troubled by the extremities of the stars near the constriction in those areas, then place there wool or felted wool between so that it does not cause injury to them.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Here is the translation of the provided medieval medical text line by line:
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that not every broken limb is immediately set with splints on the first day; the reason being that when the limb is large, it should not be placed on the splints right away but rather after five or six days, or more, according to your assurance of the development of an abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of plasters with which the Ancients would treat fractures, dislocations, and sprains.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of a plaster for the restoration of fractures, suitable for various complications and especially for women and children, as it does not generate heat or irritation: take flour dust, which is the fine powder that settles on the mill walls due to the movement of the millstone.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And prepare it thus: sieve it with egg white, and make the mixture neither too thick nor too thin; then apply it accordingly.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of plaster for treating fractures, dislocations, and sprains: take assafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is the resin of wild millet, all one drachm each; myrrh and aloe, one drachm each; alochil, two drachms. All should be crushed, sieved, and mixed with either almond oil or egg white if the patient’s condition is inflamed; then apply this plaster, which has a good composition and easily restores broken bones, and you can share it with many people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Here is the translation of the provided line:
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All shall be ground in a mortar with fine grinding, and they shall be sifted, and they shall be mixed with water or egg white and administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of plaster for joints and bones separated from their places, and which causes pain in accidents to those and fractures and breaks: take wool soaked and immerse it in sweet wine and cooked oil and place it over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	But in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, it burns and expels pain properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take leaves from the fig tree and leaves from wild poppy; grind everything together and make a plaster out of them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of a compact plaster administered for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want to resolve the remaining abscess: take roots of elder, camomile flowers, and violet flowers, flour of iris, all in equal parts; grind them all together and mix them with wine if the limb is not inflamed.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is inflamed, then soothe it with coriander water or with water and oil of it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of a more potent plaster for resolving a hard abscess and restoring the limb: take roots of elder and its seeds, pomegranate bark, sweet clover, marjoram, violet flowers, camomile flowers, all in equal parts; grind them all together and mix them with sage water or sweet water or wine, according to the nature of the limb and the condition of its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	But Hippocrates did not say in his book that the restoration of a broken limb should be paused, but rather something made of wax and oil; and he recommends that it be balanced between thickness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	But in Gaul, it is observed that they pause the restoration of a broken limb and use causes which are drying with a little heat, such as myrrh, incense, and similar to those causes we have mentioned.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method for a poultice that alleviates injury and pain: take myrtle, cypress, human placenta or dove droppings, and fern, and salt, in equal parts; grind them and sieve them, then mix them, and make a poultice.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	But the duration for which the binding should remain and then be loosened is such that you consider whether there is no accidental pain or severe injury, and if the bone is not broken nor displaced from its position, then you should not loosen it for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if you encounter severe pain, injury, or swelling at the site, then you should be cautious or loosen it immediately, and remove the poultice from it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a cloth and a damp sea sponge, and submerge that in warm water, and with that wash the area until the pricking ceases and the pain is soothed; then let the limb rest for an hour; then place over it wool soaked in sweet wine and oil or ointment, and apply that to it overnight until you are sure of a safe abscess, and the swelling of the limb subsides, and the pain is alleviated from it.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat that subtle binding and apply a small plaster without tightening it as in your first constriction, and do so gently until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you find that the abscess, the hardness, the pain, the swelling, and all the symptoms have been completely alleviated, and you no longer need a plaster or binding, then repeat the process as you did at the beginning in the same manner.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no cause of those we have mentioned affects the limb, then do not loosen it until three or four or five or seven days later; and sometimes this is left for twenty days according to what appears to you regarding the loosening of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and approaches the coagulation of the flesh over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And now adjust more in the constriction than in your initial constriction entirely, and adjust according to the swelling of the patient's food vessel, as is preceded by the recollection of it.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	And what those foolish restorers of a fractured limb do again when it is not restored properly at the beginning, according to how it should be, and is restored crookedly, is an error in their operation, causing great fear; if this were corrected, the Ancients would have expanded on this in their books and acted accordingly.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do this, which is why it is more reasonable that this should not be done.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter two: On fractures when they occur in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are many, and their forms are diverse, and the causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by the blow of an ax, where the blow removes all the bone inside the skull, which is left without its bones, just as this happens to a tree trunk; therefore, this type is named "ascial." Or the ax cuts into some part of the bone, cutting through the flesh but not penetrating deeply into the rear of it. This kind of fracture is called an absolute levation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the severity of these two types of fractures is either great or slight, and this applies to a fracture that is comminuted or crushed. The cause of such a fracture is a blow with a heavy object or falling onto stone, and their characteristics are similar.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture either penetrates and approaches the periosteum which is next to the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the severity of these two types of fractures is either great or slight.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And regarding fractures, it is said that they occur in the bone, in the subtlety of tiny hair-like structures, and for this reason, this type of fracture is named capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is a fracture that is caused either by falling or by the impact of a stone and similar objects, which causes some fragments of the bone to enter the internal parts, and it occurs in the concave area just as it happens to tiles on roofs when they are struck and pieces break off and enter their inner parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this is particularly done in bodies with moist bones, such as infants' heads.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And thus to all these types of fractures, they apply weights such as separate stones.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will return to recall all of this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And know all these types of fractures by detecting them and by examining their attempts to move and the corruption of flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary type is known because what is revealed on the bone is cleaned and rubbed with thread, for the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	But in the treatment of fractures, consider at the beginning the symptoms of the patient, and if you see by the symptoms that they indicate manifestly about fear, such as vomiting from anger, and stretching, and loss of understanding, and loss of voice, and fainting, and acute fever, and discharge from the ears and inflammation of those, and similarities to their symptoms in the most severe conditions, then it is not curable.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you encounter uncommon accidents and hope for healing, then you begin the treatment of him.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	Which means that if the injured person comes to you at the beginning of winter while they are still injured, then you must study the setting of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all dispositions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is during the days of summer, then you must take care to set the bone before the seventh day, because what is left near the bone may be corrupted by putrefaction, and to prevent the accidents we have mentioned.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already progressed to the brain covering and is in small fragmented and gritty pieces, then you must incise the fragmented and gritty parts, as I will recommend to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And you should shave the head of the injured patient, and expose the bone according to your customary method and skill based on the nature of the injury, being gentle with the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you encounter difficulties in detecting the bone, blood flow, or an abscess requiring cautery, then you should oppose it with what is necessary, which is to fill the area with cloths soaked in wine and oiled rushes, and allow the wound to rest until the abscess is calmed and ensure there is no further bleeding; then proceed with the reduction of the bone and the surgery.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be done in one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one way is that you cut the bone with a straight incisor, and this is its form: And then apply another incisor like this one, slightly more to the side than the previous one; and this is its form.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then apply another incisor further to the side than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it is necessary that you have various incisors of different kinds, some of which are more to the side than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and are sharp at their ends, and they should be made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them easily in percussion on the incisors so that the tip does not become blunt and damage it.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then you must perforate around it before applying the incisors with the punches, which are called non-deepening punches.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are called this way because these punches do not stop the bone's surface from reaching it, so that the punch has a rounded end or edge over which the sharp point of it resembles a margin or small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take many of these probes, each of which should be suited to the sharpness needed for each bone, among which you must have present all kinds of needles for every part of the brain, the tip of which should be sharp, the length and brevity of which should be according to the required sharpness of this needle. 
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three types of splints: The quality of piercing through the fracture site is to place the splint over the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the splint to another location, placing it so that across all places, the thickness equals that of a rib or something similar.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Then cut with the scalpel between each fragment of the bone, and make that pus as fine as you can on top of it at the end of the process, just as we have said, until you clear out the bone, either by hand or with some other instrument you have prepared for this purpose, such as forceps and delicate tweezers.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And you must be cautious that the scalpel does not touch any part of the spine.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And thus, after you have pierced through the bone, and it will be separated from the spine if it is connected to it, and you will extract it, you must scrape and smooth it on its roughness with an instrument similar to a scalpel, but it should be thinner and finer than other scalpels.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any small and stubborn parts of the bones remain, then take those with ease using the tools you should have at your disposal; then treat the wound with lint and ointments as we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another method of operation is lighter and farther from danger, which we call Gaulia and perform through great heat; this is the description: at the beginning, you must start to uncover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and obvious. Once you have uncovered that part, place the extremity of this smooth and pleasant instrument, whose form is as follows:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And here is the translation of the given sentence:
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then strike on the incision point of a part with a small hammer so that you cut through the entire bone as it is rotated, and be sure to avoid any accident in such a manner that you are certain no harm comes to the soft tissue around it; even if the medicating person was the most foolish of all men and the least knowledgeable among them, certainly, and even if they were asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	And if a fragment of bone is attached to the soft tissue at certain points on the bone, cut it off using the pointed end of the lancet-like instrument and remove it easily, for it is removed without harm and without fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the soft tissue, and what is cut off or remains of the bone is its surface, and roughness and subtle splinters remain in it, then you must scrape away that roughness and remove those splinters with fine razors which you have prepared in various quantities so that you can apply them to the most suitable places and use the right ones according to where you need to refine your operation on that broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you must administer with your razors at the beginning to cut away the thick pus from those razors, and then use what is beneath that thin pus, and do not cease doing this continuously until you have administered all of the thick pus and the thin pus from all of those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	But in each of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fractures, you must administer treatment according to what is needed for the correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is a reason that not everyone who has studied in that field is equally skilled or trusted.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And we have demonstrated this on large fractures in what we have written above.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the panniculus is attached when you extract the bone, then you must take cloth according to the size of the wound, and submerge it in ointment oil, and place it over the opening of the wound; then take another folded or tripled cloth and submerge it in wine and ointment oil, and place it over the first cloth and do this as gently as possible so that you do not harm the tissue; then apply a linen bandage over it, and do not tighten it beyond what is necessary for the size of the wound.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave it with this treatment for one or two days until you are sure that there is no danger of an abscess forming; then remove the bandage and apply medicines that have a drying effect, such as flaxseed and barley flour, and powders of roots and bark, and similar substances.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you make these medicines into a powder which should be sprinkled over the wound, just as they are dried; and generally, administer all medicine of such property that it cleanses and does not irritate.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And be mindful according to your skill that the wound in your treatment is clean; and there should not be deafness of ointment or other impurities; nor should you allow virulence to accumulate in it; for when it is applied on the pia mater of the brain, it corrupts that and poisons that, and you cause a malignant malice upon the patient thereby.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And you affect the skull, altering its bone structure, especially when the care of it is neglected, and there is blackening on its surface; therefore, consider now if you cause the patient the accidents we have mentioned, know that it is pernicious in every way.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if there is no blackening except from the medicine that is applied to it, and it is due to the power of that medicine causing the blackening, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil, and with those anoint a cloth, and then apply that over the skull; and then treat it with the healing herbs that are appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is fractured.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken in any part but rather in two specific parts that are more prominent, or one of those alar regions, because within it there are two bones, and the division between them is cartilaginous, and it does not break easily; instead, you encounter friction, twisting, and sinuosity.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two specific parts of the nose is broken, then you must insert your little finger into the patient's nostril and align that fracture inside with your index finger, while using your thumb on the outside to guide it, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And this should be done easily by you, and be careful not to cause additional pain to the patient through your procedure.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the most prominent part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach it, then it should be treated with the tip of a probe that has a small thickness.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should treat it similarly.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And attend to the restoration of it on the first day of the fracture if possible; and if not, then around the seventh or tenth day, you should cauterize the swelling to reduce inflammation.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then insert into the end of the nose a strip of linen cloth if the fracture is in one piece, or put two splints if the fracture is in two pieces, and let the thickness of the splint be such that it fills the space of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the ancient restorers say that the splints should be inserted into leather and changed throughout the day, but I do not see this as necessary; rather, it is better for the strip to be soaked in egg white mixed with powdered meal; then leave the splint inside until the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes, instead of a splint, a piece of wax wrapped in linen cloth is inserted into the nose; this is used when the nasal fracture is severe and to ensure that the patient's breathing is not obstructed.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this method is not necessary for you; if you wish, do this, and if you wish, use splints.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if swelling occurs again, apply a poultice to the nose with wax or fat mixed with sweet wine and rose oil, or use diachylon (a type of plaster).
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	And if the abscess does not come to maturity through cauterization, then you must cover it externally with flour of sesame and with powder of crushed violets mixed with egg white; then place a lion's foot over it, and do not unseal its nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the bones of the nose are fractured or comminuted, then you must incise over them and extract them with instruments appropriate for that; then close the incision, treat it with something that promotes healing and consolidation, and use plasters suitable for that purpose.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if there is inflammation inside the nose, then you must treat it with cauterization and administer lead tubes until it is entirely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not inflamed, then check if the fracture is only on the outer side and has not been split into two pieces and bent inward; in this case, the treatment is simple.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the right index finger; and push the swelling of the fracture inward easily to the outer parts with your other hand on the outer part of the bone; in this way, it can be properly aligned.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you must administer extension from both sides according to straightness until it is possible to align it.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if you encounter the displacement of teeth due to dislocation, then secure those that you hope will remain with a thread of gold or silver or silk; and then place wax over the broken jaw, and then place a doubled cloth over it, and place over the cloth a well-made pad or a piece of sole leather equal in length to the jaw; and then bind it according to how your bandage is prepared for application until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and place their food in sipped broth or soup.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you suspect that the shape has already been altered in some way, then on the third day, you should be cautious and unbind it; then correct what has already been altered and apply a poultice with powdered myrtle, egg white, or carrot flour, after you have removed the wax from it, and place wool over the poultice.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then when that plaster is applied and positioned properly on him, and the alignment of the bone is not altered, leave it like that, do not remove it until he is healed and the fracture is strong; because often this fracture takes three weeks to tighten.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if an abscess occurs again, then administer what we have said often in the treatment of him until he is healed, and let that abscess be drained.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, then consider whether it is a fragment of bone that has separated or splinters, and you must carefully remove those splinters with what is appropriate for their removal from the wound.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you should enlarge it with an incision according to your necessary extent.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And then when you have removed those splinters, and nothing remains to be drained from them, sew the opening of the wound if it is wide; and if not, apply one of the plasters suitable for this purpose over it and promote healing until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Capitol .v.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	For the restoration of the collarbone when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	When the collarbone is fractured in front of the muscle, this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	For it is either broken, separated, or separated into two parts without touching the cartilage; and its restoration is easy. Or it is such that it touches the cartilage, and its restoration is difficult. Or it is such that the fracture is accompanied by a plate [of bone].
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And in the case where the fracture is accompanied by a plate, the operation requires two assistants: one to hold and follow the broken collarbone, and the other to extend the neck to that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then align the fracture with your hands so that it takes the proper shape, ensuring there are no small protrusions or concavities.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if more extension is needed, then you must place a small roll under the patient's neck made of cloth or wool, and its size should be according to your need; extend and elevate the collarbone and compress the roll with your hand until you align the fracture as required.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the tip of the furcula to the parts outside, because it has reached the bone, then the patient must be placed on their back, and a cushion larger in size should be placed over the muscle area.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister presses the muscle of the patient in the areas between which the clavicle bone is raised, which is above it, and then you correct the fracture and align it with the said ties.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	And if you feel abscesses in the armpit and they are painful, then you must incise over them and remove those abscesses with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you devise an incision with one of the incisors which you have prepared for this, since you had placed under it the forked instrument that serves as a lever; and this instrument is made of wood or iron and has the following form:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a spoon, of which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to what you need from it, according to the size or smallness of the bone.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	And let the length of it be as much as is possible for you during the operation; that it have two ends just as you need, and one end be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and there is a risk of an abscess forming, then you should approximate the two edges of the wound with sutures.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear an abscess may form, then you should fill the wound with cloths and poultices according to the extent of the tear in the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess does form, then soak a cloth in sweet wine and rose oil and wine, and place it over the area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	But when the bone is in a state of fracture and has been cut open, you should apply a plaster made from ground meal mixed with egg white, then place lion's foot (herb) over it. If needed, place the tip of it under the herb. Then take a bandage, which is similar to what the Saracens use, that should be long and have a width of about one palm or so; then apply doubled poultices over the bandage and plaster. Next, take a thin board strip whose width is three fingers wide and similarly in length. Wrap this in cloth, and wrap this cloth with the board strip over the fracture site. Then place bandages as if it were wrapped around, wrapping it around the neck of it and under the tip of it where the patient's injury is, and apply it over all parts. When you need to reduce the fracture with a proper reduction technique, this method should not be hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And altogether, the splint above the broken bone should not be loose; and therefore you must see the patient every day, so that when the bandage is softened or you notice the splint is already loose, then you correct this and tighten the binding.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Then place the patient's arm under their neck, and put a small cushion under the elbow so that when they sleep at night, that side is elevated; thus, the shoulder support on that side is raised, and therefore the clavicle fracture is lifted by the elevation of the muscle; or tie the arm to that side of the neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the bandage unless pus or an abscess occurs at the site within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Then renew the plaster if you have seen that its surface has come to this state, and adjust it to the constriction, restore it, and leave it until the clavicle fracture is restored and coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and healed according to the same in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men, it happens in less time.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol .vi.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	For the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	A spatula is broken in the lateral area of it, and not from it but from its edges. 
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And thus when the area of him — and it is broken in the middle part of him — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture force it into preparation and reduce it according to its natural figure in every manner of skill that is within your ability.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then apply powder of ground alum and hen's egg white to the area, and stop with lion's wax; then apply a layer of doubled cloth; then apply on top a thin strip of linen according to the amount of the entire or a little more than the spatula.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if the strip of linen leaves a concavity in some parts of the spatula, then fill that concavity with lion's wax, and then raise the strip according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen it with a long bandage wrapped appropriately and secure the strip in such a way that it does not move from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And examine the bandage every day; and whenever it becomes loosened, bind it again and strengthen it, and reposition the strip if it has moved from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And lay the patient on his side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And thus when this number is completed, then you dissolve the binding, and you must be certain that it is of those bones whose beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you process the area of the broken bone and place the splint there, then you cut over it, remove it, and proceed as we have said in the fracture of the clavicle; cauterize if an abscess occurs here.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol .vii.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	For the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot sometimes breaks in the middle and this healing takes time; however, the ends of it move and become rough and fragmented.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of the consequences when it is broken in the middle is that it inclines towards the inner parts and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, strong fever, and vomiting blood; and it is evident in the cavity of the broken bone and not hidden to the senses.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient should be laid on their back, and a cushion should be placed between their shoulders; then press on the muscles, align the bone ends with your hands from both sides, and delicately perform the operation and adjustment in every possible way that is suitable for this, until the bone returns to its proper shape.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Then place a plaster and tow over it, and cover that with a thin cloth bandage of rushes or caligae or something similar in lightness, as you wrap it in cloth; then delicately bind that over the broken bone so that it is not twisted; and go around binding according to the roundness of the back sometimes, and secure that with a proper tightening; then consider the binding at all times, and when it loosens, tighten it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity prompts the removal of that which causes corrosion or irritation, or pain, or inflammation that may occur in the area, then you cut and remove that and eliminate the poultice and correct what has happened by means of treatment; and then replace the poultice, if it is necessary to do so for its application; and adjust the binding until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	The text appears to be in an old form of a Romance language, likely from a medieval context. It seems to mix elements similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Given that this is a title or heading, here’s my interpretation:
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	For the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that a fracture of the ribs only occurs in thick places along the back; and from the ends of them, in front, it does not happen to those areas except because they are cartilaginous. 
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And knowledge of it is not hidden from the senses; you should investigate it with the said methods. 
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration is such that you equalize the fracture with the mentioned methods as possible, so that it fits according to what is needed, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a splint, if you need that.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is penetrating inward, then the patient will experience severe pain and puncturing sensations, much like those that occur in pleurisy, and because of this, the bone affects the lining; it also leads to difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this condition is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the ants are generated in that place with many other living things.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And of these things I say: one must restrain the patient's diet that causes swelling and gas, so that the belly is not swollen or stretched, and the fracture does not push outward.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But let us prevent this so that it is not a trivial cause to generate an abscess through cautery, if it does not happen; and if it does happen, then it helps with this.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them said that a cupping glass should be placed on it and then suctioned strongly; this seems like sound reasoning, but nevertheless it is feared that the cupping glass may draw the excesses to the place due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them said: the area must be covered with wool that has already been soaked in cauterizing oil, and cushions should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, so that the binding is like when you wrap around that second round part; then the patient should be treated with a diet and medicine for pneumonia.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the forceful constriction of the patient is too much to bear and the bone pierces the covering with a puncture wound, fear for the patient, then it is necessary to incise over that area, uncover the broken rib, and then place an instrument above it to maintain the alignment, which should be remembered beforehand, and to cut the bone easily and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then we bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with sutures, and treat that with plasters until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if you find an abscess inside, then you should apply and press pillows soaked in oiled wool over the area, and treat the patient with what is appropriate for an internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let him lie on his side on which he sleeps until he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the spine and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and also in their joints, and similarly in the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider: if their hands are already softened, stunned, and numb, and cannot move them or extend them or grasp with them, and when you press them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and they feel no pain in them, then you know that they will not be healed, and in the months of such conditions, it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you see and feel a constriction with the aforementioned methods and punctures, then know that the bone's marrow is safe and that you will heal the patient with treatment. 
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see something similar in the vertebrae of the neck and want to know whether it will heal or not, then examine their feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	And if you see that they are already softened, apply to them what is applied to the muscles, and then when he lies on his back, he will have flatulence and defecation against his will, and sometimes he turns over on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, now you know it is mortal, and then do not labor in his treatment.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if none of those causes apply, the cause is better and less serious.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment is to perform the sedation of the abscess by placing olive oil or rose oil, or a poultice of boiled eggs, over the affected vertebra; place this on it several times a day until the abscess is sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And now apply one of the comforting and stimulating plasters, and bind it tightly with a bandage; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the painful area until he is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if you come across the grinding of the bone or any cause that has already separated from it, then you must cauterize around the wound and remove that bone; then bring together the two edges of the wound, sewing them if they are large; then treat it with some flesh-growing ointment until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	And if the posterior part of the bone is fractured, which is the end of the thigh bone, then you must insert the thumb of your left hand into the buttock and align the broken bone as much as possible with your other hand according to the principle of equilibrium; then apply a plaster and splint, if they are needed, and secure it firmly.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you find shattered bones in it, then you must incise over that area, remove them, and treat the wound with the previously described treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the ankle.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the ankles are often fractured, and when they fracture, the break is usually at the ends of these bones, running longitudinally and inclining towards the inner parts; the patient experiences pain in the area and puncture-like sensations, and the leg becomes numb when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that area which is above the fracture, which is the shape of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the end of it [the limb], then you align that according to how you are equipped for alignment, ensuring that it resembles its natural form.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	And if the fracture is in the spine or declines towards the lower parts, then you make the patient lie on their stomach while you prepare to restore that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And once you have aligned that [the fracture], place a plaster over it, then place a splint of wood or a bandage over that, and secure it tightly so that there is no concern of puncture from the fracture nor displacement of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And align the concavity with something that fills it so that it takes on a tight position according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	And if an inflammatory swelling occurs, then you cease the extension and restoration of it [the limb] until the inflammatory swelling is reduced, and apply something to reduce it as previously indicated; then return to restoring it and secure it accordingly.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if you find that the bones are splintered or crushed, then you treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	For the restoration of the fracture of the auxiliary [bone].
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Helpers are those who are between the buttock and the top of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one is that you take flat wood of medium thickness according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And let there be two ligaments at the two ends, and then let it be suspended from an elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And place the patient on a seat; then extend their broken arm over the wood until it reaches the tip of it at the middle point where the curvature of the wood is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend something heavy over that, or the servant should extend that to the sides of it; and then the doctor should hold the fracture with their hands together until the fracture returns as it should.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other method is that the patient should lie on their back and suspend the arm of the collar with ligaments; then command two servants, one of whom holds what is above the fracture with their hands, and the other holds the part below it; and each of them extends to their respective side.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you pull on the fracture with one bandage and on that (area) with another bandage, and each of the two assistants extend from their respective sides.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And therefore, if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then it is necessary that half of the ligament be placed on the tendon and the other half should remain over the fracture at the knee.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is near the hip, then it must be that the bandage is placed over that area and over that hip.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Apply that with ease and do the work, and then when it is properly adjusted as needed and applied correctly, strengthen that if an abscess does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if an abscess does occur, then release the tight bandage by the seventh day, and place on it wool soaked in a vinegar and rose oil mixture until the abscess heals, and then strengthen that area.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the method to strengthen that is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then put a wrapping of clean cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm with those supports, and place your open hand on their muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth and strengthen over the supports the arm so that the arm is in a stable position, unless there is any cause from the broken bone prohibiting this.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And now use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that you place on the fracture that splint which is more oblique and stronger than the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers from all sides.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Then tighten over the splints with the binding that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your binding over the site of the fracture should be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is more extended, the binding should be looser.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And thus you should change the position of the splints and the binding as we have said at the time when you restore the limb to its proper position.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess may form, then you should loosen the binding and the splints until the seventh day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Then examine the limb in all parts for three days so that no pus or inflammation may occur in the area; and it is prohibited for food to reach the limb due to the excess of binding; therefore, correct everything according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are in doubt that there is no cause for this, then do not loosen the ligature until three days or more. 
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's body lie on its back, and their hands be placed upon their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place over the splint a pad filled with wool evenly, and consider at any time of night or day that the shape of the broken limb is not loose or dissolved, or that the bandage is loosened; therefore, correct this entirely with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And place the food of the patient according to the order which we have mentioned before, ensuring that the food is light at the beginning until it starts to strengthen; and then you must make the food more substantial for them.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	For it is customary for the splint and the bandage to be tight for forty days; and then they must be loosened, and a bath should be administered and treated with ointments that correct that condition.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is severe and grinding, then you should not loosen the bandage and the splints for ten days or up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	For the restoration of a fractured arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones which are called the humerus; of these, one is small, and it is that which forms the said elbow, and the other is large and is the one placed below the small one mentioned, from the part more downward.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And often only the larger ligament is broken, or the smaller one, and sometimes both are broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller ligament above is broken, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is even easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the ligament below is broken, the fracture is severe, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when two bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the broken bone is the smaller ligament above, then it is appropriate for the doctor to restore it with slight extension easily until it is aligned.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the larger ligament is the one that is broken, then it is necessary to apply more forceful extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both ligaments are broken together, then you must apply even stronger traction.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you must place your hand in a position for its restoration with the extension stretched over a cushion, and let the wrist of the hand be on the upper parts more than all the other fingers, and the little finger should be lower than the others, and the patient should sit on a lowered seat.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion in front of him at his height or straight in front of him, so that the patient does not move around.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then the minister extends the arm of the affected side with his hand or with a bandage, and another minister extends it similarly.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Then the doctor should realign the bone as he returns it to its proper position in the best possible configuration.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the setting of the bone you have doubts, then you must reduce every piece to its proper place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if it appears separated and the joint is dislocated beyond your hope of restoration, then you should operate on it and set it according to the method we have described above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is infected, I have already devoted a separate chapter to this, so follow the treatment outlined there.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with a salve made from rubbed oil and white wax, which should be of medium consistency between thick and thin, and place a strong cloth over it with a fine bandage until the abscess is drained; then remove the salve and apply a plaster prepared with ground meal and egg whites, and then bind it tightly; and let the bandage that is placed over this fracture be wider and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of bones in the arm is seen in major dispositions, or it is a fracture in one part or in two parts together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your bandage firmly and strongly on the fracture site, and when the bandage extends beyond the fractured area upwards or downwards, adjust the bandage a bit more loosely according to how the description of it begins at the start of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, and not hard or rough, and the thread with which it is bound should be of the appropriate thickness between fine and thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and the joint for a few days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause occurs for which correction is necessary, such as swelling that happens to the limb, and now it is needed to soak the limb in warm water until that swelling subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And leave the limb unconstrained until it rests, and then reapply the bandage.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the bandage is already softened and the bone is well aligned and appears correct, then adjust everything with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider if nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive constriction, for then it is necessary that you soften that area slightly and leave it for some days so that nourishment may flow back into it, and then strengthen that area.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If no cause of those that we have mentioned befalls the patient, then it is not necessary to loosen anything within about twenty days or thereabouts.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	Then the arm of the patient should be suspended by its ability to move vigorously, and make the patient sleep on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-two days, or it is often restored in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the condition of the humors and the state of the body's abilities.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of fractures of the wrist and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that the wrist of the hand and the joints of the fingers can easily fracture, and they are not injured except by sudden blows.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when the hand is fractured or injured by blows, then it is necessary for the patient to follow a diet and place linen bandages on it according to equality, and then place the hand of the patient extended on top of it.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the minister extends the broken bones, and the doctor aligns those that are dislocated with proper alignment. 
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And now it is necessary to apply a plaster and tow, if you do not want an abscess to form from the cauterization; then place a cloth over it according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in a linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	And if the break is inside the palm of the abdomen, then make a ball out of cloth, and command the patient to hold that ball with their broken palm; then bind it with long cloth. 
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let there be a cloth under the body on which it is lifted, so that the body is applied to the palm; and press it according to what is needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	And if the fracture is on the outer parts, then you must place a splint over it and another splint under the fractured part in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; then apply the bandage, just as the hand is turned to the wrist between the fingers with ligaments.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if a fracture occurs in one of the phalanges of the fingers, then the said finger should be aligned properly and then strengthened with the palm, and if you wish, place a small straight splint to elevate the fracture and prevent it from sinking.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	And if the fracture is in other fingers, such as in the middle finger, or the index finger, or the ring finger, or the little finger, then it should be aligned and bound with the adjacent finger; or all of them should be bound continuously, which is better; or place a small splint on it, just as we have said for the thumb.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your treatment, and also for that purpose, the disposition of hot abscesses and their opposites—through your operation—with what is necessary when any cause of these occurs, as is repeatedly narrated.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the treatment of fractures of the thigh bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thigh bone is often fractured and can be detected by sensation, as it causes the part to turn outward and results in the most severe pain.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of him is done thus: that the bandage is tightened over the fracture and another bandage is placed under the fracture, and the patient is laid face down on their stomach.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the minister extends the entire limb to its original position according to its nature, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	And if it is dislocated at the root of the thigh, then the limb should be lowered towards the foot from the hip joint, so that the extension can fall into place, and the other limb leaves the fracture. 
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the fracture is close to the joint, then the bandage should be placed near the joint, and the extension should be made towards the parts below it.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Then the doctor equalizes the bone with both of his hands so that he can reduce it according to its natural shape and the bone is joined by a good union; then it is necessary to apply a plaster and tight bandaging, unless you want an abscess to form in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	And if an abscess does form, then you should leave it for several days until the abscess naturally bursts and drains, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandaging should be done as follows: you must wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, fold it two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap the limb until you reach the ankle and the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long strip of cloth between the thigh and the limb near the joint towards the lower parts; ensure that the ends of the strip come from the higher part of the two sides, and then wrap around the limb and the thigh any excess from the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place over the thigh in the location of that fracture some splints, and place one splint over the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the spaces between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the constriction is alleviated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin with a strong binding in the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four layers, and as you move away from the area of the fracture, make your binding less tight and lighter and softer.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the two ends of the bandage to the areas between where it reaches the ankle of the foot, and tighten both ends of the splints on the other side so that the binding does not move from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then apply the binding in such a way that it does not cause corrosion, heat boils, or swelling to the member nor anything similar; and if any of those conditions occur, then loosen the binding from it, and correct whatever has occurred as soon as possible, according to what we have said many times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If there is a piece of bone that protrudes within the bone, then you must smooth it out as much as possible; and if not, cut into it and remove that part, and treat it with what will promote healing until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And sometimes this thigh fracture is strengthened by binding it with splints, just as we have said in the case of the shoulder and the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of it in such a manner, do not cause the patient to limp; and if it is restored alone, without the other side being applied to it, then it is necessary that the affected limb causes the person to limp constantly.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the thigh is strengthened in forty days or a little more or a little less, and all of this depends on the diversity of the constitutions and other conditions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that a fracture of the kneecap can often heal well, but it may result in stiffness on several occasions.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	And if you encounter a fracture, then it is not just a crack or break in its parts, and this is called a wound or several wounds, and on this whole thing has been said with the opinion.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is such that what is broken of its parts should be aligned with those within which it should be added and joined as much as possible by equalization, facilitation, and construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply a plaster and place it on that round spot, if you need to do so; and bind it tightly with an appropriate bandage.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the treatments that we have recommended for other fractures, such as applying a cautery to an abscess and similar measures to address any complication with what is appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of a fracture in the thigh.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the thigh there are two bones, one of which is thick and is named for the thigh itself; the other is slender and is called the fibula.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens in some types of fractures that both bones of the thigh are affected, and therefore the restoration is done similarly to the restoration of an arm, and the operation for both is the same.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are broken together, the thigh is displaced in all directions.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the bone is fractured more finely, the chest is turned toward the parts in front.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the largest bone is broken, you will find that in this case, it is one of those causes that are not within your control.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension and reduction and fixation of the splints according to that alignment.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the thigh fracture is slight with small fragments, the extension should be less and more gentle, and alleviate it with your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the thigh, there is sometimes a reason for an operation on the arm, which involves aligning the splints and completing your entire procedure. At that time, you will take pieces of pine wood, which are placed under the causes that are positioned on supports, and are made somewhat like palm branches; choose those with small thickness, not too large, and let their length correspond to the length of the thigh, and from the knee inward toward the foot.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each piece of cloth in two layers according to its length, and place one layer on the part of the thigh from one side and the other from the other side, and let them extend from the knee toward the foot area.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then bind the two splints at three points of both ends and in the middle point, because with this structure, the thigh is prevented from tilting to the right or left side, and remains in proper position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And already a piece of wood according to the length of the chest has been administered; and it is placed on the patient's chest to prevent any movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And it is especially important that you do this in the case of a fracture, and when it is properly treated in that manner.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then, every day, examine the chest and study it with the previous studies, and you guard it from abscesses and inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of those causes occur, then apply what is necessary to it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and the toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	A complete fracture does not occur in the ankle; however, fractures do occasionally occur in the bones of the foot; and fractures rarely occur in the toes, and they only happen to them during periods of predisposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot do fracture and sometimes those bones become elevated above each other, then the patient should place their foot on the prepared ground in such a way as mentioned.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then place a hand over that which is raised from those bones, and then press on them, and rub them within the area where they are elevated.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply a plaster and lint over it, and place a small board with two rounded ends on the foot's belly.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then strengthen that area with the foot using a proper structure, since you have wrapped it with cloths and other materials as needed.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And after three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, for you will find the bones rubbed together, whether they are fractured or dislocated, and the operation on them is thus as you know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if some fingers are fractured, then restore them, and align them as I have taught you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place a splint on the fractured finger according to the length of the finger, and slightly to one side; then place this board under the foot as I have taught you, and secure it with a proper binding.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If what is cut from the bones are two or three or more pieces, then you place on each finger a bandage of its amount wrapped in linen cloth, and secure the table at the lowest part of the foot, and stand over one end of the table, piercing the sole of the foot so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes which have been mentioned to you in other fractures and accidents we have discussed; and prepare yourself for any accident with what is necessary.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the chin of the woman and of the bone of the pelvis and of the penis of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the chin of the woman is fractured, then let her sit in a reclining position, and then slightly tilt her towards one side, and keep her held from behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife fills the chin with cloth, and it is done in the chin of the patient just like a splint; and then the woman should be shaken gently, and her back should be raised little by little, for all this is forgotten until the front part of the chin aligns properly and the fractured bone returns to its place. 
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place pillows under his back, and when he wishes to urinate, lower the cloth easily and let him urinate, and reduce [the position] and return it in the manner in which you initially placed it, and then return him to his original pillow.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or around that time, for it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and attach a reed tube to the wound; insert the entire bladder into the rectum, and then blow into the tube with force until the bladder is inflated inside the rectum, for the fracture will return to its proper place.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be filled with cloth and kept for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the pelvis of a man or woman is broken, then administer in its restoration and setting what we have recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right is not hidden in these rare and nearby fractures, especially for one who has some study and practice and understands my book well; for that fracture signifies to you the greatest rectitude in its restoration and binding, and thus understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	When it comes to the man's penis when it is frostbitten, take goose fat and place the penis in it; then wrap it with cloth, make sure it is well wrapped up, and leave it like that for three days or so, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX. 
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	For the restoration of fractures of the bones when it is from an injury.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for those to whom a fracture with inflammation occurs, and especially if the bone is large like the femur or the thigh bone, or similar to that, that you take care of it and perform trepanation on it immediately if the conditions for trepanation are evident to you or testify as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the inflammation causes bleeding, then you must take care to stop it by sprinkling powdered and crushed sage over it, unless there is another reason not to do so.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Then begin to restore the fracture on the next day, and do not delay this, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess occurs, then you should delay the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess has diminished, and do not approach it on the third and fourth days, for you may cause further complications.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone protrudes above the skin, then you must carefully reduce and align it using your hands with ease and minimal extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	More or if extension is not prepared by you and the reduction of it with your hands, then you will reduce that with your hands using this instrument; and the instrument which is made of iron, the length of which is seven inches or eight and the width of which according to the amount of the injury; and therefore it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of these according to the quantity needed for this in the treatment in all kinds of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be round, and slightly thin at the end so that it is not bent when you apply pressure on it during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should have a sharp end with its edges on the ends; and the top of it should be thick throughout, and from the middle towards the ends it should taper.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is its form:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is named in Greek “labre volentz atelarem,” which means a slightly thin spatula.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	Therefore, it is necessary to raise the end of the instrument above the prominent part of the bone end.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And push that back into place while you return the bone, and keep it aligned with some kind of fixation.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And thus you must force the ends of the fracture together, and if the broken end is delicate and does not hold well with the instrument by good exception, then you must incise the end of that bone where the instrument can have power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	And if you cannot reduce the bone completely as we have recommended, then cut it with whichever incisor is suitable for it from those we have mentioned; or saw through it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Then smooth out any roughness and small shards that remain on the bone.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and the patient experiences intense pain at the site of reduction, then you should know that the bone has not been returned to its natural position; and thus do whatever will greatly benefit the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	Once your restoration of the bone is complete, then soak a cloth in black styptic wine, and especially if it is summer, do not place cerot or any other ointment containing oil on the wound, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer poultices at the time of the completion of the bone's restoration, and leave the wound uncovered so that you can cut away the scab with scissors and use bandages according to the extent of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be cautious to not strain the wound with the fracture, for many times foolish doctors have done this, causing their patients to suffer death or a corrosive or putrid illness, which is gangrene.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if your fracture is light, soft, different from the other fractures. 
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or it is a bad wound, and you fear that those harmful accidents we have mentioned may occur, and you find pain in the area, then do not place bandages over it, but rather create a wrapping of hard cloths instead of bandages and bind it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when after one or two days the wound begins to fester and pus is generated in it, then you should remove the cloth that was placed over it, and administer salves, ointments with which it is customary for us to treat wounds, such as tetrafarmacon ointment and similar ones.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is necessary for you to loosen the bandage and examine the wound each morning and evening until it is healed and stable, and it must be that the limb is prepared in such a way that the pus runs out of it easily towards its parts.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If many days pass for the wound and it is not healed nor has the pus separated from it, then you should know that there are signs of small issues, and you must examine the wound with a probe.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those signs, those that are separated should be removed and extracted. Those that do not separate and affect the limb and cause pain, you must incise them according to what is possible for you to do.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the wound is affected by gangrene or ulcers, which are forms of corruption and putrefaction, then you must treat it with one of those methods appropriate for it, as previously described in its respective chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And with this in which it is necessary that my speech stands and you pay attention: when the large bone is broken, elevate the limb as if it were the thigh bone or of the helper bones and similar to those of the large limbs, and do not presume attraction towards it nor its extraction because many times it causes death; leave that inside so that it rots, for by itself it will fall out after 20 or 30 days; and then treat the wound if you see it, and if not, leave it as is.
Capitol .xx.	It seems like you've provided a section heading that looks like ".xx." from what could be an old document or text, possibly related to some kind of legal, historical, or literary work. Without more context or content following this header, it's not possible to provide a translation or explanation. Could you please provide more details or the text that follows this section heading?
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Here is the translation of the provided line:
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer those medicines that have astringent properties such as alum, and ashes, and myrtle, and cicuta, and acrasia, and similar ones; in such a way that you take some or all of these, and mix them with wine that has an astringent quality, or with egg white, or with sweet wine, and place that on the swelling with tow, and bind those to it tightly with good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And leave the binding in place for several days without loosening it; then loosen it and repeat another round until the swelling is reduced; or bind a piece of lead over it loosely, because lead has the property to reduce anything that is inflated in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the swelling has already turned into a hard stone and is tight, and it is necessary to carefully remove it, then cut through the most prominent part of it, and incise the excess and protruding parts, or treat it with appropriate remedies until it is reduced; and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	For the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then the limb remains thin and weak not according to its natural state.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and the limb remains thin and weak afterward, this does not happen except for several reasons: one of which is an excess of dissolution in the ligament and incorrect bandaging; or due to excessive tightness of the ligaments preventing nutrition from reaching the limb; or by unnecessary application of too much rubbing; or by excessive movement at the wrong time; or by a lack of blood in the patient's body and their overall weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to give the patient food to eat and make their heart tender until blood is multiplied in them; administer baths; and introduce joy and happiness to them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Then place a poultice on the limb, so that the poultice attracts the necessary nutrients, or continue to rub it with warm water until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural state.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the treatment of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and prohibiting the proper operation for their correction.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When you encounter a limb already restored near the healing of its curvature and prominence at the broken bone and knotting, and it is because of this that the shape of the limb has changed, yet the limb is not prevented from its natural function, therefore you do not need to believe the words of those who think that the limb is newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But there are foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is highly reproachable, leading to great fear, the sign of which is mortal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if the limp and knotting are recent, then they should be treated with tepid water in which soothing herbs have been boiled, such as the leaves of elder and its roots, and melilot, and similar ones; and an ointment should be made with a mollifying plaster like well-made diachylon; or take the mucilage from the root of the elder and mix it with ground green vitriol or oil of ceramium, and apply it as a plaster; or take fatty figs and crush them with pigeon droppings, and similar medicines named for consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved with constant light friction using moistened hands, and the limb should be moved in all directions at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	Here is the translation of the provided medieval medical text into English:
Capitol .xxiii.	Capitol .xxiii.
De sermo en dislocacio.	From the sentence provided:
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e favenir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to immediately perforate and reduce it, and do not delay this reduction, for if it is delayed, the area becomes inflamed and it becomes difficult to perform the reduction of the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, it should not be massaged or stretched during the time of inflammation, because doing so can bring about spasms and pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	However, when this occurs, you must prepare for the incision of the patient, and then leave it so that the inflammation can rest; afterwards, the limb should be anointed with warm water and oil, and then it can be reduced easily.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every limb should be treated so that the memory of its proper place returns to it. 
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation as they precede in fractures; from the part of the body most superior to the one that is lower.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Capitol .xxiiii.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	For the translation of the given sentence:
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So dislocated the two jaws if not treated; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two ways: that either they are moved slightly from their places and softened a little; or they are dislocated by complete dislocation and fully, during which they are softened at the joint where saliva flows from the patient and cannot be held there nor can he close his mouth, and the tongue of him is wrapped in his words.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation is slight, it often returns by itself with little cause in major cases. 
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	And if the dislocation is complete and entire, then it must be treated with a gentle reduction, and should not be delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the minister holds the head of the patient, and the doctor inserts one finger of his hand into the area of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth of the patient if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers of his hand are outside with which he balances; and he commands the patient to stop moving their jaws and let them go from each side; and the doctor balances the jaw and pushes the jaw until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, and especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer an evaporation with hot water and oil until a slight reduction of both is made, and do not delay the full reduction of both, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And then when they are returned and balanced, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, place over them a cloth poultice with cerot, which is made of wax and oil mixed together; and then bind it easily with soft bandages.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient lie on their back, with their head resting between two bolsters, so that it does not turn to the right or left; and do not force them to chew anything forcefully; rather, let their food be minced meat until such time as the pains have diminished and the jaws are unhindered, at which point they may eat what they wish.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be administered easily, and do not exert pressure around the mouth area regarding eating, drinking, and speaking, until the jaw is unhindered and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws when they are displaced at any time and do not return to their proper places, then often fevers and frequent sweating occur, and the patient's belly is greatly distended, and they vomit pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then you know that it is a sign of deterioration; and often the one to whom this happens dies within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then compress the area with your palm using strong pressure, because it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then place an ointment and poultice on that area and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	May the extremity of that which is sick and continues to be affected not be displaced at any time; therefore, it must be reduced and aligned as we have said and according to what you are prepared to do. 
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then place over that a plaster, and pillows, and bandages, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of muscle dislocation.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is dislocated in only three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated at the part near the tendon.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is when it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, and this happens slowly; it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder; nor is it dislocated in front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is more frequently dislocated and protrudes at the lower parts of the tendon, especially in those whose flesh is thin, where it dislocates easily; but in those with more flesh, it protrudes with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And forcefully impact or fall happens to some people, and the muscle of theirs becomes inflamed with a hot abscess, and it is considered that it has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore, it is necessary that you proceed with this while you are properly positioned over them, and then continue with the treatment of them.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is known that dislocation occurs when there are differences in the parts where you feel tremors; so that you can distinguish between a dislocated muscle and a normal muscle, because you find clear differences between them; and at the head of the dislocated muscle, you find a concavity, and at the place where you feel tremors, the touch of the head of the muscle is like an egg, and the patient cannot bring their hand to their ear or move it in any way.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If the foot or its parts are dislocated and you now find a clear touch, and it is not hidden. 
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And of this dislocation, easy reduction is performed when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction is that the minister lifts the patient's hand to parts above; and then places their own hands under the dislocated part, and raises the joint forcefully back into its place, and the minister lifts the patient's limb, extends it outwards; and then holds it so that it returns gently.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	And if what we have said does not bring it back to its original position where the dislocation occurred within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water and given a decoction that softens and loosens as if it were cooked with rye, fenugreek, and honey in water, which should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be laid on their back and something soft yet firm, like wool, should be placed under the dislocated area. Then the doctor places their foot on the sphere (likely referring to a tool or method used in realignment), and raises the head of the muscle with force, while pulling the patient's limb so that it does not remain twisted at the joint; another assistant holds the patient’s head so that it is not strained at the joints, because it will soon return to its proper place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, return that hernia in this manner: and it is that you have present a man who is taller than the patient, and he stands on the side of that area, and interposes his muscle under the swelling of the patient and lifts the swelling up between which the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the areas below his belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is light, then it is necessary to have them suspended by another cause, so that they are lowered, for the dislocation returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced according to another method: and that is that a long stick should be fixed in the ground with its head rounded in shape, like a mortar pestle, neither too thick nor too thin, and then the patient should be placed upon it; once positioned on top of the stick's head, lioncloths (or strong linen) are laid down, and the patient stands along the length of the stick, and then their arm is extended to one side; and their body is stretched out firmly from the other side because the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce it due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this treatment: and that is that you take a stick whose length should be two arms' spans, its width should be four fingers, and its thickness should be light at the tip following this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then on the rounded head, place strong linen cloths so that the stick does not hurt the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then the patient's limb should be placed on top of the tip, and their arm or hand should be extended along the stick towards the opposite side, and the stick should be bound around the helper, the arm, and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And place the arm on a step of a ladder according to its latitude, and the hand should be extended towards the parts below it, and the other body part should be suspended from the other side, for the joint will soon enter into place.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the treatment of him is completed according to whichever way that is possible for you, and then it is necessary to place a strip of wool of equal thickness; and then apply a plaster prepared from ground alum with needles and egg white over all the muscle, so that it covers above, and then secure the strip with proper binding; and the bandage should be wrapped around the plaster, and his hand should be attached to his neck, and it should be left alone, and his hand should not be moved for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And it is necessary to reduce the food of the patient for a while, until the limb is strengthened, because it is easier for the recovery of him.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then increase the food significantly after seven or five days and exercise some movement; and if it is stabilized and not softened, then he is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated multiple times due to humidity that affects him or for other reasons, then it is necessary to apply a cautery with three punctures, as was previously stated in the chapter on cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed and the joint is not stabilized, and the plaster and the binding are reapplied several times but it does not stabilize and the arm cannot be raised above the parts below, then you know that the nerves of him, which are at the head of the muscle, have already been cut or stretched or weakened, and know that the joint will never return to its proper place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	Regarding the dislocation that occurs between the feet and the ankle or the parts behind it, the reduction is made with impulse and extension using the hands until it returns to its proper position.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And another binding should be applied there, and care for it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if during the healing process you notice heaviness in the limb and slowness in its movement, then the patient should use baths several times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original natural state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocation of the knee.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the joint of the knee is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all directions, more so towards the front than behind. The dislocation is not hidden from you when you place your gaze or touch upon it according to its displaced shape. And when you adjust the dislocated knee with your hand, this becomes clearly evident to you because the joint is concaved and cannot bend the leg nor touch its muscle with that part.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And it is necessary to treat and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before an inflammatory swelling occurs, because if an inflammatory swelling does occur, reducing it becomes difficult, and even after treatment, it may not be fully healed; especially when it is behind, for it is worse than all other types of dislocations, causing more pain, and often leading to death with that.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is one that can be reduced, is to extend the limb with two hands, and expand the arm, placing the doctor's hands on the knee and below it, and push the joint with the heels of their hands together, or with the edge of their palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	And if the dislocation is in the anterior parts, then return it by bending the hand with his hand, so that he strikes the knee with the edge of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey to the reduction, then administer strong extension and forceful movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two ministers should stretch the arm, and those two ministers should hold it firmly so that the extension is not hindered.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then the arm should be rotated in all directions, since it is wrapped with a long folded cloth over his hand or joint.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that those causes which help in the lubrication of the joint are facilitated; then forcefully push the joint until it returns to its place.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And after the reduction of the dislocation, it should be placed on a bandage that has astringency and exsiccation with egg white, and it should be tightened with a downward pull, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and left like this for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Then it should be loosened; and if the joint is returned to its proper place, then you should loosen the binding from it and leave it that way.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint not well joined, then repeat the plaster and binding, and leave that for several days until it is properly healed; then remove the binding.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then remove that [object], and place this one in the bath; when it is hot, now you should rub the joint with a mild friction, and then continue to alternate on that side, which is motion of rubbing, once, and the second time, and the third time,
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Here is the translation of the provided line:
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place over that moist and scraped wound some ointment and press on it; and do this several times, for it is moist and return it to its proper condition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	For the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, which is the joint between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	When the hand or sometimes another joint is dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is easy, whereas the opposite is true for other joints; however, it must be done quickly in reducing it at the moment when it becomes dislocated, before the area becomes inflamed or an abscess forms there.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the patient's hand on a table and the assistant stretches the hand, while the doctor places their hand or palm on the prominence of the joint and pushes until it returns to its proper place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it must be considered that if the palm is already dislocated towards the front of the hand, then the patient should place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation occurs on the back side of the hand, then the position of the hand should be naturally on the table so that the doctor's hand can press on the prominence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns immediately, that is good; and if not, then strengthen that area with a soft bandage to prevent inflammation and leave it alone; do not repeat this, because if you do, it will not tolerate or allow the pus to be reduced over the coming days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	But however the joint remains according to its tortuousness; and you do not notice in the patient any cause, except that the hand is softened and cannot grasp anything; therefore know that the nerves are broken or crushed, and now there is no remedy for it except that it be strengthened with a cautery near the injury, and thus confer some improvement.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	When the dislocation has been returned, then place on it the bandage we have recommended, and let it be left and strengthened for five days; then untie it and leave it, and exercise the hand of the patient.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if the movement of it is restricted and you notice some severity in it, then relieve it with warm water and friction several times until it is alleviated.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes the fingers are dislocated completely out of place.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when any of those fingers is dislocated on the back or palm side, then hold the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the finger, and suspend that part which is dislocated, and leave it like this for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it and extend it until it is straightened out on that same day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is raised, bandage it according to that method, and do not stop unbinding it during the day and exercising with movement, and bind it at night; do this for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same if it is dislocated at the wrist, and bind it in that area; perform this as your first procedure until it heals.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do the same when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation occurs in any of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and multiple vertebrae are displaced from their positions, there is no treatment in such a case, for death is expected in the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the excretion of the patient is expelled without their will, and they cannot retain it; and often some parts of their body are softened or both sides of their chest or both arms, or one of them; or a vertebra is dislocated from its place, for often it is dislocated or often the displacement occurs in four directions.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, that area is already treated behind and is called yellowing.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	And here is the translation of the given sentence:
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	And in those cases where it comes from injury or by impact or similar to those, the Ancients have spoken at length about the methods of cure with long discourse, most of which returns with benefit; but I have already summarized that from which a little excuse for too much is needed due to my proximity to my own understanding exposition, with which I have explained and formed this from different instruments than those with which they would show and explain it.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And it says that in gout which descends from the joint area into the feet, there is neither origin nor cure for that; and similarly in that which affects both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, it is only cured when it descends properly on the back with what I recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient should be laid face down on a smooth surface near the wall, and a moist poultice should be placed under them so that their feet are not harmed.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Then a straight pole should be placed, fixed in the ground at one end of the bed near their head, and another pole on the opposite side near their feet at the other end of the bed.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister should hold one pole, and it should not be fixed in a hole; another minister should hold the other pole in the same manner.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then wrap around the head of the patient and place a thin cloth loosely over it; extend one end of the cloth to the pole that is opposite their head, and secure it there; then tighten another cloth over their hips, below their thighs, towards their chest; finally adjust all the bindings and secure them to the other pole which is opposite their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the minister extends the ligament to the part of the bone, and let not both bones and the ligaments be removed from their places where they are fixed, but rather not be fastened as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or he places them on a table, and then positions his feet on the table until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return by this method, then take a table whose width or length is about three cubits, and carve into the wall next to the patient a place in which the end of the table can fit.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the middle of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and presses well so that the spine is straightened and returns to its proper position.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, use a wrench that is turned with the hand; and it should be such that you place on the ground, putting the patient's head at the rear end of two beams, the length of which should be one arm's length, and place the patient’s head at the rear end again using two beams; and the distance between each beam should be a palm’s width, and already there should be a hole drilled in each beam through which the wrench turns, and each end should be firmly fixed to the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And let there be a round beam in which the wrench is placed, and let it rotate in the two holes of the two beams.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it there is a hole in which the beam is inserted, the length of which is one palm including what rotates; and in the other two beams, it is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the bindings that you have placed on the patient’s feet in the hole where the patient's head is positioned, and the bindings that you have placed on the patient’s thighs in the wrench where the patient's feet are positioned.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then each turn should be held by a minister who turns the handle with their hand, and the doctor applies the splint as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the turn (handle):
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And then when the vertebra has been returned to its place and the area is levelled, it is necessary to apply a drying poultice with egg white, and also use tow; then place on top of the poultice a strip of wood whose width is about three fingers or so, and the length of which should be enough to cover the area of the dislocation, and over the part of the vertebra.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then bind it with the bandage we have mentioned, and give the patient subtle nutrients until they are healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if any prominence remains in the area at the end of the healing process, then it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and dissolve, using the application of the board for a long time, which we have recommended; and a plate of lead is already applied to that area.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes prominence occurs at the back of the spinal vertebrae, and it is painful due to that dislocation; and that bone protrudes so much that one should not apply compression with this medicine, for it could cause you serious harm or even death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol .xxxi.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	For the translation of the given line from this medieval medical treatise:
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the bone and the joint of the muscle can only suffer dislocation and nothing else, and do not apply to those what you apply to other joints with slight movement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the ankle is dislocated in four ways, for it is dislocated towards the inside, or towards the outside, or towards the front, or towards the back.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is most often dislocated towards the inside, and rarely towards the front or towards the back.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of its dislocation towards the inside is that when you align the healthy leg with the affected one, the affected leg appears longer and the heel more prominent compared to the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot towards the little toe, and it is at this location that a hot swelling might form under the little toe, so that the head of the thigh bone has already reached here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of dislocation towards the outside is that the symptoms are contrary to those described for the previous condition.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of dislocation towards the front is that the leg extends fully, but it cannot bend at the painful area in the heel; and if one attempts to walk, they cannot do so forwards; and the urine of the patient is retained, and there is swelling around it, making movement over the ankle difficult.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of one to whom a dislocation occurs in the posterior parts is that they cannot extend their leg, nor can they bend the front part before bending the knee, and the thigh on that side appears shorter than the other, and the knee is softened, and the head of the femur is displaced from its normal position.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	And the reduction of this type of dislocation is what you consider: at that time, if the dislocation is old and ancient, which has already become established, bring it close to you as you administer the reduction and leave it according to its condition; however, this is not a complete cure; therefore, no expectation should be placed on it.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	And for the one in whom the dislocation is recent and is one of the four species of dislocation, then you must pay attention to this: return the joint and extend it towards the inner parts and the outer parts, and move it to the right and left, because strong movement returns it and no other cure is needed.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	However, if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong assistant and extend the arm of the patient from the part below, or by his hands, or by binding which is laid over the arm above the elbow; and another assistant extends the hand of the patient upwards so that he places his hands under the armpits; and then bind tightly with a bandage around the thigh, and have another assistant hold the end of the bandage.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And the extension of it or of the inner part to the angle of the shoulder blade, or of the part behind to the back part. 
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And place all of these together at once so that the patient is lifted with their body off the ground and remains suspended.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this kind of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then in every special case, it is necessary to speak of the proper treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of a dislocation, when it is displaced inwardly, the patient should be laid on their side; then place the ligaments over the ridge of the thigh at that spot between the head of the thigh and where the kneecap is situated; then extend the ligament upward from the knee area to the higher part of the fork (the upper part of the leg near the hip).
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another minister should take the arms of the patient, grasp the thick part of the diseased thigh firmly, and extend outward with strong force, for this will return it to its proper place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this method is a lighter cure compared to the others in which this member is reduced.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if it is necessary for you and you do not obey the treatment with this type of cure entirely, then it is required to bind both feet of the patient together with a strong, light ligature, over both ankles and both toes.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each side should be the quantity of four fingers, and the diseased leg should be extended two fingers more than the other.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then the patient should be suspended over the head of the post, and it should be in the house; and the length from the ground should be two arms' lengths.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong young man to grasp the thigh of the patient, and let another young man suspend the patient, while the other young man forcefully pushes the thigh, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	And in the proper reduction, when there is a dislocation outside the part, the patient must lie on a bed according to what we have recommended in having coldness; and the limb of the sick person should be strongly placed over their chest properly and over their feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then two sticks should be placed, one under the feet of the patient and the other under the head; and then sticks should be adjusted in the middle of the thigh with damp cloths wrapped around them so that the patient is not harmed by the stick being between their thighs, because you must ensure that the extension to the parts below is not pulled.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then each minister extends to their part, and the doctor with his hand equalizes the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if it responds to the reversal, it will heal greatly; and if not, place your hand diligently on that area as we have said in treating yellow jaundice for equalization.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	However, it is necessary that the patient lie on their side quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the anterior parts, then it is necessary that the chest be extended slightly, and it is according to this same method described for thighs; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the dislocated area, and then compresses that area with the other hand, and with that compression extends the part below towards the knee.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is at the parts behind, then it is not necessary for the patient to be stretched out on those parts, and they are raised above the ground; rather, they must lie on a hard surface, just as it is necessary when treating them if their shoulder is dislocated outwardly, according to what we have said about placing them between two planks; and [they] are face down with the ligaments stretched out, as we have said, there is no delay.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it must be that compression with a board is administered to the place where you have the joint.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Thus, when the reduction is completed as it should be — and the sign of the reduction is not hidden from you, which is that you stretch out both arms of the patient, and when you see those equal and the patient extends their arm and you expand that with its extension, then you know that the limb has returned as it should — and now you align both sides and place a splint and extend with a bandage so that the joint is not moved in any part; and keep the patient at rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then loosen the bandage and the dressing, and compare one leg with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	When you see those signs on the patient, then know that the dislocation has been properly set, and then allow the patient to go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause for softening, then return and plaster that area, and extend it according to your initial structure, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then loosen that area, and have the patient walk around for several days until it is strengthened and healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outward, inward, and more to the back; it is not dislocated toward the front.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that you ask the patient to place their leg against their armpit; then you will know that the shoulder is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all positions of him is that you make the patient sit upright, so that he stretches his back, if possible; place your chest to his face, and hold his foot between your feet; then press his chin with your palms, and keep those between your fingers on his chin with strength, and another minister extends his leg while the chin returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And a sign of recovery is that the patient's chest adheres to the thigh without effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then apply a plaster to that and make the chest adhere to the thigh, then bind those areas with a bandage for three or four days, and then unbind them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not let the patient walk for several days until they are healed and strengthened.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction for you is necessary, then administer strong extension with the ligaments, as previously described in the treatment of the hip.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of dislocation of the talus.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The talus is sometimes injured by slight movement and sometimes dislocated completely. The dislocation occurs either inward or outward.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that sometimes the talus swells at the side to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	And the treatment for moving it is generally easy, and that it should be extended with ease using the hands and smoothed out before returning.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	And in the treatment when it is dislocated according to circumstances, you must make the patient stand straight, and have a strong and brave assistant from behind the back of that person in the middle part of them.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you hold the foot with your right hand on the higher side of it, and with your left hand on the lower side of the foot near the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand for two times, and then extend with your left hand; and push the toes of the foot with your right hand away from the chest.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this two times as we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the toes of the foot towards the chest for the third time, and you should be at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Thus, return it in one or two attempts following this method, and if you can bend the foot, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation on it, for it will eventually return to its place.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if it is forbidden for you to reduce it by the method we have recommended, then make the patient lie face down on the ground, and place a small pillow or something firm under them, so that it fits between their thighs, and you should cover them with a cloth so that the patient does not feel cold.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the minister holds their thighs, and another minister extends the foot with his hands or with a band that lies over the ankle; and then each minister extends against the extension of their partner, and the penis is extended between the patient's thighs retaining it so that the body of the patient does not pull back from its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor aligns the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh on that side, because the dislocation returns easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And thus when the dislocation returns and the health of the reduction is clear to you, then apply a plaster and tightly bandage it with strong bands, and bind the foot with a band to the chest.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And you must be careful of the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage over it is not too tight and does not compress them strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave it for two days or three; and if the bandage is loosened, tighten it again.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then remove the bandage on the third or fourth day, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if you happen to cauterize the abscess, then you must administer during its drainage what was previously mentioned in our narrative, at another site for treatment and application, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Capitol .xxxiiii.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	For the translation of the given sentence:
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Cover that which is dislocated with slight extension of its joint; and this is not difficult, first it should be gentle.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in any of the toes of the foot, then it is necessary to make the patient put his foot on the ground or on a table, and have him standing as if he were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then you stand with weight, and place your foot on the area near the joints that need attention, and then press it firmly with your foot until it returns to its proper position, ensuring that it is flattened and no swelling appears in that spot.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then place his foot on a board that covers the entire foot, which has two ends, and then tighten it firmly with a suitable binding for three days; then loosen it and let him rest by walking for several days, until it is strengthened and recovery is ensured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the types of dislocations caused by blows or fractures or any combination thereof.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of those causes occur, and you proceed with the treatment and restoration, death may often result.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And by this it is not necessary that anyone presumes over the cure of him, but only he who is wise in the art, experienced for a long time, merciful and pious; one who begins treatment with medicines that reduce inflammations without merely cauterizing them, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, unless it is someone from whom you hope for salvation from destruction, relief from illness, and in whom there appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then strive to promptly reduce the cause in him at the beginning, before it becomes a cauterized inflammation.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the limb returns as we want, administer treatment that reduces inflammation without merely cauterizing it and cure the wound with one of the drier ointments suitable for it.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and occurs in separated bones, then you should pierce their joint, and do as we have said in the simple ailments concerning what precedes in the areas of those [bones].
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid, according to your ability, those in the realm of fear's paths, as my teaching precedes you; for this is better for you to serve your Creator, more lasting for your glory, and you will find greater health for your body in doing so during your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.
Amen.	Amen.
