Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Here is the translation of the given line:
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina,
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the operation with the hand is laid down in our region and in our time entirely private, except that some traces of its knowledge remain and its practice has ceased; and nothing remains of it but a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have changed much and led to errors and superstition, such that the meanings behind them are closed off and their power and art have been weakened.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I will revitalize that by following the order of this treatise according to its manner of exposition and clarification and abbreviation; and for which purpose comes with the forms of the tools of cautery and other instruments of the work as an addition to the explanation, and for preparing it, which necessity causes.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	May the cause for which one does not find a good craftsman with their hand in this our time is that the art of medicine is long, and it requires its practitioner to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which Galen tells us is necessary to know the joints of the members and the forms of those, and the conjunction and separation of them; and to have knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and their extension; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and the places of their emission.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this Hippocrates says that a name does not matter much, but rather in the action it is small, and more so in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already said about this at the beginning of this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said about anatomy will not be able to avoid falling into error, which can lead to death in people, as I have seen too many of those cases, for some are formed in this science but fall away from it due to their lack of knowledge and experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who took out a stone from a man who had suffered in his state, and the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone along with a piece of the bladder, because that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have already called for extracting it, and saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, he would surely die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then untie the bandage according to their desires, and then dress the wound, and then keep it dry for several days and command that we loosen the binding; and this should be done until the thigh and foot are free from inflammation and have recovered.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and prepared to loosen the binding, and thus relief was obtained and the pain subsided.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But corruption had already set in the member, so it could not be restrained, and the corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the patient was in peril.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who lanced a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated over the course of several days, until the malignancy of it was greatly increased under the care of the doctor.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that cancer occurs due to a buildup of melancholic humors; therefore, it is not necessary for it to be treated with iron entirely, but rather the affected limb should be treated so that it is not completely destroyed.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, sons, it is necessary that the operation with me be divided into two parts: one part is an operation associated with health, and the other involves work where there is danger in the most critical conditions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor;
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take up your weapons with diligence and protection of God, and treat your patients with happiness and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way by the grace of God to lead to health and favorable outcomes, and leave behind terrible diseases that are hard to cure, and protect yourself from what makes you fear, so that doubt does not escape you in your faith and in your name: for more remains in your glory, and further on in this world and after for your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	When translating this text that blends elements similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, we interpret it with a focus on these languages' shared roots and medical terminology:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat bad sicknesses poorly, so that you are not named a bad doctor.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is ordered from head to foot, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cauteries, and of what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on drying and piercing, and on cupping, and on plasters, and on the extraction of arrows and similar objects, all chapters and ordered according to the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the treatment of fractures and similar conditions; a chapter ordered from head to foot, and concerning the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On cautery with fire and with sharp medicine and a reminder of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that, the treatise on the entire book begins.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	It is necessary that I speak of the qualities of the benefits and harms of that cautery, and in what circumstances the use of a cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the usefulness and harm of cauterization is long and tedious, subtle through science, and secretively hidden; many wise people have spoken about it, and they disagree among themselves, and for me, a little of their discourses suffices, fearing lengthiness.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And thus it is said that cautery is beneficial to all complications universally, which are with matter or without matter, except for two complications, which are complications without matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the complication of cold and dry matter, they disagree; for some say that cauterization is helpful for this, and others say the opposite, that cauterization is not appropriate in a disease which is due to quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it is inappropriate for a cold and dry disease to be treated with something that is hot and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And let him say that one who states the opposite of this claims that cauterization brings improvement to all dry and hot diseases that come upon human bodies, for when you compare the body of a person and its moisture to the composition of fire, you find the human body lacking in moisture.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the words of that person, who has experienced this several times to my knowledge.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, this does not apply to someone who has already been extensively trained and exercised in the chapter of cauterization by prior practice, and who has known the diversity of human composition and the disposition of diseases within them, and their causes, as well as the accidents related to them, and the timing of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	However, in other compositions, there is no need for fear, especially in cold and moist diseases, because all doctors agree on these, and they do not disagree about treating them with cauterization.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, sons, that the secret of healing through cauterization with fire and its effectiveness lies in the fact that it is simpler than cauterization with combustible medicine. The action of fire reaches only the member being cauterized and does not affect the adjacent member except with minimal harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	However, the action of combustible medicine affects not only the member being treated but also spreads to other members, often causing difficult-to-cure diseases and significantly increasing their severity.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence, line by line:
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, sons, that they forget the time in which it is appropriate to perform cautery and consider the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, so that the harm caused by an accidental time is submerged in the benefit of what is drawn through the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for necessary pains or severe and acute pains, which do not tolerate delay because it is feared that malice may come from them, which is greater than a small harm entering over time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And this does not fall into your faults, or, sons, this is only esteemed by the common people and foolish doctors; thus, to that disease which is cured by cautery, it is not always recommended, and its consequences are paused.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as they think it to be because of this, for a cautery is only in place of medicine which alters the composition and dries out the moistures which are the cause of the pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But nevertheless, cauteries are excessive in medicine due to the haste for its health and the virtue of its operation and the greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that the disease may return at some time in the future, according to the patient's constitution and the location of their illness, and the strength of them, and what is prepared within their body due to the accumulation of excesses in them, and what has been acquired by them through food and similar causes; but if the disease for which cauterization is administered is a subtle disease with few excesses and moistures, like tooth cauterization for pain and similar cases, it is possible that such pain will not return to them, although this applies in small cases.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And the common saying is that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, and this saying is correct, not in the way some people understand it, because I believe that there is no cure that benefits from medicine or any other cause without resorting to cauterization. 
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is not so when we administer the methods of cure in some diseases, and those medicines do not produce results, and then at the end of the treatment, one administers cautery, and it proves effective for that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And here it is said that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which the common people and many foolish doctors hold.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they only said this because of the purity of gold and the excellence of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the location of the cautery does not matter, but this is not absolutely true, for I have tested this and found that it is only effective in some bodies and not others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron as they claimed; however, when you perform cautery with fire using gold, it is not clear to you because the gold melts according to the amount of heat due to its softness, and it prepares to receive cold; and if you place it over the flame, the gold will melt from the fire, causing some flakes to fall into the fire which the craftsman cuts due to the occupation with that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this reason, cautery is performed with an iron that is applied lightly and precisely during the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter concerning the cautery according to chapters, and have arranged those of the head among the feet, so that I may quickly provide the inquirer with what they seek from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	From cautery for headache caused by cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery is applied to cold and humidity as the main cause of various ailments, which are caused by an abundance of rheumatic fluids, known as running, from the head to parts of the nose and ears, excessive sleep, toothache, and sore throat, and generally all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, dropsy, apoplexy, and similar conditions in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is as follows: first, command the patient to be purged with laxative medicine for cleansing the head for three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient, their age, and their habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command them to shave their head with a razor. Then have that person sit between your hands on a lowered bench and place their hands on their feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the tip of your palm near the nostrils at the top of the nose between their eyes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But however, when the middle part of the thread has been reached, mark that place with a probe, and then light the olive-shaped cautery, which is of this form: 
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that over the marked area with a bandage, in such a way that it descends gradually, with your hand slowly tightening little by little, and you rotate it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand lightly and examine the area, and if you see any amount of bone exposed, like the size of a grain of barley, then raise your hand, and if it does not return when you remove your hand with that tool, use another one, if it is cooled, until the bone appears as I have said to you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place over it a cloth dipped in butter and leave it there until the heat of the burn is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a tetrapharmacum ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And it has already been said that when the wound remains open, it is better to wash it with honey, because it is better and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them said that the area around the bone should be cauterized, and the cautery should be held until some part of the bone's substance adheres to it.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then remove what is adhered to the bone, and then clean it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others said that with the cautery one should reach the buttocks, pressing strongly into the bone until it cracks, and this is the method of performing a small alfahcati. 
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that place, vapors rise from the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And if the wound is kept open for a long time, then it should be treated before it becomes solidified.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	And although I have not seen these two types of cauteries used on everyone, but only on some people out of fear; leave that aside, you must tell me, it is better for health when it happens; for the head is affected by the disruption of continuity just as we have testified in other members, and especially so when the patient's head is of a frail nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cautery is safer and better, you must tell me; and with that method and by working in this way, it is more beneficial to health.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	About the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the head and this condition is prolonged in the patient, and remedies such as plasters, poultices, head cleansings, emplasters, washes, ointments, and similar treatments have been used without success, especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that has not helped and has not benefited from those causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong constitution by nature; and if it is not frail and you find much coldness, then cauterize it with another type of cautery leaving that one aside for a while.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that area above the horn of his head with a cautery until the vein is severed. 
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the cord and uncover the bone by the amount we have recounted, then cauterize that area with a cautery on the back part of the head at the location called the sinus — and it is in that spot where the suction cup is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And move your hand in this manner, and do not uncover the bone, for the patient will find much greater pain from this than from the pain of all other cauteries on the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I want to describe this cautery in its place, because the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is its form.
Capitol ters.	Third chapter.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the cautery of non-traditional migraine.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When persistent pain occurs in the head or spreads within the eye, the head should be cleansed with medicines and other treatments should be administered as I have described in the sections on diseases; if all this is not effective, then cautery can be applied in two ways: either by using an acute burning medicine or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	And with a medicinal cautery that burns, you should take a piece of cloth, and clean it, binding the ends of it from both sides.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then you incise the painful area on the temple with a slanted lancet such that it is placed in the exact spot where the vein is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then apply pressure on it with a bandage for constant constriction, and leave it in place for the duration of three hours; then remove the bandage and expose the wound, leaving the affected area open for two or three days, and then place a cloth over it that has been soaked in oil until the site becomes warm.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do this with some caustic medicines, which I have written about in the two treatises on caustic medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Perform the cauterization with an iron according to this method: heat the cautery iron, which has the following shape:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	It is called "claus clavilhs," because the end of it resembles the shape of a clove with some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place your hand over the site of the pain, and hold it there — so that the artery underneath does not adhere — and gradually rotate the small iron with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity that is adhered by the pressure of the chain is such that it covers half of it, lift your hand so that the artery underneath does not adhere, so that blood flow does not occur.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak a cloth in saltwater and place it over the area, leave it there for three days; then place a cloth soaked with ointment, and continue treating it with an unguent until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you must, cauterize using the tip of the cautery instrument as a cautery tool, and be careful not to cut the artery in this modern, non-traditional method.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the cautery of traditional migraines.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat migraines using the methods we have mentioned for previous treatments and as discussed in the sections on diseases, and if the treatment does not work, and sometimes due to the severity of the illness, what has been said about the first cautery with medicine or cautery with fire is not enough, then you must heat the cautery knife until it becomes white-hot, and apply it to the site of the pain using a line of length equal to half the width of your finger; then lift your hand once and press that area before cutting into the artery and reaching the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jaw, which is moved by chewing, and that the tendon is not adhered, nor the nerve that moves it, and that it does not result in spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the protection and caution of blood flow from an artery that is being cut, for in its cutting there is fear, and especially so for one who does not know what they are doing and is inexperienced and untrained; and leaves the operation to chance at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I come with a reminder of the regimen for blood flow accidents from arteries according to its manner, in its place within this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this disease does not respond to this cautery and the patient's body is tolerable, apply the cautery in the middle of the head as we have described, and treat the ailment until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have described in the chapter on artery rupture, using a cautery with two blades; this is a better and more appropriate cautery.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the cautery of ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When pain in the ear is caused by cold and is treated with laxatives and other treatments that I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain persists, then apply the cautery. This cautery is called "puncta," and this is its form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then apply the cautery near the flame, and move it around the entire ear as a wheel is rotated, or along the circumference of each part if the pain is in specific parts.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Extend yourself with the cautery of the edge of the earlobe gradually until you have sensed the area with your fingers.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of these points is performed all over the ear, and cleanse that area, then treat the places in between until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol .vi.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of the cauterization of tumors.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	A tumor that is cured by cauterization is one of the types that come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	The cauterization is avoided for the type that results from drying or spasms of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that type of tumor with diets and purges and fomentations, and your treatment does not succeed, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one should be on the lobe of the ear, the second a little below their temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your cautery on the opposite part of the diseased area, for softening only occurs in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cauterization is to cauterize that area with a cautery at the top of the uppermost earlobe, slightly above the horn of the head, and on another temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the little finger, and then place your hand with the cautery until half the thickness of the skin is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, which is a type of surgical instrument, the shape of which is described below.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But however more subtle it is than that one slightly as you see; and it must be that this one in place of excessive thickness should be somewhat thinner.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with what has been prepared beforehand until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	From the cautery of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is chronic and you have treated it with what we have said and your treatment does not agree and the patient has no fever, then cauterize that area with four cauteries: on all the corners of their head; and with a cautery at the middle of the head, as we have said; and with a cautery in the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of the cautery is done according to what has been said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; it is more towards the back; then it should be treated with what you proceed with.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On cauterization for forgetfulness caused by flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	It is necessary to give the patient at the beginning large seeds and pills that cleanse the sperm.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then shave the entire head of the patient and apply a plaster of cerate, as described in the treatise on plasters, to their neck.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And apply that several times, for that is a method of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to the doctor's order which I have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And thus if the healing is good through that; and if not, then apply three cauteries to the lower part of his head, which should descend from the highest part of the head towards the part closer to the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And place between each cautery the width of a thick finger, and then treat the cautery as has been described.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you add more and the patient can tolerate it, then apply a cautery to the middle area; and if you wish to add even more, now cauterize the area over both sides (corns).
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then treat the area until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form previously given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cautery of the spleen and the relaxation of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	You should proceed with the relaxation of the head using jars and as we have said; then shave the patient's head, and then apply a cautery to the middle of the head, and also apply cauters over all the temples of the head, and over the back part of it, and with three cauterizations over the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the illness of excessive softening of the body and the patients tolerate it and the disease is strong, then cauterize that area with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and finally with a cautery inside where the spine moves, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then treat that which needs healing, and this should be done with an olive cautery.
Capitol .x.	It seems like you've provided a section or chapter heading, "Capitul .x.", which likely means "Chapter 10" in a medieval text format. Without additional content following this heading, there isn't any specific text to translate or explain further. If you have more text from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, please provide it!
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Regarding the cautery for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, you must purify the brain of the patient at the beginning with herbs and with the other treatment that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is severe and tolerates the exception of the medicines. 
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is an infant who does not tolerate the medicines, then administer small doses and have the servant mix them well, for several days beforehand, with improvements to the foods.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery on the back of the head, and over each temple of the head it is also cauterized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize that with the cauteries I have mentioned, having paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let it be an olive cautery according to what is precedented.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then use a subtle cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize that with the cauteries we have mentioned, causing paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is an excess that turns to melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give them something to drink that purifies their brain according to what has been previously stated in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then shave the head of the patient, and then make a proper circle on the scalp, and then place that in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should be seated, and held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then apply an ointment; and it is better to use sheep's fat.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm it over the fire with moderate heat, which should be tolerated when it is applied to him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then place it at the top of his head in the circle and let it be rubbed inside so that it is warmed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this with the patient once a week for the entire duration until he is healed, along with other good treatments; or if you prefer, cauterize that area by making small points according to what suits him best, but hold your hand with a cautery arranged in this way: this type of cautery moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then place that bandage soaked in fat or in hen grease.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the cautery of water descending into the eye.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is declared that water begins in the brain due to the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient something that purifies his head, and protect it from all moistures.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And have that person sweat in a bath with decoctions for some days. 
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that spot with a cautery in the middle of the head; and then cauterize that area with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of water flowing from both eyes, or from one side if it is the start of water coming from one eye.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	And with a cautery, incise all the veins and arteries that are below the chin; and let the cauteries be placed at that length along the width of the temples. 
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And beware of blood flow when it is cauterized; and if you see the blood flow, stop it with some medicine, which is possible for you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries and the cutting of them and the caution of blood flow.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck between two bones with two backward-pointed cauteries.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old tears (or chronic eye discharges).
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears of the eyes are old and persistent, and through the veins and arteries which are visible on the head externally, it is confirmed that this is due to cold excess phlegm, then cauterize that area with a cautery as we have described in the chapter on the beginning of water flowing into the eyes, and with a cautery at the middle of the head, and with two cauteries on the neck between the two temples, and with two cauteries on the neck between two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need an additional treatment, then cauterize that area on the entire side of the thigh near the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capitol .xiiii.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	From the text provided and the structure of the language used, it appears to be a mixture influenced by medieval Latin and Romance languages. Here is an interpretation and translation for the given line:
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that illness with what we have said in the division and your treatment does not improve, then prepare and give the patient to drink decoctions for three nights; then shave his head, and cauterize the area moderately with olive oil cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that with a clover-shaped cautery using two cauteries on both eyebrows, leaving the hair slightly untouched.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful of the artery so that you do not burn it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of the clamp cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the cautery for softening the eyelids of wounds.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you do, cauterize that area above both eyebrows slightly with two cauteries in all parts, and keep them away from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand using the cautery, but to the extent that one-third of the eyelid is attached.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On the cautery of the eyelid of the eye when the hairs turn inward and puncture the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs inside the nose are converted into internal parts such that they sting the nose, cautery is performed in two ways, either with iron or with a burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you cauterize with fire, command the patient before that to remove his hairs just as they do when they clean them, between being pulled out and burned; and if you must do this, tear them from their roots, then tie the skin tightly with a bandage so that it is not damaged until the hairs have grown back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	When the hairs have grown back and been burned, then place the head of the patient in your lap, and next apply something over the eyelids of his eyes with a probe, shaped like a leaf of mirth, and the beginning of the probe should be close to the hairs. 
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then place something soaked in egg white or in a poultice of flour on the wound.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then heat the cautery, which has this shape.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize over the figure which you have marked, little by little, in small increments, until the surface of the chain, which appears like a myrtle leaf, is thoroughly burned.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And a sign of the healthiness of your work is that you see the eyelid of the wound already contracted and the hairs standing up from the puncture of the wound.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and leave it for three days, and then place something on it with bandages until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if any cause returns through the hairs near their root and the eyelid becomes softened, then apply the cautery to that area again just as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	And if the hairs are on the eyelid, then cauterize that area so it is raised to its natural position and smoothed out, ensuring that the hairs do not irritate the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And the cautery with burning medicine commands the patient to raise the hairs so that they are extended and smoothed out, and then a form like a myrtle leaf is made from cloth paper.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take some known soap and fresh herbs weighing about an ounce or as needed, and thoroughly mix those ingredients quickly so that they are not cooled; and spread this mixture on the paper that is made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it over one eye or both; and cover the eye lightly immersed in egg white, with the patient's head positioned in your hand.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place your finger on the medicine and press it slightly without moving it until the patient feels the stinging of the medicine, for the stinging is like that of fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when you perceive that the intense stinging has begun, then remove the medicine and move it with your finger; once the stinging stops, remove the medicine and wash the eye with water. Then check if the eyelid has risen as needed; if not, you should clean the constriction with fire or incision, for it is appropriate at that time. If it does not work, return to applying the medicine on the area where it did not take effect and continue until your operation is smoothed out and the eye contracts properly.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place over the wound with an ointment so that the bond of the adhesion is removed, and then treat it with a healing salve or with another substance so that it may be healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to conduct your operation with vigilant diligence so that no medicine falls into the eye, and if the eyelid becomes softened near those days and any hair stirs in the eye, then reapply your medicine to the area where the eyelid has been softened, just as you did at the beginning, and then surround it with a substance so that it may be healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of the mirtle leaf. 
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the veins of men are diverse according to their size and smallness, and therefore according to this your treatment should be adjusted.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not hide the path to perfection for those who study this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cautery of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula with what we have said in the sections on diseases and your treatment does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to place his head on your shoulder, and let another assistant hold the patient's head between their hands in such a way that the head is neither moved nor agitated.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Then place a piece of cotton soaked in egg white or in a paste of flour on the eye of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then heat the cautery, which has the following form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	The given line seems to be describing a particular shape or form in the context of using a cautery. Here's an attempt at translating it into English:
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you want, penetrate into the other extremity. 
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to be done in this manner, proceed as follows.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, the one who is concave is better for this type of work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Then press the fistula if it is open, draw out the pus from it and dry that area.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then place the well-heated cautery over it, and hold that cautery with your hand slightly away from the nostril so that your hand does not tremble or disturb the patient, and then place the cautery on the flesh of the nostril and burn that area.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if at the beginning of your cautery you reach the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice as needed; and leave it like this for three days, and then place a bandage over the wound and surround it with a drying ointment until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if ten days have passed and it is not healed, then apply a sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and scrape it as needed according to its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And here is the translation of the given sentence:
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about the cautery and the treatment, that's good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a probe into the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to where it belongs properly.
Capitol .xviii.	It looks like you've provided a chapter or section marker, specifically "Capitul .xviii." which translates to "Chapter XVIII" in English. This likely marks the beginning of the eighteenth chapter in a text. If there are more details or specific content from this chapter that need translation or explanation, feel free to provide them!
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	This phrase appears to be in an old Romance language similar to medieval Latin or Old French. A translation into English would be:
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Motives seen lead to cracks in the lips, and especially in the lips of children. 
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those cracks with what we have said in the divisions and your treatment does not improve, then apply a small knife cautery according to this form that is shown:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let the cavity be shaped according to the delicacy of that area. 
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	And carefully place that heated object into those cracks so that the cautery reaches the edge of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	It seems like you've provided a chapter heading or a section marker from an old text, specifically "Capitul .xix.", which in English translates to "Chapter XIX" or "Chapter 19". If you have more content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to share it!
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	This phrase is in a language that resembles medieval Latin with influences from Romance languages. It translates to:
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or at the roots of the teeth there develops an abscess and then swells, and then breaks, and then becomes old, and pus flows out and a fistula is formed, and if you treat that without proper healing, then you must apply a cautery according to the amount received in the fistula, and then place that ignited cautery into the tract of the fistula, and put your hand inside so that the hot iron reaches the throat, and at the back of it this is done once or twice; and then treat that as we have said about the internal healing until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And thus if the wound is separated and healed, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to expose the area and remove the corrupted bone as will be detailed in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the cautery of teeth and the alleviation of swelling.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the swellings are softened by moisture and the teeth are painful, and you treat them with medicines but it does not help, then place the head of the patient on your knee, and then ignite the cautery, the form of which will be described shortly, in such a way that you place the quill over the tooth and quickly insert the ignited cautery into it, and hold your hand slightly so that the patient can feel the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times according to what you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient should fill their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and afterwards spit it out, for the rotten tooth is stopped, the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupted moisture is dried.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the cautery of toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is due to cold, or if it is cold or red, or if you do not find relief with medical treatment, then cautery should be applied in two ways: either by using a cow's horn as a cautery, or by using fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with a horn is when you take a cow's horn and boil it in hot iron, then take some cloth and wrap it around the end of the applicator, then immerse that wrapped portion in the boiled horn, and place it on the painful tooth until it becomes cold.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that several times until the heat from the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you want, soak wool or cloth in the aforementioned solution, and place it on the painful tooth, then place a heated iron over it until the heat reaches the core of the tooth's cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, when cauterizing with fire, you should pay attention to the hollow of the reed or iron, and it should have some roughness in its core so that the sharpness of the heat does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then heat the cautery tool to the shape it will take, and place it on the tooth while holding your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this several times until the pain subsides, either on that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary that before applying the cautery, the patient fills their mouth with a good solution and holds it for an hour, then rinses it out. This is the form of the cautery application.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize whichever extremity as you see fit according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol .xxii.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of the cauterization of extrofulous conditions.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When the enlarged glands are caused by phlegm and cold humors and do not respond to digestion through medications, and you want to lightly digest those areas, then ignite the cautery with a shape like this: having two curved ends so that smoke comes out from one end of the cautery, and place that ignited cautery over the swelling once, and again if necessary until it reaches the core of the swelling.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the swelling is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the swelling, and afterwards leave it for three days and place a cloth soaked in oil over it until what the fire has burned is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that with ointment and bandages until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the cannula or cautery for this purpose is as follows.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the cautery for hoarseness of voice and constriction of the windpipe.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the humidities settle on the canal of the lung, and especially when this is due to cold constitution, then it is necessary that the patient be purged at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that area by placing the cautery near the root of the throat in the affected spot.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful that you do not penetrate too deeply with the cautery into the groin, nor burn more of the skin than necessary.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that area with another cautery at the joint of the neck at the last vertebra of the patient.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery should be applied in the manner previously described.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that area with the method mentioned until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cautery treatment for lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by infiltrating humidities, and the patient does not have fever or consumption and the disease is long-standing, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the collarbone at the locations near the lungs; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot between the two mounds; and let the cautery be applied according to the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, perform your cautery by making points with the cautery that is called "puncta," the form of which you have previously described in the puncturing for ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let there be points within each of those; then treat that with whatever method which is preceded by it being healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And here is the translation of the given sentence:
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol .xxv.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	From the cautery of titillic which is the head of the aid.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the joint is dislocated due to lubricating humidities and is not fixed at the time of its return, you must place its dislocation back into where it usually returns, and then with a small movement it is relocated so that it fits in as we have witnessed; therefore, you should first reduce the dislocation, and then the patient should be turned over on their back or side; and then lift the ligament which is inside the socket towards the upper parts using the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated inwardly.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then light the cautery having two heads; and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the ligament so that it penetrates from one side to the other; and the figure of the cautery will come to have four heads.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and thus those subtleties according to the quantity of the thread; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count, and that is why the cauteries are eight.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place salt on the cautery points, and then settle the patient down to rest, and do not move the limb for some time until it is healed.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and this needs to be done, then apply cautery on the muscle with a nail-shaped cautery or with several pointed cauters, for the joint is stabilized, moisture is reduced, and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On cautery of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold and moist humors enter the stomach, causing it to deviate from its natural composition and multiply harmful substances within, and if you continue with treatments without success, then the patient must lie on their back, extend their arms and legs, and then apply cautery in three places: place one nail-shaped cautery under the feet about a finger's width away, and use two other cauters beside it so that the shape of the cauteries forms a triangle; space them out so they do not touch to prevent excessive burning.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of two-thirds of the thickness of the chain.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the shape of the cautery is according to this form with this addition: And if you want, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a cautery according to the shape of a circle as follows:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach should be cauterized punctually to those who are frightened by this cautery: which means you place on the stomach points according to the quantity you wish with a probe, and then cauterize those points with a cautery; and then treat it with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On the cauterization of cold feet.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain in the feet arises from cold or moisture or excessive wind that deviates from its normal composition due to excessive discharge, and if the patient is not relieved by the treatment we have mentioned, then the patient should be laid on their back, and you place three cauteries with a probe according to this form and this quantity over the feet below the hypochondria, taking care of the position of the person lying down.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not move the cautery with your hand.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity that is added equals half the specific weight of the chain, and it should not be more tightly adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if not standing, then let them lie down, with their limbs already extended, and raise their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible to cauterize these areas with a knife-shaped cautery, when you apply subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to overprocess in the cauterization, and let the specific weight of the entire chain be added so that the whole body is affected and penetrates into the intestines, for the chain here is subtle; know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of the puncturing of an abscess in the armpit with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an inflammation or abscess in the armpit and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the armpit or in its lining, then if it is in the flesh of the armpit, the patient will feel heaviness and sharp pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the lining of the armpit, the pain is very sharp and often even fatigues the doctors treating it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, the patient should be turned over on their side; then examine the area of the abscess with your hand; then heat the cautery which is shaped like a rod, the form of which was described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that cautery until all the pus is drained, until it reaches the sinus, until scab forms.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it according to the treatment of other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And this form of cautery should only be used by those whose study in the art of medicine is extensive, and who have knowledge of many diseases; however, one may sometimes dare to attempt this procedure with experience, but it is better to leave it to those who are skilled.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol .xxix.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	From the text provided and its structure, it appears to be written in a language that blends elements from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here's an attempt at translating the given sentence:
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The sentence seems to describe an ancient method of cauterization using materials from botany. Here's the translation line by line:
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse it in oil and heat it over the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery at that place which is between the continuation of the collarbone and the neck; and with two small cauters guide them, slightly inclined towards the part below the beard, and with two cauters in that which declines between the fifth rib and the spine, declining slightly to the parts behind; and with another cautery at the middle part of the foot; and with another on the stomach, and with three cauters from the back regions; and with one cautery at that place which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauters from both sides of the foot, leaving the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And you do not need to touch your hand with the cautery, but rather at the surface of the chain in operation. 
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And already the ancients said that among some of the men who use an iron cautery resembling a ray and ignite it, and place it in the location between the ribs, until they reach with that the abscess and purulent matter, just as we have said about the abscess of the liver.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	And in this perforation with cautery there is no fear, for one dies so soon after you perform it at the site of the fistula which has no cure.
Capitol .xxx.	The text appears to be in an old Romance language that shares features with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. However, it looks like you've provided a heading rather than a full sentence for translation:
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cauterization of the tonsils.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the disease of the tonsil with what we have said about the treatment in the division and do not achieve your cure, then cauterize it according to three methods, all of which are proper, one of which is that you make three or four linear cauteries along the length of the tonsil according to the shape of the spleen cauteries, the shape of which has been described previously.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And there should be the thickness of a finger or a little more between each cautery, and the method of the cautery should be the method we have described for the spleen cautery as well.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not move your hand with the cautery; and the patient should be lying on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another method of cauterization is to ignite the cautery vertically twice, the reason for which we have described in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and lift the chain that is along the line of the tonsil by having the patient lie on their side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be such that you raise the chain according to the length of the body, so that cauterizations may be made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then introduce the two heated instruments into that area where you penetrate with the chain from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Then remove the cautery; thus, four cauterizations have been made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize using a cautery with three points.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Then you treat the cautery after it has stopped bleeding for several days, because it is more conducive to healing than other preceding causes.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cauterization of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterization is not used in dropsy except in certain specific cases properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the dropsy using the methods of cure that we have mentioned in the division and if your treatment does not agree, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauteries around the navel, one cautery on the stomach, another cautery on the liver, another cautery on the spleen, two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, one cautery on the right side of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the sharpness of the chain.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then leave the cautery open so that it burns for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from treatment near the cautery with what is needed because two intentions are added to it, and it quickly aids in healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized is a claw, according to the previous form, and the one with which the back is cauterized is an olive, according to its preceding form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cauterization of feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen with dropsy and filled with serous fluid, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot between the auricular and the ankle bone, lift your hand with the cautery without twisting it; then lift your hand, but do not completely remove it, for the serous fluid will ooze out.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery is in the following form: Then make two cauteries on both thighs, and on each thigh, perform the cautery using the blade end of the knife-like cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: place one at the top and another in the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound open for its healing for a long time so that some moisture may seep out of it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then treat the patient according to those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cautery of the abdominal area.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdomen is weakened by cold and moisture inside, which weakens its functions, namely the digestive and retentive powers located in the stomach and intestines, it should be treated with appropriate methods of treatment without delay. Sometimes patients may benefit from cauteries that enhance these functions. In such cases, apply a large cautery over their stomach as previously described for stomach cauterization, using a circular cautery and four cauteries around the subtle navel area with a subtle nail-shaped cautery; or apply a cautery on the alcatin (a specific anatomical region) above the great artery, or use two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you remove the excessive moisture and the patient can tolerate it, then apply cautery to the penis and to the intestines, and strongly adjust by applying two cauterizations on the stomach and near the inguinal area, for this is a perfectly effective cure that does not fail.
Capitol .xxxiv.	It seems like you've provided a section heading, "Capitul .xxxiv.", which translates to "Chapter XXXIV" in English. This indicates the beginning of Chapter 34 in a text or document. If you have any more content from this chapter that needs translation or interpretation, feel free to share!
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	This phrase translates to:
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When it is in the nature of ancient hemorrhoids or of thick humors that infiltrate or corrupt humidity, and they are treated with what we have said in the division but you do not agree with this treatment, then cauterize using three cauteries over the pus near the lower vertebrae and small triangular area, and with a cautery above the navel by two fingers.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you suspect that the stomach of the patient is chilled and the food is not digested, and their face sometimes becomes swollen, then cauterize over the stomach with a large cautery as previously indicated; and with one cautery on the spleen, and another cautery on their liver using a claw-shaped cautery, leave the cautery open for some time, and then treat them internally so that they may be healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the cauterization of the throat near the removal of them (the tonsils).
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove the tonsils, then ignite the cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	And insert that ignited cautery into the severed artery, and hold your hand firmly until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, for if they are too numerous, then cauterize each one as we have described, and then treat them with ointments until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on any area, it is more harmful to healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are naturally harmful in those areas.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the treatment we have recommended in its proper place, and the patient is frightened by it, he should be treated with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when someone has a fistula that is naturally harmful and is old, it discharges pus and corrupted humidity. What is most appropriate in this case is to probe it with a fine探针, and then determine the depth of it with the previously mentioned probe. 
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	And ignite the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then place the ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the amount it resists the probe.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat the cautery inside until those corrupted parts of the body are burned once or twice or three times, according to the amount of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula leads to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, then be careful of all those areas; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy area and you think it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Then care for the area until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed and the materials are separated from it, and remain that way for a long time, then know that it is entirely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not expelled from it, then know that it is penetrating or into the area of the corrupted bone, or this comes from those causes which will bring a recurrence in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capitol .xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of the cautery of the hemorrhoids.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When pain in the hemorrhoids is caused by cold or excessive wind (swelling), and for this reason, the patient's bowel movement is hindered, then it is necessary to cauterize that area over the hemorrhoids with a cautery applied to each hemorrhoid using a nail-shaped cautery, of which the precise application should be remembered.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And apply the cautery strongly with a slight space between each, so that three linear cauteries will be made, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cautery of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When you encounter weakness and softening of the bladder due to cold and humidity so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize in the area slightly above the bladder where the pubic hair begins. Cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the number of fingers of the thumb; and cauterize that area with a cautery on the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let the cautery be in the shape of a claw as it is processed. 
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol .xxxix.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of the cautery of the mire.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When cold and humidity come into the uterus, and for this reason conception is prohibited, and her menstruation is corrupted, and its provocation is delayed, and pain occurs during their arrival, then it is necessary to cauterize the area with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder; and with a cautery on the lower part of the abdomen, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be made with a nail-shaped instrument.
Capitol .xl.	It seems like you've provided a section marker, specifically "Capitul .xl.", which likely indicates the beginning of chapter 40 (XL in Roman numerals) of a text. Without additional content from this chapter, I can't provide further translation or explanation. If you have more text from this chapter that needs translating or explaining, please share it!
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	This phrase appears to be in an archaic form of Latin mixed with some Romance language influences. It translates to:
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist mucus is poured into the area of the ankle, and it becomes a cause for swelling in its place, and the sign of this is that one thigh appears longer than the other when compared.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the site of the dislocation is found where the pain occurs.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then you must cauterize the patient on the part of their knee with a circular cautery, since you will have sensed with your hand around the area as it is turned, and thus the part falls in the center of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let it be the cautery with which preceded the shape in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not at hand for you, then cauterize that area with three olive-sized large cauteries.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cautery be made according to the quantity of the spiciness (or sharpness) of the entire chain; and then care for that which needs to be healed.
Capitol .xli.	Capitol .xli.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	From the cautery of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain comes to the upper part, and it is caused by cold and moisture, the patient is treated as we have said without adding anything else, and this is outdated. Now you must purge the patient of thick humors with foul pills or artificial pills or similar ones; then cauterize that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of cautery in this case is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	It follows according to two known methods, of which the first is that you cautery that area over the broad part with three triangular cauteries in this form; and make a good depth with those.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cautery should be the quantity of the thickness of a finger, and the cautery can be olive-shaped or round.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes the cautery should be placed on the middle part, at the head of the ankle, making four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, use a circular cautery, which precedes the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, so that the circle contains and burns the entirety of the tendon.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cautery for gout when the pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if the pain extends into the thigh, then apply two cauteries on the thigh at the spot where you ask the patient where the pain is; and with one cautery on the calf, about four fingers away from the outer part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is knife-shaped, and the depth of the cautery should be according to the extent of the protrusion of the chain.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient tells you that the pain is spread around the area near the toes of the feet, then cauterize that area with a cautery at three points or four or more if it is necessary for that.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient tells you that the pain extends from the ankle to the thigh, then cauterize that area with a knife-shaped cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in any cauterization that you do not use the cautery so much that you burn nerves or major arteries, and by doing so, you do not harm the patient or cause contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen some who cauterized over the ankle and continued the cauterization to such an extent that the burning heat spread until it reached the foot, and the fire penetrated and corrupted the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	Then apply a strong solution for the belly, and this can lead to death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two separate parts, cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise ones said these things about the cauterization with this type of cautery, which is made in the following manner: make a circular piece of iron whose circumference is half a palm; and let its opening be according to the thickness of a date seed or slightly less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle, there should be another third [circle]; and the space between them should be equal to the thickness of a hen's egg; and those circles should be opened from both sides; and the length of those cylinders should be one or two inches; and make on those iron edges properly arranged in the circles; this is the form of it. 
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	And it is lit in the fire until it glows and emits sparks, and then it should be placed on the affected part of the ankle, with the patient lying on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize that area with three round cauteries at once.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it for three days; then apply a poultice to it and keep the wound open for several days; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Says Albucasis: oh, sons, of this kind of cautery we have rarely used it due to the fear of its appearance, and because few have found it worth looking into.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But for those who have endured it, the good cautery brings relief and finds the source of the problem.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	But a cautery combined with medicinal adhesives is one where you make two circles using an armula perforated in the shape of the keyhole of an iron gate; let the length of the sides be such that they are about two nuts or keys in size.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space which is between each quantity of the thickness of a finger; and they are opened below and above, and they contain themselves in this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place your hand over the part of the ankle while the patient lies on their side, and press your hand firmly on the part of the ankle; and then take warm water and pour it between two circles, and let the quality of that heat be close to a small fire little by little, and keep that for about an hour, and the patient will endure the burning and adjustment — for this treatment burns like fire — until the burning subsides.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand with the instrument and cleanse the entire ankle with warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then let it rest for three days and place a dressing on the area until the blackness from the burning is gone, and leave it like that for several more days, and pus will flow out of it; this is the final stage of healing.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends to the thigh or the abdomen, apply the treatment in such a way that it contains water, similar to how it is done for the ankle.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the refinement of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Take equal parts of alkali and unextinguished lime (quicklime), grind them together, and place them in a new bowl, one part of which should be pierced with a small hole according to the amount that will enter the jar.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place the bottom of the bowl over another porous bowl, then pour soft water over the alkali and live lime in such a way that it covers them by one finger's depth. Then compress them with your hand for good compression, and let the hot water that drips through into the pierced part of the bowl collect in the porous bowl below.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Then concentrate all that water and pour it over more fresh quicklime and alkali, because this will result in a highly acidic mixture, which is used in many medical procedures and for the cauterization of other body parts, as this operation involves fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And for some medicines with which a broad cauterization is performed, such as teztizic (possibly a misspelling or archaic term), mel anacrat (honey from Anacrat, likely a specific type of honey), and lime mixed with soap, all of which are combined.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gaulus recounts an operation and cure used by one of the ancients to treat ankle pain and sciatica, and he praises it greatly as being very effective, saying that no other treatment is necessary, and declares that it cures after doing it once as he recommends, for he immerses that limb in a bath and thus frees himself from it.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that green fennel should be taken, and if green fennel cannot be found, fresh figs should be used; and they should be crushed with a little salt and placed on the ankle where the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the hip, and then bandaged.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for a quantity of three hours or for the amount of time that the patient feels relief from the application.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then place him in a bath and when his body is warmed up, introduce him to the sun, for the pain ceases and he is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use cautery with these medicines until the body is purged.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	But Escorides says that when the vein is cauterized with a goat's horn, it greatly benefits him; and the cautery should be applied in this second manner: wool should be soaked in old oil and placed between the toes of the foot and the fossil. 
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dry goat's flesh and burn it until it turns into charcoal; then place it on the wool and spread it out until it is extended.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this process, and do not stop until the sensation of the bite reaches the ankle and the pain subsides.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called cow cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cautery of foot pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	At times, pain in the feet is caused by various reasons, such as from falling or striking, or from excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to these, due to the infusion of cold and wet matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery is only applied in this specific case which is caused by the infusion of cold matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, it is necessary to first evacuate the patient with fitting pills and similar ones, then apply three lines according to the width of the foot where the pain is, and mark them with a tenthspace between each line, placing five cauteries or more on each line, depending on the quantity that the patient can tolerate and their strength.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And let cautery be done with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or with four using a medial claw-shaped cautery according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On cautery at the onset of jaundice.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Spot yellow appearances often accompany this illness in small children; and the sign of its onset in children is that you notice on their structure in the eye a lifting and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you find in the lower vertebrae of the back and neck that they are already beginning to protrude over the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And therefore, when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	so that the cautery covers the entire part of the vertebra equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cauterize around the circumference of the vertebra with a pointed cautery, making two lines or three.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be placed close together.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then treat the area in between so that it heals with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Be careful that the cautery is not applied to swelling caused by nerve spasms.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the cautery treatment for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout properly by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus, when gout caused by cold is treated with a method of cure and the pains are not relieved, then apply cautery to alleviate them.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is when you apply cautery near the evacuation in the area of the foot joint with multiple cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let it be an olive-shaped cautery, which has the following form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain rises into the toes or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize each toe with three or four cauteries all around using this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if more cauteries than these are necessary for you, then cauterize accordingly but do not press your hand too hard with the cautery beforehand; just enough around the area of the spot.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain rises into the toe and foot, then apply the cautery that we have described in the previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is in the hands only, and it is called suagra (a type of ailment), then puncture around the fingers as they curve, puncturing along those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain remains in the thumbs, then puncture around each thumb and along the palm of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains approach over several days in the joints or muscles, then cauterize them all around with the help of instruments.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And you do not evacuate the patient of good regimen and reception of medicines, for if a good regimen is done and phlegm is evacuated with this cautery, he will be healed, God helping.
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol .xlv.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of cautery of ruptures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a rupture in the knees and hernias appear before the groin, and this begins to happen close by, then you must order the patient to leave their food for that day and use laxative causes so that the swelling descends from their belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then guide the patient between your hands on their back, and command them to keep their belly inside so that nothing is thrown out or the hernia or the intestines appear.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return and, with your words and care, examine the rupture over the bone of the pelvis and mark the end which should resemble half a circle at the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then prepare the cautery, which should have the following form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it becomes red hot and emits sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its proper cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion underneath. Another servant should be on their chest, and another on their feet, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery over that mark with your hand, holding the cautery straight, and aim to reach inside so that you can touch the bone of the heel within the middle of the wound; and repeat with that another time if in the first attempt you have not managed to reach the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And carefully observe the condition of the intestine during your cautery, so that you do not burn the intestine, which could lead to the death of the patient or another serious harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your operation is not successful.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And it is necessary that the cautery for children be delicate according to their size and proportion.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then treat the area of the cautery for three days with ointment until the burn scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that area with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie on their back for forty days until the area and the wound are fully healed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And it is necessary to pause the nourishment of the patient according to the length of time of their treatment, which reduces their belly, and to ensure that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then when it is about forty days, administer a properly prepared medicine, and keep that treatment for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let him be reduced in work and the excess of food and drink, and loud voices, for when he follows this regimen of complete healing, he will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will describe the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if they do not want to heal, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and let what is protruding from the hernia be reduced as much as one-third; then treat it as we have said, and it should not be adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some of the earlier writers have said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this form, since it is marked out with a template.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And it is a paused line that you place across the widest part of the rupture, and another line above it; then apply your hand with a claw cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol .xlvi.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	From the cauterization of torsion.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain occurs in higher limbs due to a blow or impact and that pain persists for a long time without showing signs of healing even with medical treatments, then you must cauterize using a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery should be applied to the entire limb according to its size and smallness, strength and weakness, and the location of the twist and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery on it. For such pains are usually punctuated along the limb to the part nearest the heart, so you must continue with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the cautery of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some lepers see great improvement with cautery, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of blood and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And when you wish to cauterize the patient, consider if the leprosy is common and can be treated as we have said in the division [of the text], and do not proceed if it has already spread or you fear that the corruption will encompass the whole body and all of its composition. Then cauterize on the head with five cauteries: one at the middle of the head, another slightly below, just above the forehead where the hair ends; two on both temples; and one behind, on the nape or neck area.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally place your hand with the cautery slightly inside so that it presses on the bone with a slight pressure, and from there displace the scales, so that the expiration of thick vapors is alleviated in them; and cauterize on the shoulder as needed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if leprosy has already spread over the patient and is clearly manifest, then it is necessary that you cauterize those areas with the cauteries we have mentioned; and with a cautery on the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on both eyelids, and with two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and with six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and with one large cautery on the vertebrae near the hip, and one on the hip itself, and with two on the knees, and one on each knee, and with two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and with two on the elbows, and one on each elbow, and with two on the wrists, and one on each wrist; and cauterize those areas over all the joints of the fingers of the hands and feet, and over each heel of his feet, and over the knuckles of his hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful of the nerves that are on the heel so you do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the palate and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the spleen.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more precisely you apply cauteries, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery, just as they do not feel it from their clothes, because their body has already been numbed.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or few according to the limbs and joints, depending on the specifications of the tools. 
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the cautery with flour cooked with honey and apply another treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of cautery for stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it is not healed, then you should cauterize that numb member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery enter the incision of the cord a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that area with ointment until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes a stupor (numbness) that affects the hands and feet, and the vertebrae of the back, is cauterized to address the irritation of the nerves which cause that numbness in the member, and the stupor is thus alleviated.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not undertake this without being knowledgeable about the anatomy of the members and the distribution of the nerves throughout the moving body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the cauterization of ulcers that are malignant.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When an ulcer is old and does not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you should cauterize it with a cautery applied slightly according to the amount of the incision until the whiteness and color of it are reduced, and its color changes.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with flour of ashes and lentils mixed with anointed oil and leaves of arnica, and with the blood of a dove or the blood of a swallow, each in equal parts and all well mixed together, and then spread a cloth over it and place it on the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	It seems like you've indicated the start of a new section or chapter, possibly ".l." which might be a numeral or an identifier in whatever text or document you're referring to. If you need further assistance with translation, explanation, or any other content related to this section, please provide more details or context so I can better assist you.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	This line appears to be the title or heading of a section in an old medical text. Here is its translation into English:
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around it as it has spread.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the latter cautery in the middle of the area; but I do not see this as advisable, for I fear it might become ulcerated, and I have seen this happen several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better that it be cauterized around it in a circle as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the cauterization of hernias.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some hernia is delayed in maturation, and this is due to an excess of moisture or the condition of the patient, who is old and frail, with little blood, or due to time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the hernia; then cauterize around it with small pointed cauteries; and afterwards leave it so that it may hasten in maturing.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you want to make a perforation with a cautery, then ignite the cautery, which has this shape: and place it in the appropriate location for piercing until it penetrates the skin.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery in that place where it is left helps to alleviate the body of the arm; then care for it until it heals.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of corrosive cauterization.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosive corruption is moving within the limb, which corrodes it just as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you find that corrosive in the place where a cautery with fire has been suffered, then you apply a few small, and large clavus cauterizations according to what is suitable for that corroded area.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize that area completely until you eliminate all the corruption and leave no cause of it remaining.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then leave that for three days, and place over the cauterized areas a dressing soaked in oil mixed until all the scars are completely removed and all the corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then treat that with flesh-generating ointments.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	And if after three days the flesh grows healthy in which there is no corruption, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on those areas that are raw and corrupted.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosive medicine is sometimes treated with sharp medication, for that serves as a substitute for cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, cauterization with fire is generally more reliable.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already described the treatment with sharp medication in the section, so use that when you need to apply it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of the cautery of claws and of other similar things. 
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Motu viguado in various places of the affected foot part known as claw, and it is a gross cause, an entry that bends the foot; and cautery on those is done in two ways, which are cautery with fire and cautery with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place that heated object on the shoulder, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the circumference of the shoulder until the cautery reaches the depth of the shoulder.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave that for three days until it begins to sweat (or drain) from the arm. 
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a plaster made with crushed wild mallows mixed with salt, and leave the plaster on that area for one night, because it will help root out its foundations.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with an ointment made from generative flesh until it is healed. 
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not subside and often occurs on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you must administer these treatments with water. Take a quill from an eagle or iron or horn, and place that over the claw; then pour into the quill some hot water in small quantity, and hold your hand, and you should rotate that with compression by your hand all around, pressing the edge of the quill against the nail bed; the hot water will find its way through the pores of the nail bed. Let the patient endure the burn of the hot water for about an hour, and then remove it, as the claw along with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And in this way, they should be placed one next to the other until they cover all of those that are in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then treat those pus areas where the roots of the claws have been eradicated with ointments that cause flesh to regenerate.
Capitol .liiii.	The text provided seems to be in an archaic or constructed language resembling Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. However, "Capitul .liii." appears to be a section heading rather than a full sentence from a medical treatise. It likely means:
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of cautery for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is a tremor due to cold in the nerves or from a cold fever, or for some similar reason, then you must cauterize that with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, placing one cautery between each vertebra; and with cauteries on their feet, and over their stomach, using olive oil-based cauteries.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of the patient subsides and hastens the healing of the cold disease.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter .5.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	From the cautery of white accidents to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body there are whitish spots, and pustules that break open which are made of thick corrupted matter; therefore at the beginning when it appears, it must be cauterized over all the head of the fistula with a subtle cautery with myrtle sticks whose end is extended by fire; or with splinters of long rue; or with lentil-shaped cauteries.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes the cautery is also applied at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and they are not considered dangerous, and the excess is disrupted by doing these things, leading to healing from them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it is necessary that this be done before evacuation with phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter LVII.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of cautery for accidental blood flow due to artery incision. 
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when this happens to someone, then you cover with your hand the opening of the artery and press with your finger on those points intermittently until the flow of blood stops, and it does not continue.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place in the fire the small and large olive-shaped cauteries, many in number, and blow on those until they become hot.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take one of those, small or large depending on the location and the wound where the artery is broken, over that vein quickly after you have cleaned your finger, and hold the cautery until it seals and constricts the blood.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove your finger and extract the cautery, then take another prepared cautery from those that are ready in the fire, and continue doing this one after another until the blood is constricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and that no other harm comes to the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to constrict the blood in those areas, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods: either by cautery as we have said, or by extraction when it cannot be extracted, for when it is extracted, the ends are burned and the blood is constricted, or it should be tied with a thread or with a ligature through strong constriction, or medicaments that have the power to constrict the blood should be placed on it; and they should be tightened with a pillow with appropriate constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	And here is the translation of the given line:
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	And if this happens to someone and the doctor is not present nor medicine, then open with gentle pressure of the index finger over the opening of that vein as we have said, and apply strong pressure inside so that the blood may stop from the most critical part of the wound, and do not remove the finger from the artery; and above the artery sprinkle cold water of great chilliness until the blood coagulates and thickens; and more importantly, consider whether there is a need for cautery or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	About incision and puncture and bloodletting and phlebotomy and wounds and their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter about all illnesses in which cautery with fire is appropriate and with combustible medicine, as well as the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for them along with the forms of the cauterizations; and I have ordered the chapters from the highest part of the head down to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I proceed in this chapter by that same method, so that the seeker of this may be relieved, now concerning what they have requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this, son, you must learn that in this chapter it deals with fears, which are the same as those in the first chapter on cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for this great caution is needed, because in the operations described in this chapter, one often encounters evacuations involving blood, which is essential to life. This includes procedures such as venesection, incision of an abscess or pus discharge, extraction of foreign objects or arrows, removal of stones, and similar actions.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And with all of these accompanies fear and trembling, and in most of them, death can occur.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this should not happen to you in which there is hesitation, because sometimes your methods with people can turn into methods of various diseases. 
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them, there are some who will go with their illness and death is near due to it, and this because of the intensity of what they find in their sickness, and due to the length of their illness, and with the illness comes fear which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And among those is the one who gives you his possessions and says, you hoping with that person for health, and his sickness is perilous. 
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore you should not consent to what comes to you in this manner; and your caution should be greater than your desire and greed; and do not presume any reason for this without certain knowledge that confirms what you owe, and which leads to praiseworthy success.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And it is used in the cure of all your illnesses for prognosis and indication to which health is restored, because in that lies your assistance towards acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, sons, may God inspire in you His understanding and not remove His direction and protection from you, for that is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter separately into sections following the chapter on cauterization, for the treatment from head to foot, so that it may ease what you seek from this and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this disease often occurs due to childbirth and when the wet nurse tightly binds the child's head with cloth.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it occurs due to hidden causes that are not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have only seen this disease in children; and all those whom I have seen met with death, and thus it has appeared to me as a fatal condition in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of the child was so enlarged that he could not support himself due to the size of his head, and the humidity increased until it caused death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture either accumulates between the tendon and the bone, or accumulates beneath the bone on the spine.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation in that case where the moisture is between the tendon and the bone and the abscess is small, then you must split in the middle of the head with a slit horizontally, and let the length of the slit be about two fingers so that the moisture can flow out, and this is the form of the spatula.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore, if the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, then there should be two slits according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, a sign of this is that you will see the sutures of the head open in all parts and water is squeezed out when you press that area with your hand on the inner parts, and it is not hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	You must split in the middle of the head with three slits according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	and then extract all the moisture; and then secure the slits with cloths and poultices; and then cover it with wine and oil until the fifth day, and then remove the bandage and treat the wound with lint and ointments, and bind the head evenly; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, which you should consider according to the size of the abscess and the collection of water, because sometimes it is more in the occipital region, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left side; therefore, pay attention with the incision where the abscess and the accumulation of water appear, and do this according to what is best possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery, and thus avoid blood flow and prevent the patient from dying due to that blood flow with the evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On the incision of the arteries that are near the ears, called carotids.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Second.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When catarrhs or rheums occur in the lungs or feet, and this has been ongoing for a long time, and you do not see improvement with medicinal treatments, then the final remedy in this case is to incise those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore, when you want to incise those [arteries], the patient should raise their head, and then rub the area with a coarse cloth so that the arteries appear, and then tightly bind the neck of the patient with some cloth; then identify where the vein pulses; and the locations of each are near the points close to the ears, which can be concealed in some individuals.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then mark over the artery with a thread, and then incise each one with the sharp end of the spatula piercing through to the bone, and do this for the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the spatula under the artery and break it at the points above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers' width, for when any vein is cut, blood comes out with a pulsating flow, which jumps out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the artery does not appear at the incision site, then you must measure from the earlobe a distance of three fingers, and then mark it with a needle, and proceed to enter into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And the amount of blood that needs to be let is a certain quantity of wine unciae, and it strongly depends on whether more or less is let from him, and all of this depends according to the amount which appears from the strength of the patient and the fullness of his artery. 
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then examine the wound, and if there remains on the bone any cause of suppuration, then remove that to prevent it from becoming an abscess with a scalpel.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with poultices and linen bandages, and then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III. 
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	From the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When someone suffers from an old migraine or sharp pains, due to excessive moisture and qualities in the liquids of the temples, or if they are very strong and similar to those, and are treated with the methods of medical cure but do not improve, then we have recourse in these illnesses to the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient shaves the hairs which are on the temples; and identify the visible artery in the temple where it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden except in a few people due to the strength of cold.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then the patient's head should be wrapped with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And now you take the spatula, which has the following form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you scrape the vein with an instrument that allows easy access until you reach the artery; and then cut into it where you extract that to the upper parts until you remove that from the vein and reveal those of the tunics which are left there, on all sides.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is delicate, then wrap that with the extremity of an ounce, and then divide from that a portion according to the amount by which the patient's limbs are stretched and contracted, and there will be no blood flow, for if they are not divided, blood will not rise fully.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate one ounce of blood within three [days].
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then you must tie that in two places with a strong double thread of flax or with long cords, and do not allow putrefaction before the consolidation of the wound and the cessation of blood flow.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut away the excess that is between two ligaments; do this at that time or shortly after.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you want, cauterize that with a cautery near the bone with a knife-shaped cautery before cutting the extremities of it, and it will remain in place for the same procedure.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better to do this when the patient does not have a fever or is of a warm temperament; for cautery is one of those causes that helps evaporate the moist humors, and therefore it is better in treatment.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And it is also necessary to extract the arteries that fill the place of old wounds, and they should be placed on decently made poultices, and then they should be treated with drying medicines that help generate flesh and with warm applications until healing occurs.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working again blood flows from the artery, then you must stop that bleeding, either by cauterization or by filling the wound with a poultice, and hold your hand until the bleeding is stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes are present, then place your finger on the area until the blood凝固，用非常冷的水冲洗该区域直到锐痛缓解，然后根据需要进行压迫止血。
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And that which is lighter in the extraction of an artery is to cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades, since you have marked the two spots with a probe, and afterward, quickly ignite it, between where they reach the bone and split the vein into two places, so that what is between the ends of it is elongated, for they are not completely fused together with this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two blades should be similar.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if the sharpness of the two blades is less, it is better, for if they are as sharp as two blades close to each other, they will not cut the flesh too quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, since there is some thickness in them, the heat of the fire is retained in them, and the flesh is cut gently.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this method is better for all procedures and更为轻便。 
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space which is between two ribs be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of acute and acidic tears of the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the tears are acidic, and it is the condition of those veins which are on top of the head that have swollen, and you do not find any cause for medical treatment in this matter, and at times the face of the patient becomes red and they feel a crawling sensation in their forehead as if it were ants crawling, and their eyes become exhausted to such an extent that their eyelashes seem known [affected], and their eyelids are scorched by the acidity of the tears, ancient bitter remedies were used for treating those suffering from this condition, and I will not name that treatment lightly.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to shave the hairs that are on their forehead, and then make three incisions in the forehead equally spaced according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is about two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant at the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, the second according to the length a little beyond the movement of the tears which are in the tear ducts, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful of the beginning of the arteries which are on two sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three fingers put together.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloths with which you dry the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then introduce the spatum with two sharp ends, of which this is the form of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	The given line seems to be describing a part of the body or an anatomical location. Here is a possible translation:
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then stretch this spatula and insert into the first incision another instrument which is called a knife, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place the sharp side of that against the adjacent flesh away from the tendon, and the flat side against the bone, and push it inside until you reach the middle fissure, and with that cut all the vessels descending from the head to the heel.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	And continue the incision to this part of the tendon, and then do that in the middle fissure between the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when an equal amount of blood flows out, press the areas where the clotted blood is located.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place in each fissure some old wool, and put on top of those powders mixed with wine and oil and vinegar, and ensure that no harmful swelling occurs.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of warm or tepid water, and then treat it with basil ointment mixed with rose oil and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Capitol .v.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	For the given line:
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there is a sharp and continuous discharge from some veins, and the cheeks of the patient are sometimes slightly weakened, and their vision has become weak, and the eyelids are ulcerated with hair loss, and at the top of the head there is acute pain leading to sneezing, then know by these symptoms that the substances and discharges do not come but from small veins within the inner parts.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for this is as follows: command the patient to shave their forehead, then make an incision in that area right at the center of the forehead, a small one in width (and begin the incision from the left temple towards the right temple; and let the incision be within the bone; extend your hand away from the swollen temples which are affected by mastication), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth, and then pack between the two edges of the incision with old wool or linen cloths.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then apply powdered material soaked in wine and oil on top to prevent an inflammatory swelling from forming.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you loosen it and see that the abscess has already diminished, now it is necessary to rub between the bones where new flesh begins to grow, and then treat that with a drying regimen which will promote flesh growth, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and from these make a plaster and apply it to those areas where native flesh is growing.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Here is the translation of the given line:
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Every cause that affects the ears is of four types: either it is mineral stone or something similar to stone, such as iron and glass, or it comes from plants like cypress or bean, or it is due to fluid causes, such as water and sour wine and things similar to them, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And thus when stone enters the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not fit nor grow in the ear, and expose the ear to sunlight, and if you remove the stone, then distill some cause with violet oil or sizami (a type of ointment), and then administer its extract, and make them sneeze with conditions, and plug the nostrils before the event of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear's opening, and stretch the ear upwards, because repeated movements are often helpful with these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not helped by that, then administer its extract using an instrument called the gesti epicicarios subtiles, of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is treated with gestures, that is good; and if not, then administer the extraction of it using a subtle ounce of double decoction.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not caused by that, then make a tube out of gold and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal and seal around the tube with wax and softened oil so that nothing is open except the tube. 
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract with your breath with strong suction, for it is necessary as we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If it is not treated in this manner, then take some alum or a vessel that is used to capture birds with a small amount of bait, place that at the end of the ray, and then wrap that properly covered.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the ear canal easily, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore, if it is not cured by all the causes which we have mentioned, then you should consider cutting it before it becomes an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method of cutting it is that you first let blood from the patient’s saphenous vein and extract blood according to the strength of the patient, then make a cut between your fingers and turn the ear upwards, and finally make a small incision at the root of the ear and remove the pus from the deeply pressed area.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the incision be of a crescent shape until you reach the stone, and once the stone is found, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; then quickly close the incision, and care for it until it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause in the ear is one of the growths that have grown and become inflamed, then administer its treatment and extraction; but if it does not respond to evacuation, then take a thin, subtle spatula according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And administer with that the removal of the wax which has entered into the ear. 
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the earwax, and place it in several small pieces, and then extract them with tweezers or with subtle movements, or with an incision as we have said, because the extraction is eased thereby.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	Here is the line-by-line translation of the provided medieval medical treatise:
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, do not stop until all the water has been completely drained away.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And once the water has been completely drained, take a piece of paper or reed, and place one end in the ear, and ignite the other end until the middle part of it is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	Then insert another reed and do this as many times until all the water has been completely drained out, and suction it with a tube in the same manner as described above for the stone extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	However, in the extraction of a small creature entering the ear, if it is small and similar in appearance, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is large and causes pain deep in the eardrum, then administer its extraction with gestures and compressions, and the cause of it is lighter than all other causes that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	However, in the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and your treatment does not take effect, then you must examine the ear in the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore, if any sign of worms appears here, then extract them with gestures or with subtle probes; but if no cause appears, then take a tube that is narrow at one end and wide at the other, which looks like this:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the delicate extremity into the ear according to the amount that the patient can endure; then suck with it strongly through suction, and do this multiple times until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	And if you do not obey the instruction, then plug and close the tube's circuit with wax as we have said; then administer distillations that have already proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your effusion be with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, which has the following form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or clay, leaving it straight, with a small tube in it, and a plate on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus it should be designed to fit into the cavity of the tube that will be necessary for containment.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the rod and wrap the end of it with a small piece of cloth, then pour oil into the concavity of the ear or juice from some herb, or any such medicine into the tube — which is in the ear — then insert the rod with the cloth on top and press gently with your hand to force the oil into the ear's cavity until the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And that which is inserted into the ear should already be warmed slightly with fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the substance you will distill into the ear is not too cold, for medicines for the ear do not tolerate that.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear blockage.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes, some children are born with unperforated ear drums from their mothers, and this can also occur in adults, where the ear canal is blocked by plaque or flesh growing in that area; and this blockage sometimes occurs at the entrance of the ear canal without affecting hearing, and sometimes it affects the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs at the entrance of the ear, without affecting hearing, is often in a condition that makes it difficult to cure.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in the case where hearing is affected, you must expose the patient's ear to the sun and examine it closely.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if an obvious swelling appears, open it with a fine spatula of this shape:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of it in which the width is small, one part being sharp and the other not; and the spatula should be on two sides blunt so that it does not hurt the ear. 
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And therefore, if the obstruction is due to flesh grown in the ear or on the body, then take that with fine needles and cut it out vigorously so that all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if there is obstruction in the ear canal, then take a thin thread and warm it slightly over fire, and then insert it into the ear canal.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And thus if you have noticed that the patient finds it easy to exhale due to the weight of the air, relieve the oppression on them easily; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place in the ear a piece of cloth dipped to the extent of the width of the tube that you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take some wax, soften it in rosewater, powder it with finely ground sage, and use it; and if you find the ear has become abscessed, then you must extract the wax and replace it with other wax that you will wrap in a cerote made with crushed olive oil until the abscess begins to heal; and continue treating it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if a flow of blood occurs, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment that restrains the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol .viii.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	For the treatment of athelisz (likely meaning "inflammation" or "swelling"), which occurs at the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Attaching the conditions that sometimes lead to dampness around the eyelids of the eyes, sometimes they are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you must hold those with forceps or with an ounce, and cut those with a knife from their roots, and then place something over the places that have been stitched.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	And if pain with a flow of blood occurs, then you cauterize those areas with a subtle lenticular cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is performed near the incisions and observed swellings when there remains any cause of the growths; and when they are cauterized with fire, those growths are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for swelling that occurs in the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Swellings appear in the eyelids due to some cause which resembles swelling in its strength and hardness, and therefore this swelling is called by that name.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick humidity beneath and above the eyelid.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation for it is to consider whether the swelling is occurring in such a way that it appears from the eyelid and is swollen on all sides; and the cause of it is slight.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, make an incision across it lengthwise, and then drain it completely from all sides until it dries out, and then apply a bandage and close it up.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if you are not prepared for the beginning of the procedure and must penetrate the eyelid with small incisions gradually, then this should cause no concern.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and take care of what is inside so that it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from it, for the heat of it restores and reattaches that area.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is decreasing inside the area within the eyelid, you should open the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a needle, starting from where you understand the issue begins, and press it all around; and if the eyelid at the beginning is elongated, this does not matter in any way.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Then at the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area in such a way that it heals internally.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the treatment around the upper eyelid of the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Grays (likely referring to grayish growth or discoloration) are generated in the tissues of the upper eyelid, and this occurs more frequently in children. It worsens the eyes of those affected and often leads to their pupils being harmed; they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears accumulate for them due to this condition.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And for this reason you find them lying on their faces all the time, and they sleep on their faces; and thus at the eyelids of their eyes the eyebrows are moist, which have already been covered by swelling, and an emergence of cataract is apparent in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel the cataract within them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And one method of the operation is such that the patient places their head on your lap, and then you place a cloth over them and make it warm. Then create a circle according to the amount which contains arthernach from all sides, and then place that over it and press with your fingers all around so that arthernach is gathered in the middle of the circle, and then introduce moisture into the middle of it with a spatula inserted through a fissure along its width, and the fissure should not be larger than the one made in flaubotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	And here is the translation of the sentence:
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, extract that with cloths which you have wrapped around the said parts on the outside and roll between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to insert too deeply with the spatula so that you do not reach the bone and damage it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	And if the pus does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, then insert into the fissure a small amount with ease until pus forms; and then extract it as we have said; and then apply cloth soaked in warm wine and water over the area and press them with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And some who use salt and place it in the depth of the fissure so that it removes the remaining moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	And if an abscess forms in the area, then treat it with cedar plasters until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On methods of feeling the pulse.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When hairs grow on the eyelids of the eyes, different from the natural hairs and are old, these affect the eye and cause various illnesses such as continuous tears and softening of the eyelids and membrane, which can lead to destruction of the eye, a condition called trichiasis. This is treated in four ways: by cauterization with fire; by sharp medicine as mentioned before in the chapter on cauteries; by excision and suturing; or by using cannulas, which I will explain.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so it is necessary that you place the head of the patient in your lap; then turn the eyelid with your left hand, and if it turns, it's good; and if not, insert a needle into the one where there is thread from the edge under the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with the thread over it, close to the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow, near the hairs, and pull the thread upwards along with the eyelid, and turn that part back.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Then insert the instrument inside the part under the eyelid close to the hairs, using a spatula between the larger and smaller lacrimal ducts; then remove the thread and place small particles of cotton or cloth under the eyelid, and finally sew over the eyelid with thread, making it look like a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, the shape must be according to the amount of lifting of the eyelid, for this varies among individuals, as some require a large incision in the eyelid depending on how much the eyelid has sagged.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then use the spatula over the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the larger lacrimal duct towards the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if the crack is near the natural hairs just as it often is with the majority of kings.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then insert the bone into one of the two angles of the chain, and then scrape that area completely, and then join the two lips with a suture using thread or fine wool yarn, and clean the blood, and apply what is superfluous from the poultices over both eyebrows with some viscous causes if you wish to do so, and if not, do not worry about it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then remove the suture of the poultices within three or four days, and then care for it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the wound without sutures, and care for it with things that dry and bind, because the eyelid is lifted by the sealing of the wound and its addition; however, suturing is better. Therefore, this is what the ancients teach regarding treatment.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, one must be careful with the patient, and it is of good practice, and not out of fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method in surgery, which involves placing on the eyelid a figure shaped like a myrtle leaf, and then lifting the eyelid with three separated and gathered points according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible to do that, hold the hooks, and if this is not enough, then take a needle with thread and insert it into the middle of the figure, and place the other thread near the larger lacrimal duct, and the second thread near the smaller lacrimal duct, and adjust between those threads equally, and then raise your hand evenly with an elevation, lifting the entire chain on which it is marked just as we have recounted.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches, and treat the inside so that it may heal.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	However, if an abscess occurs in your incision or your fissure, draw out that abscess with cautery and similar methods, and with ointments.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes you need to address an eyelid where the hairs are inverted; then you should use the method of incision that we have mentioned; however, in some cases, stitching is more intricate.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To straighten with canulas is according to this method:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And it is that you turn the eyelid inside out and split the figure within as I have recounted; then, make two canulas or two fine probes, the length of which should be according to the length of the eyelid and their width should be half the width of the spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already made incisions at the extremities of each section where you find the veins.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add each with subtlety on what is excessive from the eyelid of the eye, and constrict the canals of each section with a strong binding, and leave it like that for several days, because the chain will die due to the constriction, become detached, and decompose inside before it falls out by itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then break it at the roots, and then treat the wound until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	When it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not poke.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two canals which you shall make according to this shape:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and there should be the quantity of the length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On the removal of piercing hairs in the eye with a needle when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When unnatural, hard, and rough hairs sting the eyes, then in this operation you should take a fine needle and place it into that thread of fine linen or silk, and then carefully adjust the ends of it and tie each one subtly.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the fields be a quantity of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you apply another thin layer of ointment over it briefly, and bind the extremities of that if you so wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head on your lap, and position them close to the light so that your work may be clearly seen, for this is a delicate and precise operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the root of the eyelash that requires treatment, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid before removing it from the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair out completely and place it in ash, whether it be one, two, or three hairs, but no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand with it until the hair is removed, stirred with ash on the eyelid along with the natural hair. 
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And you see that with the vision of the wound, because when you cut the veins and the sinews, and you expose everything and wash the wound, and leave the clamps for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and new good flesh grows over it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is shorter, then you adjust a long hair from the natural hairs, and lift it with that, or let it remain inside so that it is stretched close to some space, and then you lift it.
Capitol .xiii.	The given text appears to be in an old Romance language that shares features with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Given its structure and vocabulary, it seems like a medieval or early modern variant, possibly Old Spanish or Old French.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	For the given line:
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the eye is affected by twitching, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it contracts inward or to the right or left side due to poor healing from a wound, drying out, or cautery, and this condition is called "leporina," and this twitching can be either natural or accidental, and it results from improper healing from wounds, dryness, or cautery, or by similarity in their ailments.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	May the manner of the operation be that you split that consolidation and separate its lips, and place in it a piece of linen cloth where those are separated, and tie them until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And it is not necessary for you to treat him through the causes that dry up, constrain; for if you do so, it will cause more harmful pus than was ever there before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that of causes which mollify thus as fenugreek is, and foment with the water in which they are cooked leaves and seeds of it, or ointment of hyacinth, which should be liquefied with some of the oils, and submerge the cloth in that, and cure with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you should pierce with any instrument that has not been consolidated according to the form at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have mentioned is nothing but some correction of dislocation where the shape of the area does not return to what it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the treatment for a hemorrhage that occurs in the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This hemorrhage that occurs in the eyelid, which is properly called a hemorrhage; it can be of a natural kind or an accidental one.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	The accidental hemorrhage is caused by blows or cuts or cautery or other similar causes.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the method of the operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, making it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch the flesh apart with the needle and secure it with the needle, and make an incision with a wide spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	Then return the eyelid to its proper shape if possible; otherwise, take a reed and place it in the cut shape, and use that to turn the eyelid, creating two slits on the side of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the extremities of the two fissures from two angles of the incision that you have made come together, and when they meet, an angle is formed between them, creating a figure from them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is a Greek letter: lambda. 
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then remove the flesh in such quantity that it is equal to the width of the sharp instrument used, which is like the eyelid. 
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then align the separated parts and sew them together with wool thread; then treat them with what we have said about the soothing medicines and the warm compresses until it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you need to make an incision due to a fracture or suture or cautery, then you must make a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid as described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Then separate with the warm compress between the two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In summary, for the discussion on how to treat an incision when it is above or below, which occurs during the operation, according to the preparation method of the incision, and that is in the form of various fragments. 
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the wise craftsman always prepares in every possible way to restore the figure to its natural form or close to it, and that patient according to what is most convenient for him concerning the operation and the instruments. 
Capitol .xv.	Capitol .xv.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in many men, you will find that the upper eyelid is adhered to the white part of the eye, and it is restricted from easy movement and its natural functions. Therefore, you must insert the tip of a probe under the eyelid, lift it up or extend it with a spatula.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Then you cut through the adhesion with a fine spatula, which should not be sharp to avoid distressing the patient during the operation; keep the spatula blunt so that it does not injure the eye with its edge.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should be such that it easily separates the adhesion, allowing the eyelid to return to its natural form and for the entire adhesion to heal.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then you put salt water into the eye with which you wash it; or drip onto it juniper dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Then separate the eyelid from the eye with goose fat, and place wool infused with egg white on the eye. After three days, use consolidating treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol .xvi.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	From the inflammation of the eyelid and the prominence of flesh around the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the eyelid is considered in two ways: either it is nervous, and resembles a hard but subtle membrane; or it is non-nervous, resembling white frozen moisture, which when touched with iron or forced to be taken by tweezers, breaks off and the tweezer does not penetrate it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both of these conditions do not begin except from the major tear duct, which gradually covers the sight and prohibits light and the movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	However, the method of treating the inflammation is that the patient rests their head on your lap, then opens their eyes, and you lift the eyelid with your hand, and then grasp the eyelid with tweezers with slight doubling and stretch it upwards.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert into it a horsehair or ox hair or cow hair, or something similar, or use strong thread; or double the tip of the needle gradually and place it in the middle of the eyelid, penetrate it with the needle, and secure the eyelid with thread; stretch it upwards, and pluck out the hair from the edge of the eyelid near the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And in this way you should proceed by inserting the pellet into the patient's rear end.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you should incise the remaining tissue at the root of the lacrimal duct with a fine spatula or small scissors, and clear the natural lacrimal canal so that from this incision there will not be continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail should be extended with the sun once or with fire, as we have said, and then it should be extracted with a spatula, which is of this form:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful not to touch the corneal layer with the spatula so as not to cause a rupture and to avoid piercing the pupil.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then the incision should release a little powdered salt or ashes made from charcoal into the wound, and leave that there until the next day; then treat it with what is necessary until it heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not embedded deeply and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it fixed in that way, then this kind of nail issue should be treated with medicines, and it is healed in this manner as described and detailed in the section.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish to incise that area, then you open the abdomen of the patient and take a subtle spatula-like instrument with an acute blade according to this form:
am subtilitat.	And if you wish to incise that area, then you open the abdomen of the patient and take a subtle spatula-like instrument with an acute blade according to this form:
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you find that it is rarefied and confused and penetrates into that region, then distill from your ore into the horn of a stag or with a red horn or with ground salt, and plug the horn until the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation until all that is inside has been removed, but rather let the opposite pus be cauterized in the wound, because when you leave that, and treat from the beginning the pus until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation on that area until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if noted in the nose causing great harm, should be suspended with an ounce; and cut that part from there, but do not complete the incision so as not to cut the tear ducts.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a warm distillation to the lacrimal area and do this treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of a sty and what is born from tight flesh in the nose.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes on the eyes of some individuals, hard flesh grows and covers the pupil, or it approaches and presses closely to the eyelids, causing them to adhere tightly from the outer parts, resembling a barrier.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation involves the patient placing their head on your lap; then open their eyes and collect all that hard flesh using appropriate instruments, such as forceps or tweezers; then cut the flesh at its beginning until it is entirely finished with the scalpel, and be careful not to harm the eye during your procedure.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your incision be with which you cut those areas or with a scalpel that we have recommended in the section about the nail, or with small scissors with which ashcel is collected according to how it will come into form near this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if any cause of inflammation remains and the blood is hot, and you fear an abscess may form, then leave the wound open and treat that abscess with whatever alleviates that abscess, and then reapply over it during the operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh adjacent to where such a wound occurs.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must be careful to keep all treatment of the wound free from any natural or accidental contamination, act with care, and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that the limb is sufficiently prepared for such an operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of pus in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Pus comes from inflamed veins that are hardened over the wound and hinder the proper operation of the healing process, causing the wound to fester for a long time.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at the beginning, it is necessary that you consider whether the wound in which there is pus is strong and if there is no other illness besides the pus; then you should collect that pus.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to place their head on your lap, and then suspend those veins with one ounce or two according to your discretion; and let that ounce be of subtle doubling in this manner:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	Or do two ounces gradually in one course according to this method:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then those veins should be tied off with fine threads, carefully, and you should wipe the blood little by little until you see those veins become empty of blood and turned pale.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful that you do not lead the blood with the tips of the spatula; and let your operation be in the morning before the sun, and be firm in your operation so as not to incise any veins except those intended.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed the procedure, then you apply wormwood or rue because its acidity will corrode what remains of the sap.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if it is not possible for you to complete everything in that hour, then apply a plaster with something that alleviates the pain, and leave it for several days until the pain is subdued and inflammation is prevented.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the same method to the second one until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the scissors:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of nasal fractures.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat fractures with cautery or with sharp and burning medicine as was previously narrated, and if it is not healed, then do not proceed in the same way; instead, incise over the abscess to allow its maturity, and extract all the moisture within until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then when the bone is exposed and there is corruption or blackening in it, you scrape it with an instrument that has the following form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called a rough head, and it is made of Indian iron, and its head is round like an asir, which is made pointed by filing or finely punctured (as shown in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place it on the corrupted part of the bone, then rotate it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption is scraped off.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And this should be done several times, and then restore the area with drying and astringent causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore, if the area is consolidated and good flesh has formed there, and the body has separated from the pus, and it remains this way for forty days, without being renewed or becoming inflamed, and no accidents occur, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then it is necessary to reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: you must expose the bone with an iron instrument or with sharp medicine, and once the bone is exposed, then take a splint in accordance with this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The tip of the iron should be triangular, and the shaft should be gradually tapered towards the end in such a way.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place it over the bone, near the lacrimal area; extend your hand a little beyond the nose, and then rotate your hand with the splint until it penetrates the entire bone. The patient will feel this as air tries to escape when you do this.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, now restore the area with astringent and drying medicines as has been described.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, when the flesh and the area have hardened, the material that was flowing out to the outer parts returns inside, thus making the condition lighter on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the prominence of the eye.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the eye protrudes completely and does not cause any harmful swelling or diminishment, then you should lax the patient, and afterwards follow up with ventousas on the neck after scarification and good suction; then apply to the eye a liniment that is made of acacia, aloe, honey, and sarcocolla, and finally secure the poultice over the eye with powdered lint.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method of the lint is to take linen cloths and cut them into pieces, and each piece should be folded into four layers; then make use of those pieces.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Then place those pieces one over the other according to the amount needed for the eye.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then bind over them with a hard cloth with strong tension; and repeat the cupping with suction after scarification; and then remove the cups and leave the wound open day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if during this time the ligament becomes softened, then it must be made tight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	Then keep the ligament on both day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if you find the hernia already reduced, that is good, and if not, then repeat the use of the plaster with the powders and the binding and the cupping until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the inflammation of the uvea (a part of the eye).
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a disruption in the uvea and it becomes prominent, protruding from the eyelids like a grain of raisin, and takes on the shape of a human figure due to this, if you wish to incise it, the operation should be done as follows: you insert a needle into the base of the uvea from below upwards, then place another needle where there is double thread from the lacrimal part, making that one penetrate while keeping the first needle in its position; then cut the area with the double thread and lift the part of the uvea along the circumference of the needle, pulling it strongly.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then remove the needle and place over it wool infused in egg white, leaving until the thread falls with the grape.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat the wound with something that strengthens the interior so that the illness may be healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes, gather from all sides with a circle of cloth around the swollen wound, and then pierce it with a subtle spatula to reach the core of the wound, allowing the white, moist substance to flow out, and reduce the swelling while entering as quickly as possible.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the inside so that it may heal.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of dislocations.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness, which is called dislocation, is nothing but a swelling that appears in the joint resembling descending water, but it is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of treating it is to have the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat. Then take his head in both hands and move it so that you see the swelling come to the respective parts, then let it dry and not descend, and keep the light such that the patient sees the causes just as they are.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not go down below, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	And if the pus does not drain to the abscess as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a thin spatula and use it to separate the panniculus from the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tunic at the margin (inside the eye socket) until the abscess is drained.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once it is drained, then you should drip warm water into the nose, in which you have mixed honey, or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be treated with other methods until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of water (discharge) coming from the nose.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the types of discharge in the division and which ones require piercing with a needle, depending on the health condition.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Now you must make the patient sit between your hands on a stool and tie their nose with a binding agent.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your left hand near the eyelid of his eye if the eye that contains the water is the left eye; or with your right hand, if the eye is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then with your right hand take the almond if the eye is the left one; or with your left hand, if the eye is the right one.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the tip of the almond near the crown along the thickness of the ray in the white part of the eye towards the smaller tear duct, and then insert the almond with force and rotate your hand accordingly.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate the white part of the eye and feel that the almond has already reached its target destination.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it is necessary that the length of the path of the almond to the front be the same as the distance from the pupil to the end of the black part, which is the crown of the eye; for you will see the pupil through the vision of the eye due to the clarity of the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place the almond in the location where the water is, and then pull it down once and then again, and if the water descends quickly, you will see the patient recover their sight immediately, with the almond still in their eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a while; if the water has descended, then wait another period before any medication is applied.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then when it is cut and does not descend, you extract the medication easily, and rotate your hand slowly with that; then dissolve a little clear salt from a gem in water and wash the hole inside with it; then place a small piece of cloth or plug or wool soaked in anointed oil and egg white over the hole and secure it.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we and those of our time place on that wound some shredded cloth mixed with egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if your medication does not adhere to the inside of the hole because of its hardness—since there are some people whose holes are very hard—then it is necessary that you take the spatula named alberid, which has the following form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce that joint with it, but do not force your hand too much, and the goal is merely to create a fine space for the medication.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then apply the medication as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should complete your work by preparing the patient's sleeping area properly so that they sleep on their back in a dark room, and all movements are prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause in the nature of the condition so that it aligns with its natural state, and do not move their head to the right or left side at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the binding be according to its arrangement within the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then release that [binding] in that dark place and expose the swollen area to light, and show them some causes [of the ailment], and then reapply the binding within the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And it is not necessary to do this during the time of treatments or right before the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	However, it is necessary that you apply this so that the water can lightly pass through with great and strong attention.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an abscess forms and requires cauterization, then you must remove the bandage before the seventh day and treat it with whatever method reduces the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you should clean the area around it and place something on their face near the mouth so that it guides the movement of whatever is inside for several days, existing in the dark place.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then it is laid down from that position gradually and turns into its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in surgery it is not excused for the disciple to see certain things multiple times, and then you should be bold during the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has been reported to us by some of those who are in the Artach, and some said that fire is made in an Ayrac vessel, which is pierced through so that water can be drawn out with it.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But however I have not seen anyone in our land who has perfected this, nor have I read this in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of maggots by which one can recognize them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they should be made of wax or proper iron, and the ends of them should have this subtle triangular shape, the sharp end thus as that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol .xxiv.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	From the treatment of flesh hanging from the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are diverse growths of flesh attached to it, some of which have causes resembling the scorpion's tail or a hanging polyp; and this illness is called polypus because it resembles that hanging part represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And if it is cancerous flesh, it appears pale; and what is lion's flesh is not of a dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in those cases where the flesh is not fraudulent nor cancerous, it is necessary that you place the patient between your hands and expose them to the sun, and breathe into their nostrils, and puncture the vein once in those areas of the flesh.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then pull that out from the external parts, and then dissect what you have grasped of those with a sharp and fine scalpel between until you know that all the flesh has been removed; so if there remains any part for which no reason exists to prevent the amputation, now cut that away with one of the fine instruments easily until nothing remains that could hinder it.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	And if the abscess is ruled by blood or if it is a malignant swelling that requires cautery, then apply what is necessary; if it is one of the malignant swellings, then cut and cauterize it until the blood is stopped and all the cavities are cleaned out.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then pour wine or vinegar into the nose near the incision.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is open and you process humidity that reaches the palate, then know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is flesh swollen with pus between the bones of the nose where incision has not been reached.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, now it is necessary to introduce a thread into the area where there is any swelling, and pierce through with nails, placing between each nail the distance of a finger or thumb, and arrange the patient so that one end of the thread is inserted into the nostril using your hand or another method that is possible for you.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after this has been done, draw his odoriferous substance into the canals of the nose, and sit over his face, as many times seen faces doing this action make children in schools, and it is an easy cause for those who wish to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then place the two ends of the splint, one end that extends over the nose and the other that remains inside the nose, and then apply sutures to the flesh using the pins that are in the splint, and do this until you know that the flesh is already attached to the pins of the splint.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then remove the splint, and place inside the nose near the bleeding a plug, and do this for three days or more until the poultice corrodes all that is rotten of the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then at the end of the treatment, place a lead cannula in the nose for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If you decide to use drying as part of the treatment, apply it accordingly.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument used for nasal administration with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make this from silver or clay, which should resemble a small open lamp, like a little bowl, and the mouth similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed tube like a reed, and the end of the instrument for suction should be flat and uncovered; to which you place the handle at the rear, with which you hold it when you heat it in oil or whatever liquid or substance that is suitable for suction.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these capipurgi are precious: take castoreum, white alum, ginger, saffron crocus, long pepper, scammony, and spikenard, each an ounce; mix them with the juice of beet and onion, make pills out of them, dissolve one pill in warm water, and give it to the patient lying down through their nostrils.
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol .xxv.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	From the words given and the structure of the sentence, it appears to be describing something related to the anatomy or condition of the extremities. Here is an attempt at translating the sentence:
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Motives seen are a sign of inflammation in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and worsened over several days within which time one must care for it.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason, you must incise at the beginning of its appearance and remove all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then place over the area where the cautery or burning medicine is applied.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	And if the initiation of treatment is delayed until it becomes magnified, then consider whether it has become calcified, hard, dark in color, and has little sensation; at that time do not touch it with iron as it is a chronic abscess; for many have found that slicing into this kind of abscess only brings great harm to the patient.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is somewhat recent and not dark in color, and it is possible to incise it completely, then treat the patient and incise it without fear, and care for the area with substances that dry and constrict until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the suture of the nose and lips and ear when continuity is disrupted by injury or a similar cause.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when the continuity is disrupted in one of these cartilages, there is little success with this operation unless it is performed on certain individuals.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you find any cause of those wounds, you should consider if it is a fresh wound with its own blood, and then you align the two edges of the wound with stitches, and then treat the inside so that it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the edges of the wound where continuity is broken are already separated and each has healed, then you must evert (turn outward) each part of its apparent seam until blood comes out.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then sew the two edges together and strengthen them, sprinkle dragon's blood powder over them which has been finely ground, and place a piece of diafinicon plaster or some other consolidating plaster over the powder. Leave that bandage on for two days or three, then remove it and replace the plaster until the stitches have separated by themselves, and finally treat with ointment until healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The method of suturing is that you close the wound either with needles as we have recommended for stitching the abdomen, or you can also close the wound with stitches as it suits you and as you know how to do.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the extraction of those causes that occur in the two lips within the folds.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Often in many men, within the folds of their lips, there appear hard swellings resembling lard. Some of these are smaller and some are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you must turn the lips and examine each of those hard swellings thoroughly. Then fill the area with finely ground sage until the blood is constricted. Afterward, wash it with sweet wine and treat the area with a styptic agent until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	From the incision of the flesh fitted into the gums. 
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	A large number of times we find on the gum a tight piece of flesh which the ancients called alveoli. Then it is necessary that you suspend that with an awl or hold that with forceps and incise that down to its root, allowing the pus or blood to flow.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then apply over the area some astringent powders or other stimulating substances.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then cut it again and cauterize it, because after the cautery it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the reason for black teeth.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth, both inside and outside, and between the gums, there are rough and sharp tartar deposits, stains, and sometimes they appear blackened or take on yellowish or green tints, which lead to corruption near the gum and cause the teeth to become stained.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore, you must hold the patient between your hands and place their head on your knee, scrape the teeth where those tartar deposits appear until they are like sand, so that no trace remains, and this will remove the blackness, yellowing, and other discolorations until they are cleaned.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if what is at the beginning of the treatment remains as described; and if not, then you repeat the treatment on those areas the next day and the second and third days until it reaches the final state that you desire.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth require various forms and many shapes of forceps according to how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And therefore, the razor with which the tooth is cut from inside is different from the razor with which it is cut between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you should prepare, which you will see shortly:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	For the eradication of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Here is the translation of the sentence:
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But when the patient is forced to extract that tooth, you must be certain which one is the painful tooth, for often the pain deceives the patient and leads them to believe it is in a healthy tooth, and if you extract that one, the pain will not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is removed, for we have already seen this by the operation of the jaws.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, you must be certain which tooth is causing the pain, and once you know that well, then it is necessary to scrape around the tooth with a spatula that has some power or virtue until it separates the tooth from the gum completely. Then remove it with your fingers, or with fine scissors, starting slowly little by little until it comes out.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then take large, strong forceps for good extraction or crushing, and hold the patient's head between your hands firmly so that they do not move, and then pull the tooth straight out in such a way that you do not break it nor cause greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not easily extracted, then take one of those instruments and gently remove it from all sides, exerting the removal in such a way as was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is loose or corroded, then you must wrap that area with cloth and tighten it with the tip of a fine thread so that it does not break when you apply pressure to it with forceps.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And it is necessary that you work carefully with incision around all parts of the gum and guard well your strength so as not to tear that part and leave a fragment, and return to the patient for the harm to be less than the first pain he had.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not perform what some ignorant barbers do in their stubbornness and audacity during the removal process; for they often bring upon men severe illnesses which are harder to treat, and the roots of those diseases become deeply entrenched, or some of them remain unextracted, or even extract bones from the jaw along with it, as we have witnessed many times.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	Then, after the extraction, wash the mouth with hot wine or sour wine with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if bleeding occurs because of this, as it often does, then apply some amount of sage and sprinkle it over the wound. And if the sage does not work, use a cautery.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and delicate tongs with which the tooth is grasped at the beginning should have a long outer end, a short handle, and be thick, so that they do not bend when you use them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they should be such that the thick handles are in between so that when you grasp with them, they do not bend, and their outer ends are short.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And let them be made from Indian iron, properly made with straight ends, and on the ends of those there are teeth that fit into each other and compress by strong constriction, and sometimes the ends of those take the form of the beak of a bird called ciconia, which is a stork, and they are of strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol .xxxi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	For the eradication of teeth and extraction of the broken bones from the jaw.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract a tooth that is broken and some root remains, then it is necessary for you to place something cold on the area with cloth for one or two days until the spot is softened; and then insert tweezers or pliers whose ends are shaped like the beak of a bird called stork or glove, which is the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extremities of their limbs should be treated within as if with a file or a chisel.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey this instruction with these forceps or tongs, then you must cut into the root and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument called an atalis, which is a small lever of this shape:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And let there be a small thick extremity of short length, and it should not be inserted too deep so that it is not broken. 
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if by this the bladder is forcefully displaced, it's good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular at the tip, in which there should be some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a finer tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And already it is helped with this instrument having two prongs, the form of which is as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments which are used for tooth extraction; because it is also done with this instrument which resembles an ounce in size, and this is its form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	From the twisted or shortened triangular extremity, which has some thickness, and should not be forced in such a way that it is not broken.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the dental tools are made in a similar way to the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	And the skilled and subtle artisan may find by themselves according to what the operation and various diseases signify; for there are diseases for which the ancients did not describe or leave proper instruments, due to the diverse forms of different types.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are fractured, or if you need to, then treat it by placing the patient in position and use what is appropriate from the instruments and forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and assist with maneuvers which take this form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And let there be gradual reduction of any swelling little by little, and it should be compressed or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or spread until the bone is entirely set; then restore the area with appropriate medicines.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a small hole or decay in the bone, then clean that area of the decay and its darkness, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitol .xxxii.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Regarding the treatment of prominent teeth over others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the prominent teeth do not follow their natural course and are rather loose in form, especially when it comes to women, and more so for those highly revered women; therefore you must consider: if a tooth is close to another tooth and there is no possible extraction or movement of it, then root out that one; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then incise that one with this instrument which has this form; and it resembles a pig's snout, and is made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let your incision be such that you cut it over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and that none of the other teeth are infected.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if a tooth protrudes significantly from decay, then file it with an Indian iron file, which has the following form:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it should all be made of Indian iron and the margin should be smooth; and it should have fine points like those used to make needles, with which the tooth should be filed little by little over several days easily, so that another tooth is not damaged or affected.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then line it with flax at the end, and scrape it with sharp razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if a tooth is broken in such a way that it irritates the tongue, then you must smooth the inside so that the roughness of that fracture is removed and leveled, and fill it so that the tongue is not injured and speech is not impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver filings.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When you encounter front teeth that have been knocked out or dislodged by impact or falling, and the patient cannot chew on what they eat, and you have treated it with styptic medicines but your treatment has not been effective, then in order to prevent further damage, repair them with gold filings and not silver ones, because silver can corrode and will fall out after a few days, whereas gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the salve be of such subtlety and thickness that it can enter between the teeth; and the method is to take the salve and take twice as much between two healthy teeth, and then form two twists of the salve between two decayed teeth, or if there is one or several, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the threading from the part where you began, and hold your hand with ease and skill until it is not decayed. 
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your ligature be with which you tie the thread around the roots of the teeth that do not come out.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then separate the excess bile from the extremities using forceps or tweezers, and apply those in each area with care, and place them between the healthy tooth and the diseased one, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then loosen that area tightly as a Roman would.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	And if it is loosened or broken, strengthen that or those with another thread in such a manner throughout its entire time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the reaction of two healthy teeth and two diseased ones, just as you see these tied together:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it is done that one tooth or two are returned to their respective places at the junction, and they have grown back as we have described, and that they no longer decay.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And this is done only by skilled artisans and wise [individuals].
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes a piece of the bone from a cow is prepared, and it is made in the shape of a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is fastened as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the condition of the ligament that affects the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament that affects the tongue sometimes is natural, with which a person is born, or it is accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on him is to open the mouth of the patient, with his head in your lap; and lift his tongue, and then incise that nerve bundle according to the width between which the tongue is severed from its root.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	And if there is any hardness or knotting in that area due to the consolidation of an inflammation, then you take it and split it along the width between where you have cut the nerve bundle and dissolved the knot.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful not to make a tear in the skin and to cut any artery, causing blood to flow.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the remnants of the incision with wine or with sour wine or with cold water; and then place the tongue back smoothly. This is the method by which the patient should keep their tongue in place every night to prevent it from knotting again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if bleeding occurs, place powdered vitriol over the area; but if the bleeding continues, then cauterize the area with a red-hot cautery, which is appropriate for this situation.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with other causes until it is healed. 
Capitol .xxxv.	Capitol .xxxv.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	For the given line:
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on him is that you open the mouth of the patient sixty [degrees] facing the sun and examine the swelling.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it of dark or black color, hard, in which the patient does not find sensation, then do not touch that which is gangrenous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it has turned white, in which there is humidity, then you put your finger in it and incise that with a fine spatula, and cut it entirely; and if blood spurts out during the time of your operation, then you place over it a piece of cloth, which is vitriol, until the blood is constricted.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work until you have completely removed it, ensuring that it is washed with sweet wine and salt; and care for that area with the other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of abscesses from the ears and those that form in the throat, as well as other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When they occur in the throat, these are glands that resemble almonds, which appear externally and are called the ears. When you treat them with what we have said in the division and it is not healed, then consider whether the abscess is hard, of dark color, with little sensation; then do not touch that with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of a rosy color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron because of the blood flow; first allow that to mature inside, and then either you will pull that out, or it will come out broken by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of a white color, like a root, and the stem is thin, then that is what needs to be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is such that you consider, before your operation, whether the abscess has already rested from being cauterized with complete rest or if it has decreased by some reduction; and then make the patient sit facing the sun, with their head in your sight, open their mouth, and the servant takes between their hands to hold the tongue with a noble instrument of this form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or iron, and it should be thin like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So as you press with that the tongue and the abscess is shown to you, spit over it with your saliva, then take an ounce and insert that into the swelling, and pull it outwards as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And here is the translation of the given line:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it is similar to forceps, but the ends of it are curved, so that the opening of each one faces directly towards the other, both being sharp, which should be made of iron and well-tempered.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	And if this instrument is not available to you, then cut with a spatula of which this is the form: It is sharp on one side, blunt on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have cut one incision, cut the other in the same manner of incising, and then wash the patient with cold water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is excessive bleeding, wash with water boiled with pomegranate peel or myrtle leaves and similar styptic substances until the bleeding is stopped, and then treat it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes abscesses may form on the cheeks or around the ears, and incise those in the same manner as I have described for cutting two incisions equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman with an abscess that had formed on her cheek, which abscess tended to a dark color, was of little sensation, and had already closed her cheek, causing her to breathe through a narrow passage. She had been denied food and water, and she was close to death if it had lasted for one more day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had risen so much that it had split into two paths from which it would exit through two routes.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So I carefully incised and inserted one of those needles into it, and pulled that out, and a large portion was extracted, then I cut into the other side where I understood there was another route, then I closed the opening of it, and compressed its tongue, then I placed the needle back into that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	Then I cut away a large part of it, and only a little bit of blood came out from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	So the swelling of that woman is definitely gone, and she should start drinking water immediately, then eat food. Therefore, I did not stop incising that abscess multiple times for a long time, and new abscesses would form in place of the previous ones, which I continued to incise until they ceased to prolong.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	So I took some action and cauterized the swelling of it, which provided additional treatment; then I left, not knowing what God would do with that condition near me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capitol .xxxvii.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	From the inflammation of the boil when it is abscessed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarrh affects the throat, and it is abscessed and prolonged, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in a part that is thick and round, then it is called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	However, when it is treated with what we have said in the division, and you do not approve of your treatment, and afterwards you find that the abscess has already become dry and subtle, then you must incise those parts that are aggregated roundly; and if it extends to that length, and is bloody, of dark or black color, and is not in the center, then you must attempt to incise it, for there is fear for the patient in that.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see it according to the manner I have described, regarding its whiteness and length, then make the patient sit up and press their tongue with an instrument that is shaped for this process, and then insert the ounce into the new area, pull it down, and incise it with one of two instruments which are used for incising two melons. 
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And it is necessary that you do not incise beyond what is aligned with the natural boundary of its addition, for if you incise further, you will damage their speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then for the incision, use what we have recommended in the section of two wounds, and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the patient was frightened by the incision, it is necessary to use ingenuity in the cauterization of his fear, and the method of the cautery on him is not with sharp water, but rather you place the head of the patient on your thigh, then press his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and then take the water we have specified in the chapter on cauterization, and warm it with that live fire, and apply it neither thick nor thin, and with that fill the concavity of the instrument which has this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the extremity of it be concave like a spoon's concavity, where the medicine is to be placed. Position the instrument with the medicine on the ulcer, and have the patient lie on their side so that no saliva or mucus from the mouth of that person can flow down due to the internal medicine, so that it does not, by any means, reach the throat of the patient and cause harm to them.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then take the medicine in your hand and apply it to the uvula for a short period of time until you see it become darkened and calmed by the action of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take a cloth and wrap it around the end of the ray, then soak the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray wrapped in the cloth into a tube until the cloth adheres to that tube. Do this as many times until you achieve the desired cauterization effect on the vein, and then let it dry and fall off within three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the application of the medicine, do so, and then for the cauterization, clean around the vein with a cloth soaked in wine vinegar. Modify the area around it with that which is from the medicine, wash it with cold water, treat externally with an embrocation, and internally with gargle solutions until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this type of treatment is safer than incision and lasts longer in terms of prevention.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the uvula is cured with something more subtle than cauterization and incision, for it is treated by fumigation in this manner: take candles, hyssop, origanum, rue, Arabian safflower, camomile, bryony, and similar herbs; prepare all these ingredients or some of them in a pot, and submerge them in sour wine, then boil them. The pot should be well sealed with good wax, and place a tube in the middle of the pot on which is set a concave iron instrument according to this manner; it should be made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And insert the extremity into the patient's mouth until the steam reaches the uvula over the tongue, until the uvula is moved or obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then apply to those dry spotted areas, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the occurrence of abscesses, because it would overly irritate the abscess, and you should not do that; rather, you must declare the presence of an abscess to the doctor.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if this instrument is not available to you, then take a reed and attach a hen's bladder to the end of it, so that the patient's mouth can be cleansed, because the hen's bladder prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of thorns and other foreign objects that adhere in the throat and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Spotted objects adhering in the throat or fish bones or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you must extract what is visible of those objects, on which you focus your sight, by pressing the tongue with an instrument in front of light, so that you can see clearly what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which does not appear and is hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because by doing so the cause attached to the throat will be forcefully expelled through vomiting; or the patient should swallow a piece of raw onion or radish or a bit of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge, and soak it thoroughly with honey, and then have the patient swallow that, for when it reaches the place where the thorns are located and are extracted, they will be forcefully expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And also take an eel and wrap it in honey, and place it inside until it is thoroughly extracted; or take a leek and similarly put it in and then draw it out.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if they are not forcefully expelled by those means we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be thicker than a small tube, and at one end, it should have a cavity that you can easily insert into the patient's throat.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And lift his head up, and be careful not to touch the bones of his throat, so that you do not cause harm and avoid pushing against the bone or spine, or let the doctor use his hand for this. 
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	And yet if the patient himself intervenes more actively, by his knowledge of the location of the attached cause and presses into it, and pulls his hand with the instrument towards it, all of this according to the amount that is prepared for him internally before being purged. 
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol .xxxix.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of the extraction of the leech attached to the neck.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When treating a leech with the methods we have mentioned in the section on treatment with medicines and not by compression, consider placing the patient’s neck under the sun, so that you may detach the leech's mouth using the instrument we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	So if you see the leech, remove it with a small pinch or with gentle and proper movements.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to remove it in that way, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient’s neck. Then place a heated iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this as many times (until the leech is dead and detaches from the neck) and ensure that the patient abstains from water for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Then take a vessel full of cold water, and open its mouth in that vessel, and wash the mouth with it; and do not let any of it be wasted, and move the water back and forth with your hand for about an hour, because the leech will immediately release when it feels the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If it is not healed by what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with camphor or asafoetida using the instrument we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, whichever may apply. 
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not work, then you repeat the fumigation several times, and abstain from drinking for the patient, eating salty foods and garlic, and do not drink water; thus, it is necessary that this regimen be strictly followed.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodsucking from the navel is treated when it is seen; and it resembles forceps in some ways, except that there is some curvature to it:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Capitol .xl.	Capitol .xl.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the sum of the discourse concerning abscesses and their incision.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	These abscesses are various types, in various ways, according to their recall, each one in this book. 
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And thus there are differences in puncturing and drying them by two methods, of which one is by the type of abscesses that you insert into; and by this, we draw out the humors.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is for areas where bodily accidents occur, because an abscess that happens on the head is different from an abscess that occurs on the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshy area is different from an abscess happening at a joint; and each of them requires its own treatment through operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And regarding abscesses, some of which should not be punctured until near the ripening of the pus or the completion thereof.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment,
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	And you must know the time of puncturing the abscess, and this is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you know that it has matured when there is the reduction of pain and the cessation of fever, and then the decrease in heat and pulsation, and the sharpness at the head of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And you must know that the puncture should be made at the lowest point of the abscess where the pus can come out from the prominence for proper healing.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the puncture should always be made along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in areas of the hands or feet, and at sites of tendons, ligaments, nerves, and arteries; and finally, in all other places where there is no reflection; for in those that do reflect, use puncture according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	And when the abscess is in a fleshy area, it is better to delay the puncture until its digestion is confirmed according to the full course, as we have said; for if you pierce it before this, the suffering of the poor patient is prolonged with much filthiness, and the lips of it become hardened and its depth increases.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	And here is the translation of the given line:
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you must administer a small puncture, and in large abscesses a large puncture or wide opening, or multiple incisions according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And for other types of abscesses in which the skin must be depressed and incised, when it is done this way, similar to cutting bread, and once it is done, it remains so, just as if you were making incisions into numerous swellings and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And there are those that are incised with a cut having three angles; and there are others in which it is incised in the shape of a mint leaf, such as the abscesses of the armpits.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And there are those in which a round incision and a crescent-shaped incision are administered, similar to the latter.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But for those that are not like superficial lion abscesses, you must pierce them with a superficial or flat puncture only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, you must pierce it, but do not worry about extracting all the pus at once; extract part of it, then on another day, press the abscess to bring more pus, and then extract a larger portion, repeating this multiple times gradually until it is fully drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of weak strength, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude, because the animal spirit often dissolves with the discharge of pus, and the patient dies quickly, and you operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take great care with this chapter and then your puncturing where you pierce these abscesses, you must clean the wounds and then consider whether the wound of the abscess is small or a flat section; if it is small, you should apply ointments of oil or old fat; and if the abscess is large and the cracks from the puncture are many, then you must place lint in each track until they come together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess a part of the chain is severed or you have hollowed that out in the circumference, then you must compress it with old fat or a thread made of linen cloth soaked in oil; strengthen that by the third day; and then treat it with the appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if during the time of your operation there is a flow of blood, then you should apply cold water and sweet wine to a linen cloth, and place that over the site of the bleeding multiple times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the bleeding persists, then you must administer treatment and care, and use powders which I have recommended in various places of this our book and its sections.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	And if it is during the winter season, and the location of the abscess is near sensitive nerves, then you should infuse pillows with wine and heated oil, and place those on the affected areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you must place poultices soaked with water and oil or with wine and oil, and all of this should be rubbed in until the third day, just as we have said, and then you must open the abscess, clean it thoroughly, and administer to its treatment what is appropriate for healing until it is cured.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses universally, but according to the method of distinction, I have already spoken of each abscess in which manner its cure is carried out specifically by chapters.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	From the section about abscesses which appear in the nape of the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the nape of the neck, small abscesses appear, and they are like kinds of nodes that contain tunics which are their formation; and the contents of these are particles.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from them come pus, and those contain moisture similar to lime water.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And those contain moisture similar to powder, and they resemble stones; and some of them are stony and hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, because the extraction of those does not cause any harm to the arteries.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of those is that you express them with an instrument whose form is suitable for this, which is called a probe, until you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what it contains is moisture, then you should split it by making a longitudinal incision according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begins in the section of the line of B entering into the line of G. Thus when the humidity is evacuated, then you scratch that skin which contains that humidity, and do not leave any cause behind, for gout returns if some cause remains.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then submerge a cloth in Egyptian ointment, if it is available, and if not, in salt water; and fill the wound with that and leave it inside for another day, because with this you will corrode all that is rotten from that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply the Egyptian ointment to that cloth a second and third time if necessary, until you are confident that there is no rot left from that skin; then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you should incise it in the following manner:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	using a section in the shape of a cross, and insert your fingers between the two edges of the incision and scrape it thoroughly from all sides, and apply your strength in extracting the tissue that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your initial treatment meets resistance, then do what I am about to tell you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly, treat the calcified abscess with incision and cure as I have instructed you; an incision on a calcified abscess is easier, because it has little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes some of these swellings which are on the head in some men with whom it is not entirely moisture; the cause is that I dissected over a swelling on the head of an old woman and found the swelling thus like a deaf stone, rough, white, which could not be broken, and if anyone were to hit it with that percussion, it would hurt.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other swellings or accidents on the head which are not part of this chapter, such as swellings that come to the heads of children and affect the roots of the ears, but the section of these all is a superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the perforation of those in the lower part of their body so that the discharge of the wound is alleviated in the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then treat those with whatever is appropriate for their healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the incision of scrofula which occurs in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Moisture and stagnation often cause these swellings in the neck and armpits; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck are often generated between the layers, and all scrofula of those is within its own proper membrane, just as in the knots and swellings of the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the types of these scrofula are diverse, for some are stony, some contain moisture, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in the one that you find to be of good disposition upon touching, where the color of what is apparent is similar to the color of the swelling, and it is soft throughout, and is not attached to the neck's nerves, veins, or arteries, and is not hard, you should incise that with a dry superficial cut from the upper part to the lower part of the body within the line G inside the line B, and scrape it thoroughly, and extend the two lips of the swelling with tweezers, or with several tweezers if you need them, as we have said in the swellings of the head, and extract that little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more cautious that neither the vein nor the nerves be cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that it does not injure your hand upon incision, or disturb the patient, and cut what is not necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and prohibit your operation, then apply to the wound powdered vitriol or other powders which stop blood flow, and bind up the wound, and leave within that which alleviates the acuteness of the abscess so that the wound may be softened and begin to putrefy.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is constricted or blocked.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, return to your operation before you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then examine with your index finger if there is any cause of the other small swellings, and thus cut those out and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is near the large vein of the swelling, you should not cut out that swelling from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before that, it is necessary to wrap it with a strong doubled cloth and leave it so that it falls off by itself without harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cataplasm that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then treat it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cut out that swelling entirely, then you must bring the two edges of the wound together and suture them immediately so that there is no remaining excess material.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is excess material due to the size of the swelling, you must understand how to cut out its root, remove it, and administer stitches as mentioned.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those swellings that contain moisture, pierce it with a superficial puncture where you see the site of maturation, and make an incision to drain the pus at the base of the swelling, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer punctures, using cantharides with ointment and similar things, so that it corrodes what is rotten from the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see the wound already cleaned, now you treat it with an ointment made from generative flesh until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol .xliii.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the incision of the pus pocket that has occurred in the armpit.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients described this incision in the abscess, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has performed it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those [individuals]. 
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	When dealing with men who have a propensity for hemorrhoids, it is necessary to avoid extracting the hemorrhoid, as this would not be beneficial because all of the veins and major ones of the patient are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to do this, we must incise the eyelid leaving three circles of the eyelid untouched, or four small sections across its width in that area between two circles by quantity, so that the incision is on the fat, not on the cartilage, and this location is suitable for incision because it is devoid of flesh and the blood vessels there are few.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is inexperienced, it is necessary to extend the ligament of the ankle with force, and then split the ligament until it reaches the channel, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any reason to do so.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then incise the fat as we have recommended; it is indicated over the incision of the channel by the swelling that comes from the fluid which is from the disrupted area and by the absence of sound.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the hour is unfavorable for the feared perforation, bring together the edges of the wound's ligament, and sew them with just one suture over the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that promote flesh growth within to heal it.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the essence of the speech we have recounted is that some of those abscesses have already blocked the windpipe of the patient, and the patient has come close to death, and their breath is cut off, and some proceed to incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe through the wound by some respiration and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And by this, you should leave the wound open until the wickedness of the disease is consumed; and this wickedness lasts for three days; and then after that, you should sew up the wound, and treat it until it heals.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and inserted it into her windpipe and cut a part of the trachea with it, and I was called for her treatment, and I found the sound as if it were the moaning of the dying, and upon discovering the wound, I found blood that had seeped from the small wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, I must confess that she had not cut any vein or artery, and the air came out of the wound, and she treated it until it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And it does not harm the servant if there is no hoarseness in their voice, and then within a few days they return to the improvement of their conditions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the hernia there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	The given text appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a language that seems to combine elements from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here is my translation for the provided line:
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the incision over an abscess which you encounter on the groin externally, and it is called a groin hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess called a groin hernia is a large abscess according to the body's color, and it occurs in women. 
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it happens in two ways, for it is either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, there is no need to treat it.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental occurs in two ways: one similar to fatty nodules, and the other way is similar to an abscess, which is caused by arterial obstruction, and fear is present in that case.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it is not necessary to apply pressure with iron except in the case where it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should examine it and investigate it with your finger. If you find it similar to fatty nodules and it is not suspended by any veins, then incise it as you would with nodules, and extract it using what contains the flesh and bursiclam; otherwise, thoroughly scrutinize its entire being, and then treat the area with whatever is necessary for healing until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the section of various types of nodules.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	About the different types of nodules; I have already described all their types in the division [section or chapter].
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is necessary that I recount thus the difference between a knot and a hernia as if there were doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	So I say that in a hernia there is heat and fever and intense pain until the swelling caused by the excess is calmed; and complete putrefaction occurs at which point the fever, the pain, and the heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	However, in a knot, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a hard mass which is like a lion's paw in shape.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it depends on the color of the body, and its beginning is like a seed and forms in such a way, whether larger or smaller, and there are two types: dry or fatty, containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are various, as I have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you reach the treatment of a knot, you must remove it and trace it back to its origin using a tool that is called an introitus, as its form will be described in the chapter that follows this one.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method for investigating abscesses and all kinds of knots: you take this tool and insert it into the most moist area that you find in the abscess, and you will stir the contents little by little with it until you know that the tool has penetrated the core.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then adjust your hand according to the size of the swelling, and then extract the foreign matter and consider what has been left in the wound.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current humidity, of whatever color it may be, is discharged, then you incise it with a superficial cut as I have said in other swellings.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no humidity left in the wound from the foreign matter, then you know that it is pus.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it with a cut in the shape of a cross as follows:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	do as you have been taught, and suspend it with weights, and remove the chain from all sides easily, and cover the skin or sack over it, if you can, and extract that scab with the knot.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that scab, and sometimes because of this, you must extract it in pieces to ensure nothing remains.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if any part of it remains, whether little or much, the knot will return accordingly.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that some small part remains from it, then complete the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders, and place over that which has become an abscess a cautery, and treat that with another form of cure until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if the knot is large, then sew the two edges of it together and treat that with something that promotes flesh growth.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the pulse is opposite, or non-pulsating, then cut and fill the area with a mixture that includes vitriol, leaving it for two or three days until the wound dries up and the blood swelling subsides; then return to divide what remains of the knot.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Regarding the forms of the instruments used for insertion, they come in three sizes: some are large, some are medium, and some are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large instrument is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The method of midwifery is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of introducing something small is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Here is the translation of the provided line:
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the methods of the experts, and they are called herbalists, and one of them is called a barber.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And of three species, which are grain, flour, and a little [something else].
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of great experience, form of it:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of experienced midwife, form of it:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of little experience, form of it:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It appears that this text is written in a language that blends elements from Latin and Romance languages, possibly an archaic form or a constructed medieval style. Here's the translation of the given line:
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And thus make round, thick needles, like large sewing needles with which leather is sewn together, and they are made of citrus wood, or of ivory, or of iron, or of silver, and the best ones are those made of citrus wood.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And the methods of using black feather are made, which they agree that by these means fistulas in their cavities are opened, where reflections are, and should be reflected with their light through those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And of three types, for some are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the stricture. 
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the large lead ball:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the experienced midwife with lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small lead pipe:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of wounds are of various types, for some are simple curves, which have only one curvature, and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of their hooked instruments, and they are of three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those hooked instruments having two curves, and they are of three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of them, they have three curves, and they are of three kinds.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a large simple hook, form as follows:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of a medium simple hook:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a small simple hook, form as follows:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of a large hooked instrument:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of a medium hooked instrument, form as follows:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a small hooked instrument, form as follows:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a large hook having two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape of a medium hook having two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels with which nodules and abscesses are cut and squeezed, and they come in three types: one is large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Forma de scapel gran:
Forma del scapel migier:	Forma del scapel migier:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Forma de scapel pauc:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities with which a section is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a manner, but rather to ensure that during the lancing of nodes there is no risk of incision into veins or nerves, and through this the patient is healed and finds some tranquility from the inflammation which is alleviated by the lancing of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of almagidas, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of the large magda:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of the medium magda:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of the small magda:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They should be made of brass and resemble a rod with which alcohol is made.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And at the end, it is punctured with a hidden spatula and in that area, it reaches both the internal and external parts, as you see fit.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatimis, which are hidden between the fingers during the piercing of abscesses and are not noticed by the patients, and they come in three types: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of cupping with which the flow of blood is interrupted and they come in three types: large, medium, and small; the forms are as follows:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut, e sian subtils.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary for these kinds of cups to be large, medium, and small, so that through them you can quickly remove blood when needed, and at the times when first aid is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use those to cut veins throughout the body, and only use them in fleshy areas, such as in the creases of the thighs and chest, and in the creases of the arms, and of the breasts and abdomen and knees, and similar fleshy moist creases.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes those instruments are made in other small forms similar to reeds according to this shape; by which the blood is cut off when it is done through phlebotomy or proper incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made round according to this shape:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of men's breasts that resemble those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen due to the excess of sleep as they begin to be flaccid, and then the breasts swell and resemble women's breasts, becoming moist and developing swellings.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to treat this condition, you must make incisions with a lunar section according to this shape, from line B to line G, and then extract all the swelling, and then apply a flesh-growing medication to the wound, and then suture the two edges of the wound together, and care for it until it heals.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here is the translation of the provided text line by line into English:
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of what needs to be cut due to the restlessness of the patient and blood flow, then it is necessary to fill the wound with a cloth submerged in a corrosive ointment and leave it there until it corrodes the fat that needs removal, and then treat it so that it may heal.
Capitol .xlviii.	It seems like you've provided a section heading, "Capitul .xlviii.", which translates to "Chapter XLVIII" in English. This indicates the beginning of the forty-eighth chapter within a text or manuscript. If you have more content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to share!
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	This phrase appears to be describing a medical procedure related to the treatment of abscesses. Here is a translation into English:
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These swellings that come from a kind of scrofula, which are hard and contain a kind of pus.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those that contain humors; and those that contain humors must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of .G. to the line of .B. And once everything is evacuated which is in the abscess of the pus, then you fill it with old wool and clean the inside on the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the cut should be sutured and treated with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is from the glands of the nodes and the scrophulas, then you should incise it in the same manner as we have described in the section on scrophulas.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the plague has spread to such an extent that it causes putrefaction, then apply a cautery as we have previously described.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the section of abscesses that occur due to arteries or veins.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured and the ligament that is above it becomes hardened, abscesses may occur in various places. The signs by which one knows that inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: for when the abscess is due to an artery, it extends along the course of the body; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you can feel a murmur within it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to veins appears round on the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And incision on this abscess is an error, especially in those that are near the armpits, and in the knees, and in the neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is great, therefore the treatment with iron should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities or head should be prevented.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	And if it is due to inflammation of the artery orifice, make an incision along the length of the cord; then enlarge the incision with hooks and approach the artery, and free it from the tunics so that it is uncovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place the needle and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie the artery with double thread at two places—this method is taught for the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then widen the area between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood is released and the abscess is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer treatment in which pus is generated between where the ligaments lie; and then treat it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess due to vein constriction, then you must hold as much of the abscess as possible with your hand, and then insert the needle into the area where you have held it, making sure it penetrates; and use a double thread so that you pull it out from the other side, and then tie off the abscess with a good ligature as I have told you about the grape vine ligature on both sides with the two ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then insert the wire with that needle through the entire abscess from the beginning of the first needle insertion, and secure the wires at four points.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess at its center until all that is inside has been removed; then incise the excess of the ligament and leave what remains tied.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place upon it a pillow that you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the treatment made with plasters and ointments until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capitul l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And the incision is made in the areas of the instep or the ankle, or in any area where the joints are painful.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the rest of the body, and it is located in the major regions where they are disposed, and when it tightens with vehemence, the patient appears to be in a state of stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess aggregated in the groin of the body, and thus the chain is left behind, and it spreads to all parts without moving forward or backward.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, of those that are in the joints, it is not necessary to wrap them with iron, for it will surely cause contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But those that are on the head or forehead should be treated with a spatulum (a type of instrument).
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small abscess, then take hold of it with forceps and excise it entirely.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then suspend it with an uncial (a type of hook), and drain it, and then remove it; close the wound with stitches, and care for it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Chapter II.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	From the section about the abscess that occurs in the groin area which affects the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Here is the translation of the provided text line by line into English:
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one, and in its belly were two parts that resembled mushrooms more than anything else, and there was no difference between those white, tiny structures.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already the lips of those were turned inside out and split open, and moisture was running from them all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore I cut into those [areas] and found one [stone] weighing eighteen ounces and the other about six ounces.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation for incision is that you consider whether the patient is moist, and if the color of the flesh is white, moist, with subtle veins; then you make an incision with a broad spatula, and have cautery irons ready in the fire, because small pieces of the section should be dried to expel some blood; and if the blood flows too much, cauterize that area.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is weak and fearful, guard against making an incision with iron; instead, take fresh lead plaster, and apply it to that flesh in the manner we have described; leave it there for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then apply pressure to the lead thread at the constriction; thus, do not stop applying lead until it has been severed and falls away on its own.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the vein is of large size, then there is cause for fear and terror in its incision, especially so when it is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	However, it is possible to cut through half of it, and then cauterize that area so it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then treat that inside so that the plague may be healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to presume to cut that which is of dark color, with little sensation, and poor appearance, for that is truly cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I come with a reminder about cranial issues related to this. 
Capitol .lii.	Capitol .lii.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of the treatment for an umbilical protrusion.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The prominence of the navel is caused by various reasons; either by fissures in the spine which is above the belly, and you remove the tissue or intestine according to what happens in other ruptures; or by blood flowing from a vein or artery as was previously mentioned, or by trapped air within it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is due to a fissure in the spine and the protrusion of tissue, then the color of the swelling resembles the color of the body; there is little pain, and it appears at various locations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its location differs significantly from what we have described before. When you press on it with your fingers, it becomes hidden and then returns; and it moves strongly within itself, swelling greatly each time it takes in food and there is intense labor [activity].
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is due to moisture, then there is little pain, and it does not become hidden when pressed with your hand, nor is it constricted or hardened.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to blood, then with these signs, the swelling appears with a decreasing black color.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	And if it is because of flesh that has not been treated, then it is a severe, large, and hard abscess, and it has formed according to a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is due to air (flatulence), then the touch of it is lion-like (severe or violent).
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the procedure for it is that you should consider whether the prominence around the navel is due to arterial blood, venous blood, or air (flatulence); therefore, you must abstain from treating it, for there is fear and dread as I have taught in the chapter where I discussed abscesses caused by arterial and venous blood.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence around the navel is due to the intestine or the membrane, then you must command the patient to have their belly exposed, and lie extended; then probe around the entire circumference of the navel with a tent (a type of probe); then command them to stand against your hands on their back; then encircle the area around the navel where you probed with the tent using a spatula; then extend half of the abscess upwards with a large finger; and finally, bind it around the circumference with strong linen or cloth in a proper manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then incise the middle of the abscess extended over the ligament and insert your finger into that area to locate the intestine; and if you have found or noticed it through the ligament, now you cut around it and push the intestine towards the interior parts of the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the membrane, now take it with your fingers; and cut away its excess parts.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to an artery or vein, now circle that area, and then continue with your procedure; take two needles and put strong threads into them, and insert the two needles into the circuit you have made around the abscess in a cross shape, making sure they penetrate; then hold the abscess tightly in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, remove the needles and allow the area inside to let the extended flesh pus and fall off by itself; or cut away that which is thin and can be removed, and then treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to flesh or moisture, now you must hollow out the abscess as we have said and drain the blood or moisture that you find there, and then treat it with what is appropriate so that the area consolidates.
Capitol .liii.	Capitol .liii.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the treatment of hernia.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, about the types of hernia and in what manner it is treated with medicines, and what is harmful in its treatment by iron so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have mentioned a hernia generated in the groin and precautions for its treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes a hernia can be eradicated from its location, such as a hernia in the breasts or in the thigh, and similar to members allocated for extraction of the whole, especially when it starts small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and large, one should not approach treating it, because I cannot heal such cases nor have I seen others do so, nor has it been passed down to me how to do this.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is when it is suitable as we have said, you should precede by leaving the patient and purging them of black bile several times, and then apply a poultice if a noticeable swelling is found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient with preparations in which they are placed for surgery, and then expose the area with hooks that are necessary for it; and then scoop out from all sides with a good thread to remove any remaining causes of the roots thoroughly.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not cut that lightly, and squeeze the areas, and clean the thick blood entirely with your hand or with an instrument with which it is possible for you among the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you encounter thick blood from incisions of veins or arteries, then cauterize that area until the flow of blood ceases, and then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	It appears you've provided a section marker or chapter heading that reads "Capitol .liv." This likely denotes the title or number of a chapter in a text, possibly an ancient or historical document given its style.
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the treatment of dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed, in the division, of the types of water-related dropsies, and the signs of each type, as well as the treatment with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is only the type of althitas alone, and it is not treated with iron in the case of the type of timpanists nor the type of yposarcha, for that would be fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this type of timpanist dropsy with medicines and your treatment does not help, then consider, for if the patient has already become weakened, or is suffering from another illness such as another form of dropsy, like in the lungs or abdomen and similar areas, then beware lest you treat them with iron, for there is fear regarding this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see that the patient has abundant strength, and they have no other illness except dropsy alone, and are neither a child nor an elderly person, then the method of the operation is as follows: you lift the patient with your hands, and another servant compresses their abdomen with his hand, pushing the water towards the area below the navel, and then take a spiked spatula according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from the intestines, for at that time you must with the incision move away from the navel by the length of three fingers towards the area below it, on the right side toward the pubic region.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	And if the generation of dropsy is due to disease of the liver, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel by three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then your incision should be on the right side. 
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is not necessary for your incision to be on the side on which the patient wishes to lie, so that the superfluities do not flow to that place freely.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce through the entire chain with the instrument, and then insert into that section, and lift your hand with the spatula between the chain and the siphon, and you extract it; and if it is the amount of a fingernail or around there. 
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then puncture the bladder so that the spatula reaches the empty space, which is where the water (fluid) is located.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract it and insert an instrument of which this is the form: 
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it is similar to a silver tube; it is made of silver or iron or lion leather, at the lowest part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the end of it is incised in the manner of a feather, just as you might see:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the extreme end of the pus, the most superior is the armilla, because when the instrument reaches the water, then immediately they say over the instrument, thus evacuating some amount of water, because if you evacuate more than what should in that hour, it can cause the patient to die from a resolution of their animal spirit, or lead them close to death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	More evacuation should be done according to the strength of the patient and according to what the condition of the patient, the strength of their pulse, and their overall health indicate to you.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Then remove the instrument, and hold the water that is retained by the chain which catches the tip that is on the head of it,提示：这里的翻译有一些不确定性，因为原文包含了一些不太清楚的医学术语和构造描述。以下是一种可能的解释：
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the procedure on the other day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days over time, and be careful not to make any mistakes until only a little water remains.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	And if you are concerned about the patient and leave a large quantity of water, then treat it by burying it in hot sand, induce sweating in a bath, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and treat it with drying medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize over the stomach, and the spleen and the liver before the extraction of the water, according to what I have recounted in the preceding section.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter V.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children whose urinary passages are not perforated at birth.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes, some children are born from their mother's womb with their urinary passage not perforated (or it is very narrow or not in its proper place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, it is necessary to puncture with a subtle sharp instrument as soon as it is born in this manner: 
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then insert into the wound a subtle lead clamp and tie it there, and leave it for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wishes to urinate, let him be turned and urinated; then return him to his previous position.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not hold the tube, it is possible that the urine passing over the area will not cleanse this spot.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But the one for whom the passage is narrow should be treated with a lead dilator, as we have said, for several days until it is widened.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But in those where the passage is not in its proper place, as mentioned, the cause is that for these individuals, the one who is born with the tube deviated at the end of the head of the penis, so he cannot urinate inside the parts below; until he lifts the penis with his hand to the parts above; and it does not allow generation, so that semen cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and this is a significant disease.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the method of the operation on him is that the patient should be placed face down on his back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand using a strong traction, and incise the tip of the penis at the site of the constriction with a sharp spatula, much like the cutting of a feather, or you may scrape some part so that the middle of it becomes similar to the head of the penis and the passage falls into its proper place as required.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful in your operation of blood flow, for you often encounter this; and place yourself above where you cut off the blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Capitol .lvi.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of a condition that occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis and involves corruption, blackening, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	White spots occur with this condition on the penis, and it is an elevation of soft flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	For non-malignant cases, you must suspend it with a fine thread and cut within so that the entire area is separated; then apply ointment over the wound submerged in Egyptian ointment; afterwards, treat it with diafine ointment until it heals.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the condition is malignant and of a leathery color, then you must apply a cautery near its beginning and root.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the condition is on the foreskin of the uncircumcised penis head, and one part of the condition is inside the foreskin while the other part is outside, then you must remove the part of the condition that is inside at its beginning until it is stabilized; then treat the external part, because when you treat both together with the foreskin, it is not guaranteed that it will not be torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And we have examined accidents in the genitalia and in the foreskin showing blackening and corruption; therefore, you must return to its natural state everything that has already been darkened and is beginning to corrupt or is already corrupted; then apply a dressing on this using honey, which should be mixed with flour from ground pomegranate rind and finely crushed and sieved ashes.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then treat that with another treatment until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	And if there is also bleeding, then administer a lunar cautery according to this method:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	For a beneficial cautery serves two purposes at once, that is, for bleeding and for a plague when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed, then you must insert a lead catheter into the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the case of the foreskin adhering to the head of the penis (and this adherence only occurs in those whose foreskin is tight, and circumcision is not required; and when adherence occurs due to a plague or an abscess), you must scrape with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely released.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to discern those precisely, then you must scrape with a spatula some of the cause from the head of the penis and the foreskin, and this is because the foreskin, when it is thin, is easily pierced slightly due to its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a sharp and thin instrument, which has already been moistened in cold water so that they do not adhere again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then it should be treated with styptic wine until it is healed.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVII. 
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the purification of children and the treatment of what happens to those who undergo circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution to the discontinuity like other afflictions; rather, since it is of our doing and by our will, and those for whom it is properly performed are children, it is necessary that we assign the best method and least burdensome path to health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because it was not used in their laws. This is so because we have acquired it through experience. The reason I have found most artisans and surgeons to use circumcision and purification with a scalpel and probes, and they apply bandages with honey and anointment with oil.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already examined all these methods and did not find a better purification with scissors and bandages with honey than the purification with oil. Often, this allows the foreskin to be cut more on top because the foreskin has two layers, and the lower layer remains, making it necessary to apply another ointment and causing certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And with the cleansing which is performed by alum, and is digital, of which barbers use, the incision at the end of the male member is not protected, for fear it goes inside too far.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	And in the operation with a nail, if you force it too much, you will corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the umbilical cord of the child is short by nature, and often it is born in such a way that it does not require modification, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	Regarding the modification that is done with scissors and ligature with thread, the goodness, my experiment reveals to me, is that the scissors have proportional blades, so that the sharpness on top is as precise as the sharpness below; and thus when you press your hand it brings together two proportional sharp edges, and cuts according to a comparison in one motion; and compression of the thread is done with a figure containing the entire cord of the penis from all sides, with which no error occurs at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the method of the first operation is that you should place the child in such a way, especially if it is one of those who need a little more care, that you only tie the thread on its penis just enough, and leave it that way until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	Then make the child happy in every way that is possible for you to bring joy to its understanding.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Then make the child sit between your hands properly prepared, and do not be careless; and hide the scissors in your hand or under your foot so that the child does not see them or any of the other instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into the penis and blow into the urethra, and pull it inside so that the head of the penis is erect, and then clean it from whatever filth has been added to it.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then apply the marked area with double-fold wax, and then place another small ligature below that one, and then, with your finger pressed down, indicate the site of the ligature firmly, and incise between the two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the urethra slightly and extract the head of the penis; and then let the blood flow little by little, for it is better that way; and apply powder on it and over the powder place a cloth in which hen's dung mixed with warm water and fresh rose oil has been spread; and leave that there until the next day; and treat it with care until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the scissors for modification is as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let one end of the scissors be untrimmed and blunt, while the other end be sharp, so that it does not protrude the nail's edge, and let the length of the two sharp ends be equal to the length of two equally sized handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	And the error in purification is that you must completely expel or part of the intrinsic chain through incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, you must stretch that area with your nail before the inflammation of the place and incise it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then extract that with tweezers and incise it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	And if three days have passed and the swelling under the foreskin has not subsided, then you should wait until the abscess softens, and then easily drain it, and incise it as you deem appropriate.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful of the head of the penis, for it should not be harmed by this.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore treat it with the methods that consolidate the wound using powders, which we have discussed in the section on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised too much on the scrotum and you extend to the areas above, this should not harm him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And instead, treat it with the methods we have mentioned until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction created by stones or coagulated blood, or by pus or growths, and similar to those we have mentioned regarding the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and the retention occurs due to a stone already in the neck of the bladder, then the patient must be bent over their ankles.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the patient's feet on their back and stretch out their belly above their back, and have the patient hold their breath as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Thus, the neck of the bladder is forced to expel the stone backward, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved by what we have said and the cause is strongly present in the patient, then you must administer extraction using an instrument called a syringe, which has the following form: It should be made of silver and have a thin cylindrical body, similar to a bird quill with a thickness of about one palm and a half, and it should have a fine tube at its end.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of urination extraction is as follows: take a piece of leather folded and tie it at one end with wool or thread tightly; and insert the ends of the leather into the part where the catheter should go, and cut off any excess material from the wool with scissors if necessary, but insert it forcefully into the tube. Then gently pull out the catheter with your hand and egg white.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And lay the patient on a sheet, and wash the bladder and penis with moist herbs, olive oil, and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the catheter easily so that it reaches the root of the penis; and then bend the penis upwards towards the navel; and then push the catheter further in there; and then push it until it reaches the bladder, which should be felt by the patient to have reached its destination, and if this is not done according to this order, but goes through the meat where it twists wrongly.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then extend the thread with the wool little by little, for the urine will soak the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then remove it and perform the urine treatment, using a catheter; do not stop doing this and use the catheter until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter .59.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of cathartic treatment of the bladder with clencedra and similar instruments that are appropriate for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When you encounter ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood within it, or if pus is obstructed, and you wish to instill water and medicines into it, then use an instrument called clencedra, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	And here is the translation of the provided line:
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that way three incisions are made: two from one side, thus as you wish.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning is the concave area in which something is inserted, and it is according to the quantity that obstructs it; without addition, until when any cause draws from the moisture, it is pulled out, and when expelled, it is drawn along with it, and when expelled for a long time, according to how it acts like clampcedra (a term which seems to refer to some sort of mechanism), in which naphtha is placed in the naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, if you want to extract moisture from the bladder, insert the end of a tube into the moisture, and pull with that what is pushed up to the upper parts, for the moisture is drawn into the cavity of the tube.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the end of the tube into the urethra as we have recommended in the circumcision; and then push the moisture with what you are using to push, for that moisture reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient feels it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the catheter to be used for catheterizing the bladder is as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or lead, with one end resembling a small feather, and leave a hollow canal inside.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take the bladder of an animal, and place in it the moisture you want to introduce into the bladder, and then tie both ends tightly with a double thread, and heat that moisture over fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the end of the catheter into the urethra.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then press your hand on the bladder with moisture, applying pressure downward so that the patient feels that this moisture has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	And if the bladder is not present, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; and pierce that entirely around its circumference; then insert strong wax into those holes, so that it is sealed; then attach the circle in such a way as to be attached to the applicator, so that you can place it in the moisture, oils, and waters that you want.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then attach it to the instrument and use it in the same way as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed in the division the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of each.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have mentioned the stone in which the operation is performed by hand, and incision.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is formed in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I am narrating this with clear exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Thus, it is said that stones generated in the bladder most often affect children; and one of the signs of this is that the urine excreted from the bladder resembles water in its fineness, and appears sandy; and the patient rubs his penis, and sometimes feels pain, and then it erects; and with this, you will find discharge from the rectum in many cases of these.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And bleeding is the treatment for children of that kind who have reached fourteen years; and it is a difficult cure in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	However, in younger individuals, it may be milder because they are among those who can recover more easily.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And for the one in whom the stone is larger, the cure is more difficult; and if it is small, it is contrary to that [difficulty].
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Thus, as we come to the treatment of this condition, we must begin by cleansing the patient with clysters which extract all the sediment that is in their intestines; for that sediment often prevents the discovery of the stone during examination.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then the patient is lifted by their feet and shaken and jolted gently so that the stone descends into the neck of the bladder, or jumps from place to place a few times.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then place that poultice between your hands prepared, and the patient's hands should hold onto their own body parts, so that the entire bladder is made to slope downwards towards the lower parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then wash that area and clean it all outside.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then you should immediately operate on it with an incision.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not remove it entirely with your touch, then you must anoint your left index finger with oil, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if they are a mature adult, and insert that into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And wash the stone inside while your finger remains there.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gently guide that [stone] little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on that area with your finger, and expel it towards the outer parts away from the site of the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the attendant to press the bladder with their hand; and command another attendant to extend the testicles upwards with their right hand, and with their other hand hold the cord that is below the testicles, at the site where the incision is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a spatula of the following shape:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And then divide that which is between the anus and the testicles, not in the middle but closer to the left thigh; and make the incision on that stone with your finger inside the anus, and let the incision be transverse so that the outer part of the cut is wide and the inner part narrow according to how much the stone protrudes as possible, and no more, because you will compress with your finger in the anus to facilitate the expulsion of the stone through the incision.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that some stones have angles and edges, which makes their expulsion difficult because of this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that, it appears like a grain, and is round, and is made of its light secretion.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is that which belongs to the ankles and margins, adjust in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not a case of fistula, then you must either apply something over it, or stretch over it with a suitable device, the end of which should be like a file used to scrape against stone, and do not let it slip off; or insert into it an instrument with a subtle curved end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	And if you cannot do that, then widen the passage a little, and if you see blood flow, cut into it with ground vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if there is more than one stone, then at the beginning you should press your hand to the opening of the bladder, and then incise over it; and then gently push a little towards it; and similarly do this if there are more than two fragments.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then it is ignorance to incise it with a large cut, for you cause one of two things to happen to the patient: either they die or they end up with continuous urinary incontinence, because the area does not fully heal.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer the expulsion of what is embedded inside, or use tweezers to extract it in pieces from the fracture.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, once you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with pieces of aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it thus.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and warm water, so that the swelling may be alleviated.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then recline the patient on their back, and do not remove the bandage within the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have removed it, wash the area with warm water and oil, then treat it with fine honey ointment and basil ointment until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the wound there occurs swelling that is painful and corrosive, and it appears as if the blood is congealed in the bladder, thereby preventing urination (which is known by the discharge of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if left, it will cause corruption and putrefaction of the bladder.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the wound with sweet wine, water, and salt, and treat it oppositely to all kinds of infections, using what is appropriate for its healing until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And throughout the entire duration of the treatment, you must spread both the thighs and apply the medicines that are placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and is in the flesh of the penis, and it has embedded itself within, and urination is obstructed, then treat this condition with what I recommend before resorting to surgery, for many times it is said that this treatment accuses one of practicing surgery; and already I have expressed this, which is that you take an iron awl, of which this is the form:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	with a triangular outer end, sharp, inserted into wood.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take honey, and apply it with that to the penis after the stone for so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the tool into the urethra, penetrating easily until the perforator reaches that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the perforator with your hand on that small stone little by little, and you pierce the perforation so that the one from the other side can penetrate; for the urine is immediately released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on that which is the broken stone outside of the urethra, for that is constricted, and it is rinsed with urine, and the patient is healed. 
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	And if this treatment is not prepared for you due to some cause which prevents you from using that method, then apply a poultice underneath the stone, and another poultice on top of the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then incise over the stone in that area between two ligaments.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract that [stone].
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then loosen the ligament and modify the clotted blood that has formed in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to ligate the thread under the stone, except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other ligature above, because when the thread near the protrusion of the stone is loosened, the tube returns to its place and closes the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason, when you ligate the thread above, it is necessary that you lift the tube to the parts above, or return its fullness, and close the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are rarely formed.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if a stone does appear in any of them, then the cure for it is difficult and is prohibited by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that when the woman forcefully moves her legs apart, she remains intact (or virgin).
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman truly knowledgeable who would confess to the doctor when she is chaste, or if she is one of the women having husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you do not find any woman well-versed in this art, especially in this operation by hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the site of the incision above the stone in women is distant from the location of the stone itself, thus requiring a more extensive incision, and there lies the danger.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	And if necessity compels you to do this, then you must take a female doctor who is well knowledgeable, though she is rarely found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that, then seek someone who is quite skilled and subtle, or present a knowledgeable woman experienced in women's affairs, or a woman who has a good understanding of this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, have that person present and command them to do everything you instruct, starting with the examination of the stone; this is done to check if the woman is a virgin, then they must insert their finger into her hymen and feel the stone. 
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, when you find it, press on that spot with your finger, and then command him to urinate on that spot.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	And if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the patient’s vagina and feel around for the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and compress it firmly.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, when you find it, then it must be gradually pulled from the opening of the bladder to those parts with the help of its strength until it reaches the root of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then incise over that spot in the middle of the thigh where you find the vein of the thigh from whichever side it comes to a stop and press the stone at that point, and his speech should not be hindered by pressing the stone as described.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that incision, and if you feel the stone, now enlarge the incision according to the amount by which you know the stone will come out.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that there are different kinds of stones: some are small and large, some are sharp and rough, some are long and round, and some have ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you should know the various types of it so that you can understand what you are dealing with. 
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see blood flow, apply powdered vitriol to the area and leave it there for an hour until the bleeding is stopped, and then resume your operation once the stone has been expelled.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And have you prepare with you the instruments which are used in the extraction of stones from men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see a flow of blood and know that the bleeding comes from the artery that has been cut, then apply powder to the area and press it with cushions and tight bandages, and do not repeat this; leave the stone and do not remove it, for the patient will likely die otherwise.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the sharpness of the blood has subsided over several days and the area has dried, then return to your operation before the stone is completely embedded.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the section for treating a hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	An inguinal hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane that lies beneath the spermatic cord containing the tube, and this membrane is called the tunica.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And at times it is in the proper panniculus which nature prepares in the part of the egg, between what has been cooked and which is already another egg; and it is the chain of the genetic material between the white substance that we have mentioned, and this is nothing but sperm.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the groin area, because this material is infused into those areas, and sometimes it occurs due to percussion made on the groins.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity has various colors, for the color of it may incline to yellow or bloody, or red, or be black and feculent, or be clear white, and that is what exists.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known where this water accumulation is as follows: for if it is in the white cippus that we have mentioned, then the swelling is round, declining slightly along its length like an egg shape, and the genus appears, for the moisture contains all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the actual subcutaneous fat, then the abscess becomes round with parts of an egg, and for this reason it is thought to be another egg.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the chain of the genitalia and the white rump, then apply the lotion.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the humidity, then you scrape the color of the humidity in the abscess with a probe whose shape is described beforehand; and according to what is left on the probe, judge of what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	When we come to the treatment with iron, then it is necessary to command the patient to be in a squatting position if that is possible for you, and turn the body of the patient completely. 
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then lay them down on their back on some support slightly raised, and place a soft cloth underneath.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then sit on the left side of him, and command the assistant to stand on his right side, who should stretch out their arm from one of two sides towards the groin area and the part near the navel.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a broad spatula and split the groin along the middle length towards the perineum.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the incision straight and equally distant from the line where you should cut the skin of the groin, until it reaches the white membrane encompassing [the area].
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And stretch that area, observe it, and be careful not to penetrate it; and the stretching you perform should leave it suspended, and you should probe it subtly with the stretching according to what is possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the fluid-filled membrane with a wide incision and extract all the fluid.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate the two lips of the incision with hooks, and extend the sphincter to the parts above; and do not touch the chain that contains the genitalia, and incise the sphincter in whatever manner is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And cut that [part] entirely or in pieces, especially its fine layer, for if you do not examine the incision meticulously, there is no guarantee that the fluid will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	However, if during the operation you process it from outside its chain, then when you have completed the incision of the sphincter, return it inside, and then sew together the two lips of the genitalia's chain, and then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the hernia corrupted by another disease, then you must tie off the vessels that are near the suspensory ligament, remove the hernia, and then treat it as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	However, if the fluid is gathered in two separate parts, then you should know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part equally as you have done in the other one; and if it appears to you that an operation is necessary, then perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you clean the blood, and insert into the incisions wool submerged in oil or oiled wool; and place on top other wool that you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread that over both groins and the navel of the abdomen; and place above folded cloths and pillows, and tie those above with a bandage which is according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then two cloths are taken and filled with padded wool according to this shape; and the ends are made with which pressure is applied with a pad or damp wool, and they are attached with ties in the waistband of the breeches; one end goes between the buttocks, and the second at the crotch seam; and two ends over each thigh and two other ends over each knee, and all ties should be adjusted in the waistband of the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of surgery with a knife; and you should take a subtle scalpel-cautery and incise the chain of the groins with it, and ignite it as we have recommended between the time when the white flesh containing the fluid is exposed, and then you apply the cautery according to this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it is similar to Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce with that awl, and heat it so that all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the awl with forceps, and squeeze with forceps, and gently cauterize with a heated cautery; and cut as much of it as you possibly can until you remove all of it; and be careful of the area so that the fire does not touch it.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and results in less blood flow, and is better than an operation with incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if during the incision or cautery process, an abscess forms, or there is bleeding, then you must treat whichever complication arises from it, with the appropriate treatment as described.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is weak and does not endure a second operation due to its horror, then administer puncture as I recommend here; and it is when you are certain, based on what we have said about the signs, that the hernia is acute.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then you must have the patient sit on some elevated stool, then pierce the abscess at its lowest part with a blunt spatula, and maintain the puncture according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let there be a wide opening through which all the water can flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place your hand over the swollen area and press it, letting it release so that the remaining water can flow out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then treat it until the plague is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if there is an obstruction to the discharge of water at that time, you must pierce it: this is done only when the white membrane in the orifice of the wound causes an obstacle and prevents the flow of water. At this point, you should introduce into the wound a probe or instrument with which the water from dropsy can be extracted, the form of which has been previously described; or apply a small device to the compression of the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns and accumulates again after about six months or around that time; and when it accumulates again, it should be pierced according to the same method, so that the patient may thus spend their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On the sectioning of a fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the section regarding this hernia, there is fear of causing fatal harm during major procedures; therefore, in my view, it is better to dismiss the operation and save the patient by choosing the safer option.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I am recalling the operation in that case and the specifics of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that abscesses arise in bodies where the veins are involved, and this happens for various reasons: either due to an excess of sharp and bitter fluids that are poured into the veins, or by percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not accompanied by pain, and it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And often the abscess is hardened (lapidified), of which the color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by the coagulation of the arteries and the inflammation of those, as is already perceived in the recollection of it, or by the inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which is caused by the inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it should not be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which is caused by the inflammation of veins does not disperse when pressed with your fingers for any reason.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that a section may be made on this type and on the other flesh; and you should incise the chain of the testicles, then stretch the scrotum upwards, extract what is inside the white bag, release the suspensory ligament of the vessels, tie them up, and then incise the suspensory ligament after you have freed it completely from all parts of the scrotum.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	And if the scrotum is already consolidated with those fleshy parts, then you must extract the scrotum and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion due to any cause within the white bag, or between the vessels, then you must release all of that adhesion and incise it with a circular incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is a growth of flesh in the area of the adhesion that is behind, then you must incise all of that which belongs to it and extract the scrotum as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, once your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool infused in oiled and fermented wine; then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Capitol .lxiv.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	For the given line:
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Vit is an abscess enclosed by some kind of membrane resembling a boil with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult any physical exercise or walking for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this disease, there is fear due to the memory of what preceded it.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, one must speak of the operation that is performed first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And it is said that you must make the patient sit on an elevated chair; then pull down the sac containing the testicles; then take hold of the spermatic cords with your fingers using the tips that are proven to be effective on the penis; and have another assistant help you, and stretch them forcefully.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then make an incision with a sharp spatula across the spermatic cords where the vessels are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	Then squeeze from all sides as we have described in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	Then insert a needle with double thread into those areas, and tie one end of the thread at the front where you made the incision for the abscess, and tie the other end at the back.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then incise those in the middle of the area with a straight cut according to the length of the body, and extract what has accumulated from the foul and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then treat the wound with a method used for other wounds where you want pus to be generated so that it cleans out vessels which will allow one of two humors to drain, for it is not harmful by doing so.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if you accidentally cut all the vessels, then it is necessary that the testicles be extracted or that they wither along with the vessels, because they will be deprived of all nourishment due to the severing of the vessels, and they should be removed or allowed to wither so that they do not cause further harm.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter .65. 
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Regarding the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The appearance of this hernia is due to a section that descends from the spine extending over the abdomen from the groin area of the belly button, so descending intestines from that rupture lead to some of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the spleen or due to exertion by him, and these two types occur for various reasons: by impact, by jumping, by shouting, by lifting something heavy, or by similar causes.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this condition, when it is due to consumption (or tuberculosis), is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time and does not happen suddenly; it is an inflammation similar to one within which the phlegm compresses the intestines.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when there is a sectioning of the abdomen, for at the beginning it causes a sudden and intense pain; and it presents itself as an abscess different from the usual appearance of hernias, and this is due to the protrusion of the intestine, and its body appears outside the abdomen.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the intestine pushes through the membrane, and this kind of intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is caused by gas, and sometimes the intestine splits open, and here it gets trapped, causing great discomfort to the patient, and sometimes it leads to severe and more intense pain when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of this kind of illness with iron, there is fear, for which reason it must be avoided in that case.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of the operation for this is that you command the patient to push the intestine back into its cavity with their hand; if it obeys and returns, then have them lie on their back between your hands, and lift their chest.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then hold the cord which is the spermatic cord above it, and cut through the entire length of the spermatic cord; then insert two hooks into the edges of the incision according to what is needed to open the incision with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is according to the quantity that you are able to extract from it so that the pus may be thoroughly removed.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then push out that swelling which is left under the skin of the scrotum, until the hard white core of each part is revealed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And when you insert your finger into the area where the testicle is, between the white core that is under the skin of the scrotum and the second layer, release the adhesion that is in the part behind the scrotum.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Then use your hand to pull the scrotum outward, and with this action stretch the white layer upwards with your left hand, and lift the scrotum with the layer at the site of the incision; and command the assistant to stretch the scrotum upward while you release the adhesion behind it completely.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And use your fingers to ensure that there is no cause for the intestine being wrapped in the hard white layer.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause for it, then push that part into the abdomen below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle with a thick thread made of seven threads, and insert it through the back of the white layer, which is under the scrotum skin where the incision is; then cut the ends that protrude from the thread until they are four threads long, and arrange some of them in a cross shape; and tie together the white layer we mentioned, which is under the scrotal skin, with strong knots on both sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the extremities of the veins and bind them tightly with a strong ligature, so that none of the vessels that nourish those areas can pass any cause by which an abscess might occur here.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And again bind with another ligature according to the first ligature, about three fingers away; then between these two ligatures leave from the scrotum, where the testicles' cord is located, a length equal to that of a finger, and cut all the remaining part in a circular manner, and remove the egg.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then make an incision at the site below the cord of the testicles, through which blood and pus will flow, as we have mentioned in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound; and administer the bandage that we have mentioned (and sometimes the scrotum is cauterized, which we have discussed near the incision to prevent blood flow, as this often occurs), and leave the bandage until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the treatment is delayed, then warm water should be poured over it, and place that on it until it falls off as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound with another method for treating wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	It seems like you've provided a chapter or section heading that appears to be ".lxvi." This Roman numeral translates to 66 in Arabic numerals. Therefore, if this were part of a text, it could be translated as:
De hernia ventosa.	Of gaseous hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this type of hernia, no one has been bold enough to attempt its cure with iron (surgery).
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first method they described is done as we have recounted in the hernia treated with wine; which is that you tie the vessels near the section where it can be done easily; and then dry in the middle area around the abscess using something that opens it, allowing the vessels to fall inside.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the plague as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter .67.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the dislocation that occurs in the ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes there is also a rupture in the ankles as we have said, and you should examine the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not attribute any cause of the hernias to the groin; and if you do, it is minimal; and it returns at all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	And if this continues for a long time, a precise incision is made on the spine where the intestine descends into the spine; and this happens due to the extension of the spine which occurs in the armpit area as we have said, the cause being that the spine is stretched, then it softens, and the area becomes inflamed and protrudes.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of it is with cautery, as was mentioned earlier in the description of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is treated with iron according to this method: the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then the area of the rupture that has become inflamed is dried through sectioning across its width according to the amount of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white spine that is below the shoulder blade until it is exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the spatula and place it over the protruding area of the spine, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then puncture the two protruding areas at the ends of the spine extension, and join them together with a suture.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the extremity of the wound, and do not incise the entire circumference, nor extend the hole, nor cause any other harm as I will teach you in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then treat that with the treatment of wounds, and when you incise the abscesses, cleanse that area and restore the wound before it becomes consolidated; for the circumference is contracted and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this area, for it is more conducive to healing.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the spermatic cord.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Often the spermatic cord is softened in some men because the flesh around it is softened, and this is attributed to its care.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is skilled in its treatment to make the patient lie on their back, and incise the entire softened cord over the natural cord; then sew the two edges together with sutures.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, at the beginning, soften the excess of the loosened chain with three or four boils and with a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then cut between the sutures; and then treat for the healing of other wounds until it is healed and the pus has drained.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	From the context provided by the previous sentences and given that this is likely an ancient medical text, "De castracio" can be translated as:
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that according to our law, castration is excommunicated, but for a reason it has been deemed lawful for me to remind you of this in this book; and the reminder of this is not necessary except in two ways: one way is so that doctors may know when asked about it what the treatment should be for those to whom it happens; and the other way is that we often need castration of other animals for our benefit from them, such as horses, bulls, pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And thus I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by attrition or by incision and severing.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in the one that is done by attrition, the method of the operation is to have the animal immersed in hot water until its testicles are softened and become loose and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then take them with your hand while they are still resolved and do not appear to the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration performed by incision and severing, you must hold the animal and press the cord of its testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then apply the suspensory, and make an incision on each bone with a cut between two joints.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then incise that pus which you have squeezed out.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any other cause on the hip except for the subtle hip condition that affects the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better, which is performed by atrophy, because atrophy leaves no cause from the testicles for the animal to desire mating.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then treat the plague until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in males occurs in two ways: one is when it appears in the space along the scrotum, between the two testicles, where a female genitalia-like figure appears, complete with hair.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes urine flows from that area in the scrotum where the testicles are.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In females, it is a different case: the female genitalia above the pubis resembles two male testicles slightly to the right side, similar to the foreskin of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three types: two for men and one type for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is necessary that you incise those tight muscles so that the swelling of that area can escape, and then treat them with the cure for other ailments.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second type for men, where you find urine that is in the area of the scrotum, there is neither cure nor operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On swelling and protruding flesh caused by conditions in women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Severe swelling often occurs naturally, compressing and causing attention to be drawn to it; and sometimes it is exaggerated in some women to such an extent that it spreads similarly as in men and can even affect intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then it is necessary that you remove the excess swelling with your hand or with scissors by incising it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not hesitate to incise, especially in the area of the genital region, so that it does not cause a flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then treat that with the treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	New-born flesh is flesh that grows in the wounds of the mother until it fills them, and it protrudes from the outer parts resembling a tail (and for this reason some early doctors called it “tail disease”); therefore, we must incise it as we would lentils, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII. 
De curacio de alratica.	For the treatment of arthritis.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	And accidental is due to illness that has preceded it, and that which is caused either by improperly fitted flesh or by subtle or thick phlegm.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is caused either in the anterior part of the thigh, or on its sides, or on its upper surface, or on its lower surface, and you should prohibit bathing, pregnancy, and childbirth, and especially forbid menstruation. 
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is obtained by examining the uterus, if the obstruction is visible, proceed accordingly; but if it is not visible, then you seek that with your fingers or with a probe.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If obstruction is due to a fine particle and it is close to both lips, then you should probe and disrupt that area.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you should place pillows under both thighs, and then place your index fingers of both hands inside.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should lie on her back, with her thighs spread apart, and then separate the two lips forcefully so that that subtle barrier is broken and the obstruction is opened. 
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and soak it in oil and place that over the area, and guard it well for a day so that the incised area does not become hardened.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	And if the swelling is large and thick, then you must incise it with a broad spatula or with a myrtle leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to flesh, then suspend that with a hook, and incise it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use the medicines that stop blood flow from bites, such as hawthorn, dragon's blood, and enses, mixed with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide lead tube so that the affected area does not become slightly hardened.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep it for several days and administer a dry cataplasm.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then it should be treated with another consolidating treatment until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes it happens in the native growth of other flesh, and then you must incise it according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If this is due to a chronic abscess, do not use iron in any way on the chronic abscess that is in the breast.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Capitol .lxxiii.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	For the given sentence:
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the types of those and the signs of those, and to say thus those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and tumors when they are inside the main channel and do not appear to the senses, in those cases surgery should not be performed with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those which are in the openings of the mother on which one feels pain, are those that are treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is necessary that you put the woman in cold water and then extend the labia with scissors or with coarse cloth, and cut them with knives.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle over those areas the flow of blood from one of the non-adhesive powders such as myrtle and similar to these.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then foment the patient's feet for an hour, and then place them in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then have her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate peels, and walnuts, and similar items.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of oats, mix it with honey and sweet wine, and make a plaster with this mixture to apply on his back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is congealed, it is good; otherwise, apply two cupping glasses and perform scarification on the nipples.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and soak it in the juice of coriander or in the juice of angelica or in the juice of plantain mixed with fermented wine, and apply it to the area; then dress the area with ointments until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	Take care to observe the following with strict attention: you should inscribe what appears to you of that second thing I have mentioned in a similar manner. 
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that which is within so that it may be healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	It seems like you've provided a section indicator, likely from an old text or manuscript, specifically "Capitul .lxxiv." which translates to "Chapter 74" in English. Without additional content following this indicator, there isn't more context for translation or explanation. If you have more text from this chapter that needs translating or explaining, please provide it!
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	This phrase appears to be in an old form of a Romance language, likely related to medieval medical texts. Here is the translation into English:
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Particles of various types of abscesses can occur in the breast, such as cancer and stone-like abscesses, ulcers, boils, snake-like eruptions, hemorrhoids, rashes, and other kinds of abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already described these diseases and their types and the signs of them, and their cures in this section.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And I must say in this treatise about the abscess that occurs in the breast when it is one of those abscesses that discharge pus, and if you want to know how the operation on it is performed with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then you must consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion and flux and fever, and sometimes there is redness and if you press on it, then do not treat it with puncturing it, and cure it with something that aids in its maturation until the acuteness of the symptoms subsides.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And now you must have the woman sit on a chair that has two supports; and recline her on her back and adjust her feet towards the part below the abdomen, and spread her thighs apart, and place her arms under her head, and bind them with a suitable bandage.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife follows along the right side and administers the instrument with which the opening of the mother is cut, the form of which will come in those cases that will be addressed later.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this instrument, you must place it gently at the entrance of the woman's vagina, and the part of the instrument that enters the mother should not be longer than the entrance of the vagina and should guide the patient. 
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the opening of the mother (perhaps referring to a womb or an organ), then you must place pillows on the texture of the opening of the "mother" so that it prevents any instrument from entering the opening of the "mother.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And it is necessary that you stop the flow of liquid running in the upper instrument and that the assistant hold the instrument and rotate the flow inside until the opening of the main area is opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when pus appears, and it is touched with the hand and feels warm and moist, then you must dry that area by cauterizing its head with a spatula.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus is evacuated, then you must place on the wound a cloth soaked in rose oil or ordinary oil which has some astringency; and apply a bandage to the incision in the direction of the main artery.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place outside the wound and over the penis clean wool submerged in water in which mallows have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be treated for about two days with an ointment which you should apply until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the wound and the affected area are washed with water and honey, then with water in which the root of iris or longwort has been boiled, and then return to using the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is inside a swollen area of the wound, then you must abstain from treating it with iron, instead cure it using what we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach the midwives how to treat unhealthy embryos when they appear according to an unnatural form.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife recognize at the beginning the natural form of childbirth by its signs, and this is when you see the woman expressing the parts and desiring to smell the air, and because of this, she is stimulated by what is about to happen during childbirth, and hastens the expulsion of the embryo. At this point, you know that this birth follows the natural form, with the expulsion occurring head first, and the second stage with the body either suspended or hanging from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore when you see those signs, then it is necessary to compress the patient's belly so that the embryo descends easily because when they descend with their head first, tell them the second stage has begun, and clean away those excesses with a good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	However, what is different in this part is not-natural and not-praiseworthy, because when the embryo sits on its feet and its body is positioned with its head and feet forward, or one of its hands, or its foot, or its head and hand, or its stomach, and it quickly turns around its neck, and resembling figures that are not praiseworthy. 
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	When there is a necessary cause, it is essential for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those matters, and that she guards against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I am showing all the figures of those [diseases or conditions], and what kind of nature is in them so that it may be understood by this and stand upon this.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fever is placed on his head due to natural exertion, and it is strong upon the woman and happens in a difficult part, and sometimes the strength of the man is already weakened, then make her sit, or let women have him, and evaporate his seed with fenugreek juice and with moist oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the midwife between the small of their back and split it with that second tool, or scrape that area with her nail until you remove what is inside of it in terms of moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	And if it does not descend, then the woman should be given a mixture of psyllium mucilage and fenugreek mucilage.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Then command the patient to be pressed and induce sneezing with condiments; hold their mouth and nose for about an hour, as the fetus will come out soon. 
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both thighs of the patient are dislocated at the beginning, then you must reduce them with ease little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if the instrument does not work, then place the woman on a chair and lift her feet up, and then bring the chair down to the ground; and the woman must be held so that she does not fall from the jolt.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not turned inward and the fetus dies, then cut those [hands] and extract the dead fetus or tie the body of the fetus to its hand with a cloth and pull it out carefully, for that will come out more easily.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Regarding the descent of the embryo to its legs.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is on its legs, then you must push those up, and then turn the fetus around, and then align it properly, and then take one of its feet and stretch them little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But once it has entered the thighs, then you command them to squeeze, and cause that [area] to expel with pressure, for it will come out more easily if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it does not come out easily with what we have recommended, then you return the fetus little by little until you place it in its second natural position, for it will now come out more easily with gentle descent.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if all that we have recommended is prohibited, then take crushed alum and dissolved gum, and pound it well in the mortar, and then line with this mixture the neck of the woman, at the lowest part of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that incision in tepid water, between where the hypochondria are. 
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when you see that the parts of the patient are inflamed, then perform the fumigation with myrtle and keep that under control for the patient.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have the sub-fumigation for an hour, then make her sit on a chair, and then induce sneezing and open her mouth wide, and lift her up from that position, and press the lower part of her abdomen with gentle compression, because the matter will soon be expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus will come out in this manner, then you carefully insert your hands little by little; and then the woman should be laid on her side, with her feet hanging down, and those [people] should be sitting nearby, and hold their hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press on the abdomen of the patient gradually, and then extract what remains from their feet between the ears where it is prepared in the lower part below. 
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the wind has not passed, then take their feet and move them vigorously, and then press what is above the hypochondriac regions little by little until the wind rises to the upper parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert your fingers and gently widen the wound little by little, and command the woman to push so that the wound is fully dilated.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Insert a finger longitudinally while holding one of your fingers in place.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Try to reduce the swelling with your hand, but if you cannot do that, then lift the woman and let it move. 
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if walking is not possible, then lay them on the ground, and violently shake their thighs with a concussion, and then administer ointments that are made from mucilaginous substances.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the childbirth has occurred, then have her sit on a chair, and then focus on reducing the swelling, aligning the part according to its natural form, and make the woman sneeze and command her to compress herself internally until she is exhausted. 
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	And here is the translation of the given line:
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	It is necessary that the midwife hold the hand of the infant and then gently turn it little by little, so that it comes out easily.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is mixed and well combined, then apply on the nose what we have recommended of oil and poultices.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command him to moan little by little, and when you have done that, then place that poultice on a tile and order her to lean over the right side, and then command him to be compressed; and make that person sneeze with conditions.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The exit of the prepared fetus over the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When they say to deal with the worst of this manner, consider, and then you incise the second finger with your nail until the moisture is evacuated.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the patient is suspended by their face and neck, then you incise the area around the larynx so that it is not constricted and the patient does not die. 
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then push the fetus towards the internal parts where you need to place it, and instruct the woman to compress herself several times, and it will be expelled with a light emission, if God so wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The outcome of twin births or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four are born, though this is rare and seldom happens; but their causes are natural, not alive. 
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And counting those, even if they are multiplied, a second time, and separated by ciphac, they distinguish themselves within the ligament in the navel of each of these; and sometimes they are expelled as if it were done by a light natural emission, and sometimes they exit due to an unhealthy expulsion as we have recounted.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if there are difficulties in childbirth and it leads to what we have said about unnatural presentations, then you should treat those cases as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and does this with ease and subtlety, and with caution, and is inventive according to every figure according to how it is prepared by the incoming genius leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and [are] aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Here is the translation line by line:
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all of this must be in the knowledge of the midwife who closely observes that slight resemblance of this condition, and therefore applies herself to it with what is necessary.
Capitol .lxxvi.	The text appears to be in an old Romance language that shares features with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Given the context of a medieval medical treatise, here's how you might translate the provided line:
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	From the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat a dead fetus as we have described in the section on medication and it has not yet descended, and you must use manual operation, then you should consider whether the woman is of sound health and not subject to any of the conditions that could cause her harm.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then the woman should be placed on her back on the bed, with her head lowered slightly and her thighs raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister should hold her at two points or tie her to the bed so that her body does not move during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then you should moisten the mouth of the womb with oily substances and with a poultice of alum, fenugreek, and its own seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and poultices, and then easily insert her hand into the womb, and then search with her hand for the place where she can grasp the fetus with her fingers.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And here is the translation of the given sentence:
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	And if the pain is in the feet of the patient, then it occurs in the ankles, or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it is necessary to hold the instrument with the right hand, and place its curvature in that spot which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand with ease so as to place the instrument in one of those areas we have mentioned, until reaching the swollen cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and keep another person in the appropriate position next to him, or a third if necessary, so that the traction is equal, and not just extended according to its straightness alone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And it should be massaged all over, so that the extraction of it is eased just as is done in dental procedures for the removal of it.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And it is necessary to apply something between the parts so that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then it must be that the midwife anoints some of her fingers with oil and skillfully inserts them and rotates those parts that are retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if a part of the fetus is obstructed, then the traction should be changed to the one that is more effective; and do this until the entire fetus is delivered.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if one hand is extended before the other and it is not possible to reduce it due to the constriction of it, then a cloth should be wrapped around that hand; and then extract it until all of it is delivered, and incise it either at the joint of the hand or at the wrist.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And thus you must do the same on the other hand and on both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And if the head of the abscess is large, or you encounter constriction during expression, or if water is tightly held in the head, then you must insert between the fingers and split the head to drain the water, or you should scoop it out with an instrument named “alundat,” the form of which will come with the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly, if the abscess has a large head by nature, then you must incise it with a lancet, or take it out with an alundat as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head has emerged but is constricted by the forked area, then it should be cut open to allow the moisture inside the feet to be released.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated and does not require expression, then you should incise the head as soon as it is possible for you to do so.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the lower part of the abdomen is affected by an abscess or is dropsical, then you must perforate it to allow the moisture inside to be drained.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	And if the procedure is on their feet, then the attraction of it is slight and the direction of it to the mouth of the vein is slight.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	And if the belly and foot are constricted, then you must extract that with cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and cut open the belly and foot so that what is inside may flow out. 
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	Here is the translation line by line:
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the womb is constricted by an abscess that affects the uterus, then it should not be disturbed; before anything else, you must administer an infusion of moist and fatty substances.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer plasters; and follow up by bathing the patient in waters that soften and moisturize.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the procedure is on the patient's side, then if possible, it should be punctured; and administer what we have mentioned in the fresh wound.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if this is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And it is necessary that you do not leave any cause inside the second layer.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all of your operation, then administer what we have said about the treatment on the abscesses that may occur from the procedure.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if bleeding occurs, then bathe in styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen a woman whose fetus in the womb had died, and then she became pregnant again, and afterwards another fetus also died.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to him after a long time that an abscess formed in his groin; and it swelled inside, and he began to discharge pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to his care, and treated him for a long time, but the plague did not subside.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I placed on him several strong adhesive plasters, and extracted a bone from him, and after passing some days, I extracted another bone; and I was greatly amazed, for there were no bones in his abdomen.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	Then I thought that they were the bones of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I treated the plague, and extracted many bones from him; the woman existed in various dispositions within her, and lived in such a way for a long time, cured of a small part of her arm. 
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I do not wish to be strange, but rather that in this there is knowledge and assistance for the physician who administers treatment with their hands.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of an instrument with which the uterus is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a device with which the ligaments are joined, to which joining there are two hooks at the two ends of two handles.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this hook must be finer than the forceps and can be made of iron or wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each handle should be two fingers, and the margin of each should be about one finger, while the length of each is one and a half palms; in the middle of the two handles, there are two joints made from the same material, which are already fixed, each being about half a palm long plus a little more, and the width of each is two fingers or slightly more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additives should be inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is opened with them when you rotate the two prescribed instruments.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But however, at the end of his two extensions similarly as before, and the length of those extensions is each one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the uterus with those methods, then you make the woman lie down on the bed with her feet hanging off, and you open what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the instrument just as you would with scissors, cutting according to the amount you desire of the measurement of the mouth of the mother between which the midwife does what she wants.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of dizziness which the ancients said:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran  
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps which have teeth at the end, like pincers, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, like pincers, which have teeth like those of a saw with which it is cut and scraped.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	It seems the text you provided is in an old or constructed language that combines elements from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The sentence "Forma de amesidat pauc:" does not have a direct translation without more context about specific terms like "amesidat" and "pauc". However, based on recognizable parts of the languages mentioned, I can attempt a general interpretation:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Forma de unci havent una spina:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Forma de unci havent doas spinas:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps with which teeth are closed in such a way that the head of the fetus is compressed:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Forma de dos espatums latz:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you should not use those instruments at all, for the necessity of them is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the extraction of the stone (likely referring to the bladder or kidney stone).
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second stage of childbirth is delayed, then you must command the patient to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze with stimulation, and press your hand over her mouth and nose, and if by this the expulsion occurs, it is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then you take a bowl and pierce the cover with a hole and place herbs over the mouth of the mother, such as calamint, rue, dill, chamomile, Arabian sagapenum, and cinnamon bark.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in a pot, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a reed tube in the mouth of the mother, and keep it there until the vapor reaches the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make that person sneeze as we have said, and the second one will be expelled quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If this treatment remains and is not expelled, then you command the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or in an alum decoction, and then introduce that into the vagina and search with it for the second part, and once you have found it, then take it out little by little. But if it is attached to the placenta, then introduce your hand as we have recounted, and when you have found the second part, extract it bit by bit according to prescription so that the mother does not suffer a strong attraction (likely meaning "strong pull" or severe strain).
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before anything else, it must be moved to the right and left sides with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then it should be adjusted in the amount of traction, for it will obey and withdraw from adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the opening of the mother is constricted, we have already recommended the treatment with sneezing and with a medication made from herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not expelled by all the methods we have recommended, then be careful not to exhaust her with repeated attempts at extraction. Instead, what has been expelled from him into the mother’s opening should be brought to the woman's thigh, and then treat it with unguents and tetrapharmacum; for this will cause it to rot within a few days and dissolve, thus being expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	And when you pour, elevate the patient's head and stomach, which leads to illness; then it is necessary that suitable fumigations be administered for this purpose.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the Ancients already recommended sub-fumigation with juniper and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Forma of instrument with which the woman is fumigated due to retention of menses and the second flow:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It appears that the text is written in an archaic or constructed language reminiscent of medieval languages. Based on the context provided from previous translations and the structure of the given phrase, here's a possible translation:
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And let the thin end be placed in the ash and the wide end over the fire, and the fumigation should be placed over the embers of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And have it such that the fumigation is completely consumed, and repeat with another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	On the treatment of an unperforated infant's anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Some children are born with their anuses unperforated, which are small and obstructed.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that obstruction with her finger; and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula, being careful not to touch the bladder.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then place wool soaked in wine and oil over that area; then treat it with ointment until it heals.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it is obstructed, then insert a catheter into the passage for several days, and remove it when the child needs to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And sometimes the anus becomes obstructed due to the hardening of a swelling or an abscess; in that case, it is necessary to incise that hardening and then treat it with the methods we have mentioned for treatment and using a lead applicator.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	For the treatment of fistulas that occur below:
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that appear in the lower part of the area are narrow and thin, those that appear close to the anus from outside or in the space of one part.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or abscess. 
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that swelling is old and comes from moist white phlegm or subtle putrefaction, and sometimes these fistulas can be penetrating.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those penetrating substances are known by what is excreted from them through excretion and flatulence; and sometimes the patient experiences excretion, and it is strongly expelled from them along with worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of those fistulas observed in the space penetrate into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and some of those penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the buttocks.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And that which is known about the penetrating and non-penetrating fistula is that you insert your index finger into the anus, and insert a thin probe of wax or iron into the fistula when there is no curvature.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	And if there is curvature in that area, then insert a thin probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel anything at all and do not find any signs of the passage, such as excretion, worms, or gas, as we have said, then you know that it is non-penetrating, and then proceed to the treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the urethra of the penis, then its significance is the discharge of urine from there and the prevention of it by consolidating the area with medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	And if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the area, then the sign of it is that the probe goes through there without curvature directly into the bone, causing pain in the area around the affected part; and that there is constant pus discharge from it; and that no medicine applied to it is effective, nor does it consolidate with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those fistulas penetrating is not a complete cure, and the cure of those is work and vanity of the young doctors on whom they rely.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in those that are not penetrating and not old, healing with iron is hoped for according to what I will recount to you, and this which has already been proved.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back and raises their chest towards you, with their thighs inclined towards their belly, and then insert a lead probe, or a reed if it is in a tortuous fistula, until you know the place where the probe reaches.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels pain around the neck, then you must insert your index finger into the neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the probe already penetrating and uncovering itself through your finger, or if you feel something between your finger and that siphon or flesh, then you know for certain that it is penetrating; and therefore do not work on it, because healing does not occur in this way, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, some say that it can heal in some men over time.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And regarding the treatment by which improvement is hoped for, you ignite a fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been previously described, and insert that ignited cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; then repeat this two or three times until you know that all the fistulous flesh, resembling a bird's feather stem, is properly adhered together.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then treat that with poultices wrapped in cloth until all the adhering flesh comes out, and then treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, well; and if not, then it will never be healed by any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe is inserted and does not penetrate into your finger which is in the anus, and between that and the probe which is merely a piece of flesh or gristle, and sometimes the fistula extends to where the surface of the cord is, then dry the cord from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it drying with the probe, and it should be inside until the drying reaches the place to which the tip of the probe reaches, and through the probe it is released and cut.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those fistulated flesh parts which are joined together like a bird quill tube and do not leave any of them due to any reason.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if a flow of blood occurs between you and your operation when you are trying to join those flesh parts together, then the best thing to do is to use a light instrument for cauterization with fire or with sharp medicine, because cautery with fire has two good effects: it is the joining of those adhered flesh parts, and the stopping of blood through the drying of the humidities.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then treat it with cloths wrapped in fat or in crushed wool within which the area sweats, and then heal the wound with ointments that generate and consolidate tough flesh.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And in medicines that have astringency and drying properties; when it is restored, it is healed and you do not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	And if the fistula has already penetrated into the rectal region and extends from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and investigate with it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if the instrument is inserted and between you and it there is merely a veil of skin or flesh, and it resists penetration, then no operation should be performed on it except by way of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The treatment can be administered in one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry the area so that you can achieve penetration and reach the cavity for proper treatment; do not proceed with cutting so deeply that you injure the lacert containing the bile, and ensure that the patient does not die against their will; then treat it as we have described until it heals well; or extend the veil and cleanse the pus by drying the area near the anus, as we have said, using an instrument with a sharp end or another appropriate tool; then thoroughly clean the fistula-infected flesh in the dried area through excoriation; finally, strive to restore all of the affected area through incision, and if the pus-discharging opening is not sealed, leave the fistula open at the anal part so that the pus can drain easily from the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is on the side of the buttocks around the surface of the body with the chain and at the margin of the buttocks, then take a probe with a perforated end, which is like a needle used for preparing the hearts in this way:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert into that wound a thread wrapped with five threads or around it; then, insert and try to reach the cavity with the thread through the fistula.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	And if you penetrate into the edge of the anus from inside, then you extract the thread from that spot just as you insert your finger in the anus; and pull out the end of the thread and tie both ends together tightly, and keep it like this for one or two days, and when you cut the thread in the flesh, make sure to press well on that area so that the flesh which is between the two ends of the thread can close up.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Then treat the wound until it is healed and consolidated.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the openings of the fistula are not penetrable, then make them penetrable in whatever way you deem appropriate, but ensure there is movement within the pus, for it is not right to do this so as not to cut the tendon; and then treat it until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of the spiked spatula with which the fistula is cut open: the curvature of which is sharply pointed and the other part is not sharp, so as not to cut what is unnecessary, just as is often done.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	On the suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows from the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those [sores] that are both small and large, and from which blood flows continuously, and they are one type, and they are in patches, and outside the anus, and at the extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	And yet those that come from the anus are according to months of little moisture, from which yellow water or a bit of blood with continuous flow comes out, and it is according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for that which is inside the anus is that you command the patient to sit and to strain themselves so that the anus opens and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you take care and suspend them with hooks or hold them with your nails, and then cut those veins at their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the nails are not held in place by their moisture and softening, then take those with a rough cloth or with a piece of wool, and extract them with your fingers as said, and then cut into them and sprinkle over them certain powdered substances at the site of the incision, so that they can serve in place of cauterization; or cauterize them according to what is detailed in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	Then treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the stool does not come out easily, then use a suppository on the patient with one that has a small opening, and wash it with the water in which chicory has been soaked, which will help the stool to exit gently when the patient is squeezed. 
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	And if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is trivial, and you should take those with your fingernail, or use scissors to cut them, and then treat them as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And for the incision that you will make, you should administer suturing in this manner: take thread wrapped and insert it into a needle, then pull the hemorrhoids to the upper parts, and make that penetrate with the needle into the edge of the other side. Wrap both ends of the thread at the part further from the needle, and do so latitudinally; tighten the hemorrhoid with strong traction, and then tie off the thread and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, but leave one without stitching, so that the excess blood can flow out from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then place over the anus a cloth infused with oiled rose or ointment; put that on the area and instruct the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then leave that in place until it dries; and when it is dry, treat them with ointments or other treatments until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	White spots occur due to the drying of a fissure or by natural constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And when they are old and no longer useful in that medicine, then you must scrape them with the tip of a spatula or with your nail until they become moist and remove the pus that has formed on top, which prevents their consolidation; and then treat them until they consolidate.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you remove them with a more forceful scraping than the first until blood comes out and they are raw; and then treat them until they heal.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the treatment of hemorrhoids, this is crucial.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that alamermar, which is crucial, appears as round spots according to the color of the skin similar to the head of a nail, and it occurs throughout the body but mostly on the feet and knees, and sometimes because of these pains, they name it thus.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then it is necessary to cut around the area where the nail-head appears, hold it with forceps or tweezers, and remove it from its root; and then treat the area.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize the wound that is described in the preceding chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	And a wart is a small, rough, tubular, round prominence on the surface of the body, and they often appear on the hands of children. 
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment of it is that you stretch and incise that area, or that you compress that with a splint or with bandages inside which supports.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize that, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already the contraries and non-contraries have been removed with the instrument that I will describe.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	And a morsel is a small raised or pustular bump on the surface of the body that moves slightly under the skin, and when cold encounters it, it feels like the bite of an ant, and it appears around the body. 
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment is that you take a tube made of goose bone or vulture bone, and it must be strong, and place that over the boil until the circle of the tube encompasses the parts affected; then rotate your hand with the tube until you cut out what is within the circle of the boil, and place that in the sore spot of the flesh, thus removing the boil from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, do this with a tube of reed or iron according to this method:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The part above the tube should be tapered, closed (that is, unperforated), and wrapped in such a way that when placed on the finger, its application by the user is eased and the rotation of it is facilitated.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the boil, do so as mentioned in the cautery of anthrax in the chapter on cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	On the shape of the instruments that are used to give chrism.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes chrism is made of silver or lead or molded or hammered reed; and at other times it is made with small and large instruments according to those to whom it is administered, for the one that is given in the treatment of small children should be small; and for those whose ends are sore or painful, the chrism vessels for them should be small. 
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and small gallstones:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the cannula above, which is tied to the bag, should be wide according to this manner; and it should be at a distance where the bag is tied just so. 
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of the pus channel below, which is inserted into the buttocks, is closed (so it's not open) due to the lion; moving towards subtlety; and on one side there are two tracks, and on the other side one track, and the width of the track should be according to the thickness of the rays, with a slightly thicker one.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let the bag in which the medications are placed be made of animal bladder or sheepskin, and its mouth should be one palm wide.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced by thick threads in such a way that it is twisted; and if the space between the threads is as thick as a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then pour into those channels strong honey of raw honey which is from ten hives, or around those areas; and adjust with that the bag; and when the bag is placed on them, it should be tight at the head of the catheter between two distinct points with strong constriction; and then catheterize each channel: However, the quality of catheterizing with that is to fill the bag with medicine which should be warmed according to the quantity tolerated by the patient; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should be placed on their back, and raise their thighs up and place them on a pillow or a cushion upon which they already lie, or a bolster; and then anoint the tip of the catheter with oil or egg white or mucilage of fenugreek or something similar; and then insert that into the rectum easily, and then the minister should take the bag and squeeze it with both hands and repeatedly with force until everything in the catheter is evacuated into the intestine; and then remove the catheter and the patient raises their thighs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces it to emit, let it do so as much as possible; and if one sleeps with that for an entire night, it is more beneficial for healing.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	And if you treat those with diseases of diarrhea and the vomiting that torments them, then apply the cautery repeatedly until they are healed. 
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a gentle and strong suppository, of the type with which children are purged.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the treatment of the plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already said in the section on the treatment of plagues what was appropriate for the book, and I say thus the treatment of those with hands and medicines according to the completion.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Thus, I say that plagues are diversified according to how the plagues are caused and according to the location where the plagues fall.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which plagues are often caused are thus: throwing of stones, or cutting with a sword or knife, or striking with a lance, or with clubs, or with arrows, or similar to many such causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	However, the plagues that are in the parts of the body are thus: a plague that falls on the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the abdomen, or the thigh, and similar to those of the other limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I am recommending the treatment of some plagues so that you can apply that reasoning and rule to other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with simple headaches, for the memory of compound ailments will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	So it is said that when you encounter a simple headache in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to an accumulation of stones or similar substances, and if the chain has already broken only partially and there is severe pain and you fear that an abscess may form, then you should be cautious and perform venesection on the cephalic vein immediately, and do not delay this; and extract as much blood according to the strength of the patient unless there is any prohibitive cause for venesection, especially if the blood from the headache is scanty.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And the venesection should be performed on the opposite side of the affected area; and the patient should be guarded against relapse and should avoid wine and heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if there is any contraindication due to caution, then reduce the amount of food and avoid meat and wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And apply to the affected area, if an abscess has formed, some wool soaked in rose oil or wine in which a styptic has been applied.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that condition, then place poultices over it until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	And if the wound is large or caused by a sharp and similar object, and the edges of it cannot be brought together with pillows, then bring those edges together with stitches as I will describe regarding the stitching of them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound has already exposed the bone and sinew, and there is no retention of it but only a small suspensor, then incise that area and subsequently treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh near the wound site. Instruct the patient to eat foods rich in nutrients: heads and forms similar to them, until it is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the wound that does not adhere to the bone, then you should cut out all of that rotten part and remove it, and subsequently treat the area.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which bleeding may occur and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then you should search for the artery. If you find that it has not been cut, then cut through it with a spatula or tie it off; and if the necessity arises such that what we have said does not suffice, then cauterize until the blood is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these sores are simple and small, then the cause of them is slight; in such a way that you powder over those this powder, which solidifies before the air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of the powder is as follows: take oil of vipers one part, dragon's blood two parts, non-extincted charcoal three parts; let all be thoroughly ground and sifted, and with it fill the wound, and apply strong pressure over that area until it adheres well, and let it coagulate with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Then bind that area with bandages and leave it like that, and do not loosen it while it is still in this state until it is free of abscesses, for the medicine will not take effect until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes this is done with only cautery, when you do not have vipers and dragon's blood available.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this method of operation is used on large wounds when it is necessary to apply pressure over them and keep them tight, especially fresh wounds with their blood, which have not been altered by the air.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially during summer, then this powder method is not intended. Instead, treat them as we have said, by placing certain unguents or powders made from barley flour mixed with water and honey over them until they begin to putrefy; then treat them with another form of treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	And if you encounter a fracture in the bone due to an injury, and it is small, then you extract it with gestures.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will describe the treatment of skull fractures in what is poisonous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the plagues of the neck. 
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the plague strikes in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and it is the same as when the plague affects the head simply.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerves or artery of the neck is already cut, then if it is a nerve, there should be no attempt to suture it but rather avoid treating it with anything that causes strong astringency, such as zinc and copper sulfate which is vitriol, and similar substances that bind to the nerves and constrict them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place anything cold on the wound at all, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuation leads to the brain, which is the source of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is treated with light medications, such as washing with warm water, sometimes infused in olive oil whether cooked or raw, and thyme when washed with warm water, along with other small stones according to this method, and apply moist ointments.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is large, then administer stitching, or bring the edges of it together, and then treat it with poultices until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if there is depth in the wound or you encounter putrefaction in the lowest part of it, then puncture it at the deepest point.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	And if in the wound an artery is already cut and bleeding has occurred, then tie it off, dry it out, or cauterize it if necessity demands it.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the vertebrae of the neck have already been cut through entirely and the veins of the neck are preserved, then you should align the edges of the wound with sutures over the bone of the neck without touching it; first equalize it and reduce it to its natural form, then secure it firmly with appropriate binding, and leave it for several days; then treat it with ointments that have astringent and stimulating properties until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has caused a protrusion in the bone, then percuss it; and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all that you can from them; leave what is not easily reachable until the wound suppurates, and let it be separated so that the protrusion may be reduced.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is new, then sprinkle over it the powder that has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if a fistula has formed in the wound, then treat it with the methods that will be recalled later in its respective section.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the wounds of the neck or similar when made between the shoulders, whether caused by a sword, dagger, lance, or similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If the wound is from a lance or dagger and you measure its depth, then consider if there is air coming out of the wound when the patient breathes; then you know that the wound is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no great depth to the wound and it is fresh with its own blood, then within the first hour you should apply powder to it; do not strain it so that the blood is not retained in the depth of the wound and does not return to the heart and harm the patient, but instead apply an attractive unguent to it, and remove that twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the unguent is not available to you, then you should apply a dry cloth to the wound's opening to absorb the moisture that comes out; and have the patient sleep with the wound elevated so that whatever is inside can drain out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have passed since the wound occurred and the patient does not experience spasms, palpitations, or constriction of the lungs, and other good signs are present, then you know that the wound is healing; therefore, treat it with bandages and other treatments until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of it is avoided, and has been open for a long time, then know that it has become a fistula; therefore, treat that according to its chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is caused by a cut from an axe or sword, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with stitching if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if the bone has already become embedded with fragments from the cut, and those pieces are still inside, then you should probe the wound and attempt to extract those pieces, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then leave them inside for the wound to become pus-filled, as their extraction will be easier.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidental wounds on the other limbs, the treatment in curing them is the same as what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	About the wounds of the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen is either severe, slight, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	From the many layers you will see the intestine or nerve of the intestine, because their insertion and the suture of them should be more vigorous and finer.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small dislocation is made difficult by another method, and it is known that their reduction is more difficult if one does not take care of the intrusion of them into their place right away, because once opened and thickened, the insertion becomes difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is a median one, for in that case it is not difficult to return the intestine to its place, just as it is difficult in the two previously mentioned types.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you should know that there are four ways of缝合腹部，但是有两种是最常见的，与其他身体部位的缝合方法相同。
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other specific sutures are related to other ailments, but they are more specific to the abdominal suture.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you each with explanation and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Thus it is said that when the hernia is small and some part of the intestine protrudes due to this, and it becomes difficult to reduce it, then it is done in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the tear as we have said, or when the intestine has become inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And thus when it is so, then you must warm that area by submerging a sponge or cloth soaked in tepid water alone, or boiled in sour wine, and cyperus, and spices, and apply with that the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes it is done in the way that has astringency, and it is better than water alone for reducing inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And thus when you see the inflammation resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which celery and mallows have been boiled, for this alleviates the tissue of it with little harm.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If surgery is necessary for this treatment, then incise the rupture slightly with an instrument used to cut hemorrhoids.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better when it is appropriate that there be no drying, and there should not be an occupation to dry near necessity and deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	From the instrument, dry its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the sharp wound, and the other part not-sharp, and the extremity subtle, and not be like the subtlety of a spatula, rather be slightly blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And thus when the hernia is enlarged and you bring out the intestine, now it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form, in its proper place, if possible over this, for it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	And when the disruption is large and in the lower part of the abdomen, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you raise their head and feet higher than the other parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then always focus your attention and consideration on this so that the part where the hernia is may be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you should administer this in large hernias and in medium-sized hernias as well.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small hernias, apply what you have prepared, then have the assistant place their hand over the affected area with tenderness, who should hold the entire disruption with their hand and adjust its edges, then carefully suture it from one end to the other.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: first you take the needle, or a count of needles according to the quantity of the width of the wound; and then leave at the end of the disruption of the ring finger, and hold the needle one, so that you do not put thread on both ends of the chain; with both ends of the clip which is left behind the chain of the inner parts, until you make that penetrate from that part; and you have already added both ends of the chain and both ends of the clip, and thus four orders are made.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then strengthen with double thread around the stitch, and sometimes on both sides together, and then bring the two edges and the wound together properly by joining; and then insert another needle in that place, leaving the thickness of a finger between them; and then tie it with thread just as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if necessary until you have completed all the stitching of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be of moderate thickness between thick and thin, for thin needles barely penetrate the flesh; and thick ones are difficult to insert into the wound, and therefore they should be of moderate thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not necessary to insert the needle at both ends of the wound too deeply, so that the flesh is not cut excessively and the wound may close before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not extend the sutures so that the wound is not prevented from healing properly.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then sharpen the ends of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient during their sleep; and place on the sutures poultices made from various parts, which hold the ends of the needles; and leave them until you know that the wound is already healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these types of sutures with needles in this manner are more suitable for small wounds, where only one needle or two or around that number is needed for the suturing.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the second suture is common: and it is that you administer with a suture the four extremities, of the chain and two extremities of the spine, at once, with a needle on which the thread should be wrapped equally in fineness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when you have penetrated these four extremities with the needle, withdraw the needle from that same part where you began, so that the thread draws out any pus from the underlying part to the wound, so that the suture is like a cloth suture with which cloths are stitched together.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture the width of a smaller finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is known to men. 
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with such a suture, I sewed the wound that had been inflicted on a man in his abdomen, which was stabbed by a knife; and it was a disruption of the wound greater than one palm, and it extended around two palms from the middle location of the intestines and there was a disruption in the middle of the member; and then I returned the intestine after it had protruded out of the wound for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated within about fifteen days, and I treated it until it healed; and after that, he lived for many years, and his condition improved.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and yet he was cured, for I did not treat him with ointment, for there was no place where ointment or any medicine could be found, but instead I placed on the wound a piece of old cloth twice a day and washed it frequently with honey water until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will describe two types of suture specific to the narration of Paraula.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And you begin with a chain suture, and insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus as the needle penetrates into the tendon and in that manner goes straight and along the entire body, and leaves the tip of the syringe in which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from inside to outside at the other end of the wound.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made that penetration, now penetrate again in the same extremity of the cloth from the outside part to the inside part; and leave the extremity of the needle that is on this side, and pierce the needle into the other extremity from the inside part to the outside part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make the penetration with that needle with which you pierce into the cloth at the extremity of the wound that is on the inner side so that all of it penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	Then begin from this side and sew with the extremity of the needle on the other side, and remove the needle from the suture that you penetrated, then return it to that suture and sew the extremity of the cloth that is on the other side with this extremity of the wound; and remove it from the suture that is on the patient's side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once and again, doing it one time after another until you sew all of what is on the outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the essence of this method of suturing is that you sew with a skin suture with which I sew skins, in such a way that you sew the cloth once from one side of the suture, and leave the other side until it is completed. 
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	Here is the translation line by line for the provided text:
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	You should place the needle at the end of the thread that is closest to the outer part, and make it penetrate to the inner part through that same point, leaving both ends of the suture; then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside in both ends of the suture.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then rotate those sutures, and make each one penetrate from the inner part to the outer part through both ends of the thread on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of suturing is better than the common superficial suturing, and it is a suturing technique that precedes proper healing.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the sermon of Gaul.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And more specifically, for abdominal suturing with two needles, you should thread each needle with a string, and begin by inserting your own needle, making it penetrate through the other side according to the suturing method where the threads are interwoven equally.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when the disruption is in the middle of the abdomen, then suturing it is more difficult than suturing other areas of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	And the judgment of plague medication is a judgment of other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	Here is the translation of the provided line:
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply ointments to that area in your presence until they form a hard stone and expel the bile, and strengthen and observe it; then treat it as you would any other wound until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if you do not have the medicines present, then apply something to that area immediately, as it begins to discharge pus, which is old and foul, and change it twice a day, just as you have been taught, until it is healed, for you would not need any other medication in many conditions when the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the wound might spread to the major limbs, then you must soak lion's wool in oil of good quality, or in anointed oil, and apply it around the areas between the joints and leave them like this.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, for it often occurs repeatedly, then treat it with black styptic vinegar, especially if the corruption has spread to the intestine and has penetrated into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that the condition of the large intestine is more easily healed than that which affects the finer intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal when the intestine called “gegunu” does not receive healing from the plague that falls upon it entirely; and this is due to the large number of veins in it, and because of its great size which contains those veins, and because of the fineness of its body, and because of its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what proceeds from the plague is pus, and you obtain fresh pus, reduce it according to your prescription with which you treat the intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has spread to the space and has already turned green or black, then you should scrape that area with a knife over the part that is discolored, to cause bleeding, because in the pus there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then incise what is another layer of the ligament, and place two ends of the knife hanging from the infected area outside it, so that the attraction of the pus is relieved, allowing the discharge of the pus and the emission of the plague's force.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the plagues when they occurred in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is a small rupture in the intestine, it can sometimes be repaired in some people. For this reason, I have seen someone who was wounded in their abdomen by a lance strike and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had become a fistula, with gas and air escaping from it.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I consider the treatment of him already because he was not confused in his healing, but stopped subtlety intervening between what has been healed and the area is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I fear that the area is already consolidated, worry about the patient suffering an unfortunate event in their belly; and not letting any misfortune from this accident disrupt their proper dispositions of eating and drinking, then bathe them and exercise them as directed.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And already some experienced ones have said that when there is a small wound on the intestine, it must be tied in this manner: take large-headed ants; then adjust the two lips of the wound and place an ant with its mouth open over the two edges of the wound; thus, when it clamps down with its mouth, cut off its head, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Then place another ant next to the first one, and do not stop doing this with ants placed next to each other according to the quantity of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then close the wound and sew it up; let those heads remain attached inside the intestine until the intestine is healed; do not cause any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine be sewn with fine thread made from the intestine of an animal attached to it, as it is finer than regular thread; take one end of this intestinal thread, ensuring it is well-deboned, then tie the end of the thread tightly, wrap it, and then insert the thread into needles and sew the intestine with it, and bring that part back into the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of stitching with ants is nothing but a second way of trust and hope. 
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	And if the wound is large and extensive, especially if it is in one of the delicate intestines, then it cannot be treated with simple suturing, and it will not fully heal.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the treatment of syphilis and fistula.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any wound or swelling when it becomes corrupted and old, and turns into an ulcer, and does not heal but continues to discharge pus constantly without being separated, then, in whichever part of the body it may be, it is generally called a fistula, and we call it syphilis.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And a fistula, in truth, is a firm, whitish, furry nodule that is painless and has a cavity similar to the hollow of a bird's feather; and for this reason, it is called an ulcer with a beak, that is, hollow. 
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in some men there is moisture, which causes swelling; and in them, this moisture is cut off at certain hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture is turbid, and it is scanty, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already said in the division when I mentioned the plagues, that any ulcer which is not healed nor in raw flesh, it is so for one of these causes: one of which is either due to a lack of blood in the body; or because of its malice; or there is hard flesh between it and the lips preventing the growth of flesh; or it is caused by light dust; or that ulcer within itself is rotten and the material mixed into it is of poor quality; or the medicine used is inappropriate for curing it; when corruption falls upon the region, it becomes pestilential; due to the nature of the region as in Saragossa where illness digestion is difficult, and the natural healing of inflammation is delayed; or there is a bone within it, or several bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And all those causes and their signs, along with the treatment of them using medicines, have been shown in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And it is also necessary for me to make you understand the treatment of a fistula, which is performed through surgical operation by hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; for among those are fistulas that affect large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spine, or the intestine, or the bladder, or some of the ribs, or some of the vertebrae of the back, or some of the composite joints such as those of the hand and foot; and there are those that extend to the proximity of the main body part and its likeness.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore, one of these fistulas that follows this manner is among the illnesses difficult to cure, and it does not receive treatment, and ignorance is at work with this condition.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if there are some fistulas whose depth does not reach the places that I have mentioned, and you hope for and trust in their healing, and wish to understand them better, then take a probe of iron or bronze, and if the fistula follows straight through, examine it with this.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a thin lead probe, for lead, due to the lightness of its body, is flexible and can follow the twists.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has horrifying swellings, it is not possible for you to make sense of it by touching.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then irrigate the openings through their own openings, for the moisture with which you irrigate it should cleanse the other openings and flow from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Then inquire meticulously in whatever way you can to know if there are bones or nerves here, and whether the cavity of the fistula is long or short, or if it is a fistula with multiple openings, and examine all this with all your strength through your examination of the patient. Discover the source of pain by pressing on the area with your hand, and understand the signs and accidental causes of the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And after you have stood over all those causes with true understanding, then proceed to the treatment based on confidence: that is, consider now whether it is an apparent fistula nearby or in a salty place, distant from a joint, or from a nerve, or from an artery, or from a vein, or from one of the places which you know and mention.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Now dry the fistula as previously mentioned for its opening, remove what is in that filtration and from corrupted flesh, and what has grown in the openings of the flesh, or of tissue and similar things, and treat it internally so that it may be healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	And if the fistula is of great depth and goes straight down, then you must incise it as deeply as possible according to your ability; then cleanse it of all its corrupted flesh; then administer dressings wrapped in sharp medicines and insert them into the cavity of the fistula which you have probed with an iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from the corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with ointments that will generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	And if it is not healed by this method, then you must cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must be certain of this, then you should investigate it and dry it out as we have recommended, provided that you do not interfere with any vein or nerve or major body part, as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	And if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackening in it, then you must scrape that area until all the corruption is removed; then treat it with something that will promote flesh growth until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if the arm is not healthy and thrown away just as it was, then know that you have not reached complete eradication of the corruption; and then uncover again and meticulously examine the reason for it and clean it thoroughly with your final strength, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it is healed, that is good; but if not, then know that the corruption is in the deep recesses of the body, which has not been reached, and then there can be no remedy for that except to leave it alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to extract it, then you should remove it with delicate forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are multiple bones, then meticulously extract all of them, and do not leave any behind for any reason with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if any obstruction is caused by moisture, and there is neither fear nor error in its incision, then cut those ligaments or flesh if they are present, and free the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you are not prepared to set the bones of your hour, then place over the wound something that can heal that wound, and leave it there until what is around those bones of flesh and ligaments heals, and guard the wound so that it does not solidify too quickly, and constrain the section which you have incised in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	However, if you fear, place over it a cloth soaked in oiled broth, or a cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment, or in one of the green ointments, for when those ligaments will heal and the bones are separated from their ablation, and that traction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	However, if it is a large bone such as the thigh bone or hip bone or similar ones, and only the surface of it is corrupted, then scrape that area with a tool just enough to remove the blackness and corruption underneath, and then heal the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	However, if the corrupted part is large, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that area by incising entirely in the place where the corruption has penetrated, and then treat it until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you what happens to a man in his thigh so that you may use this as an example and assistance for your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Here is the translation of the given text line by line into English:
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then extend the time with that due to the error of doctors until the abscess is opened, and pus will come out from it, and its healing will be slowly achieved until the chest becomes fistulated, and many holes are made in it through which all the putrefaction and moisture of the body pour out.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then many doctors attended for nearly two years, but none of them knew much about the craft, until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And you see the chest of him and the materials that were flowing out of those orifices through great force; and already the body of that man was entirely swollen, and its color was yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the probe into one of those orifices and brought the probe to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then I carefully examined the orifices and found those leading to all parts of the chest.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I prepared and incised one of those orifices where I discovered a part of the bone, which was found to be corrupted; it had already become brittle, corrupted, and discolored; and a part of the chest that had been penetrated down to the marrow was already corrupted.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I treated what was discovered and prepared of the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I ensured that only the corruption in the bone was cut out and treated, which I had already identified.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then I applied the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	Then I repeated the procedure and re-examined the bone beyond the initial exposure, and found continued corruption with the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I will address what appears to me from that corruption, and then I was perforated to perform the cure of it and its restoration, and it is not restored. 
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I uncover on the other side and do not stop dissecting the small bone bit by bit particularly and perforate its restoration, and it is not restored until I dissect around about a palm of it, and that which is extracted with its marrow, and then restore that with medicines, and it is slightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to repeat the operation and cutting unless due to the disposition of the patient's weakness and the lack of their tolerance and fear of death, for in them, accidents occur at all times because of the excess of evacuation syncope illness.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus it is healed by complete healing, and there is no hard flesh in place of bone; and the positioning of it within its body is made good, and the strength returns to it; and it is converted into its proper dispositions and does not suffer opposition in movement nor harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If there is an prominent bone in the body that has already been operated on, then you must dry it out according to this method: take a thread and tighten it at the end of the protruding bone, and command someone to pull it taut; then use a thicker woolen thread than the first one; next, bind it over the flesh beneath the bone, and extend its end so that it pulls the flesh together on both sides, thus exposing the flesh where you want to cut so that the saw does not touch the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place wood or a board beneath the bone properly, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to use the saw without drying out the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And the cutting must be done gradually over the corrupted area, for if the corruption is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear on its visible surface, it may require another cut to reach it.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted but not prominent, and one part is still connected to the other, and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it, then you must expose the flesh entirely from all sides; then place wood beneath it, and cut from the first part where the corruption is, continuing the cutting through to the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the incision be according to the location of the corruption a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and cut the bone where it continues from the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation between two joints, then it is not reasonable but rather a complication.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, you must examine how the corruption appears to you, and cut into that area, and clean it according to whatever method is possible for you, and in all cases, adjust the complication as best as you can, provided it does not interfere with veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know which are the incisors and the saws used to cut these bones are very varied according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the fineness and the size and the smallness of those, and the hardness and their rarity; therefore you must prepare every type of instrument suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that this operation implies for you the choice of the instrument which you will need; when you have great study and long experience in the methods of this art, and knowledge of disease forms, because now you should apply what is appropriate to each illness from among all instruments.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I am telling you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will use simply with which you will proceed in your procedure, which you will perform on others.
Forma de serra:	Forma de serra:
Forma de autra serra:	Forma de autra serra:
Forma de autra serra:	Forma de autra serra:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Forma de autra serra gran:
Forma de ray:	Forma de ray:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Make the head of this rod in the shape of a star-shaped nail head, and the points on it should be according to the form of the star's points.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not appropriate to friction only the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or if the opening is wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of a larger razor than the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of a broad razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another properly made saw: it should be made with the arch on top and the sharpness on the metal part, and the handle should be made of wood appropriately fashioned.
Forma de lu:	Form of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of a razor that has a concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of another delicate razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another razor with a curved end:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of incisors with which bones are cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Forma de inscisori autra minor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incision tool; this resembling a ray, and the end of it is like a saw, and it is applied in various places along the line of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio dequel que es perforat dels osses:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the end of it is triangular and has a sharp point. 
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly all the causes we have mentioned for rasors and scissors and saws should apply.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the incision of extremities and of the suturing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	Extremities may decay either due to intrinsic or extrinsic causes. If you have treated that corruption with medicines for healing and the cure does not confer any benefit, or if the corruption continues to advance in the limb without any effective cause, then it is necessary that you incise that limb where the corruption adheres, so that the patient may escape from death or severe malice which is a greater defect of the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of the one to whom it happens is that the limb turns black before it falls off, as if fire had already burned it, or the blackness spreads so that the corruption moves through that member which ails him and takes over the whole body; therefore, be quick to incise that area.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	Similarly, if the cause of the corruption is due to some venomous causes such as from a sea scorpion or viper or rattlesnake and the like.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the affliction is in the extremity of the finger, then you should incise the finger and do not give space for the corruption to spread into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if you access the hand, then you incise that of the wrist area, and do not give space for corruption to enter into the arm's joint.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you need to amputate, then cut the arm between the elbow and the joint. 
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption spreads further and affects around the knee, then at that point the patient's death is near; and administering any other cause or treatment in such a condition is an amount of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly treat the foot when corruption invades the said part of the foot, then you incise it between one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if you take hold of the instep of the foot, then you incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	And if it enters into the knee, then you incise the thigh between the joint of the knee.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread over the knee, then there is no remedy for it but dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of incising or amputating the limb is that you stretch one band at the part just below where you wish to incise, and another band above the area; and have an assistant stretch a band on both sides away from that point, and another assistant stretches a band upwards; and you separate the flesh between the two bands with a spatula so that all the flesh is exposed; then it should be incised or amputated.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it is necessary that cloth be placed from all sides so that the area does not come into contact with it, and that the patient receives a well-adjusted lesion and a matured abscess. 
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	And if blood flow occurs while you are operating, then cauterize the area appropriately, or apply some hemostatic powders to stop the bleeding; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend to you what happened to a man in his foot, this accidental event which I and you recommend, which is that an accident occurred causing blackening in his foot resembling a fire burn.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that accidental corruption first occurred in his toe and then spread to the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared himself to perform more pus incisions in hopes that the treatment would heal the limb with the intensity of what he experienced from pain and burning. He cut that foot up to the joint, and it was healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	A long time ago, that same corruption occurred in the little finger of his hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then I come to him, and so I pierce to expel that excess with what is placed on the hand of medicines, near the purification of his body; and if the excess is not expelled and begins to go to another finger within which it enters the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And the patient urged me to cut his hand, but I did not want to do so, hoping for the resolution of that excess without surgery, and more because I feared the incision of his dead hand, for the power of the patient was waning.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he departed from me, he returned to his land and I was informed that the man prepared and cut all of his hand, and he was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have added this narration only to be helpful regarding what can be done for this disease, and for its meaning to be understood and according to which it should be acted upon.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	About the treatment of the sinuses and the quality of enemas with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in fleshy limbs and the space of the abscess extends so that it collects pus, and then it bursts and perforates, allowing the pus to drain out, leaving the area empty like a vessel, and the skin over it is thin like a fine cloth, and there has not been any severe corruption, nor has it affected the bone, nerves, or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not referred to as a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space extends so that the corruption affects some part of the limb, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment of it is to incise that skin entirely as it twists, especially when it is thin and resembles cloth, and you must ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	Here is the translation of the given line:
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And when you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm that you use should be of an odorous substance, then enema-tize it with an Egyptian medicine which consists of olive oil, vinegar, and zinziber (ginger) in equal parts, mixed together in a vessel, heated over fire until the mixture becomes warm and reaches the consistency of honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Then take the amount needed and dissolve it in water and honey; and administer it as an enema to the sinus, tighten the opening of it, and leave the medicine inside for a quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	Then extract it with a scraper; do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the pus is completely removed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is enema-tized with ashes water when this medicine is not available to you; in which case, you should take the ashes of vines, put them into water; then strain that and use it to enema-tize until you are convinced that the sinus has been cleansed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then enema-tize it with water and honey, mixed with ground ginger; and enema-tize it with a mixture of vinegar and honey, for the property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and the vinegar helps to tighten the sinus, especially when the vinegar has an excess of astringency and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this several times and are convinced that the vein is already cleansed, then fumigate it with something that promotes flesh growth.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is that you take some unguent of diaphoretic and dissolve that with rose oil and styptic wine; or you can use aclyster (enema) with certain medicines and apply other ointments that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the sinus opening is narrow in which the catheter of the clyster cannot be received, then you enlarge it little by little with a small iron tool, and place on it a cloth wrapped in Egyptian ointment or in balsam ointment until it is enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly, if the opening is wide, then you sew up the edges of it with stitches and leave an amount through which the clyster can enter additionally.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening from which the fluid flows is elevated towards the upper parts, then dry it at the lowest point in it so that the fluid can flow down into it, for when the fluid is constricted in the depth of the sinus, the flesh is generated within it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus around the lowest part of the bone as you wish, then you must prepare the limb with a treatment that allows the fluid to flow out easily according to what is suitable for you and ensure that no cause for the fluid retention remains within it.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that are placed on the sinus appropriately for what you want to extend them on a linen cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such quantity as to cover all the sinus; and then incise with scissors in the right place at the opening of the sinus, making it slightly wider than the sinus opening; and then extend over another cloth from one side of the wound according to the width of the cut, and position it near the distant part of the sinus opening so that the secretion from the arm is lightened, and do not change the large cloth but only once every few days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	And the one that is over the opening of the sinus should be changed at all times so that what is inside the arm can come out. 
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And in order for you to know whether what flows from his arm is a lot or little, or if it is digested or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And with this, you should consider the location of that vein, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is an abscess in it.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the material that was placed over the vein's opening already adhered or about to adhere, then you remove it on the second or third day, and when you remove the dressing, change the cloth and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if from the vein nearby there is a subtle virus, then do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is approaching. For some people take a long time to generate flesh on their wounds, and the opposite occurs in others.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if for many days the vein continues to discharge undigested material, then you know that the vein is not adhering; and if the adhesion of the vein is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you adjust towards drying out the medicines. And if the medicines are moist in their substance and virtue, they should be made dry like diafinicon ointment, when excess addition of moisture is adjusted on it.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the most effective method for treatment is that you take some unguent of dittany and dissolve it in rose oil, and apply it over the wound as if anointing with ointment on its substance, then warm it up with that, and use it accordingly.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it appears as such in that action, when there is no plaster, use the following method: take honey and heat it until it becomes thick, and utilize it; or take myrrh, aloes, and incense, mix all of these together and powder them over the honey while it is on the fire, then apply this mixture onto a cloth and press that onto the wound; and apply that with the honey which you have heated until it has become thick, and sprinkle over a cloth and press that [onto the affected area].
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes they are administered with long aristolochia, roots of celestial lilies (which are indeed celestial lilies), flour of ashes, and centaury. Use these simple ingredients or mixtures, grind them together, sieve them, and powder them over the honey which has been heated; then use it [this mixture].
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the wound is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the depth of it. Now make an examination of the bones or other hard members or ligaments; now cure it with a fistula treatment, as was said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	On the treatment of whitlow, nail inflammation, and the incision and division of the finger.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici is an abscess that arises under the nail of the thumb or toe, and often occurs in other fingers as well. And if it persists and its treatment is delayed, it becomes a more serious abscess, or gets corrupted, discharging pus which corrodes the root of the nail. It can corrupt the entire area, and through this corruption spread to the bone, causing a foul-smelling odor, and deform the tip of the digit, turning its color black.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And so when you have that abscess as we have described in the division and your treatment does not bring comfort, then you must incise with an iron all the superfluous part that remains of the nail. Then cauterize the wound near it, for a hot cautery is beneficial in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the edges of the nail are already pressing into the flesh at the sides, causing it to be pricked and damaged, then you must place a thin splint under the angle of the nail that is piercing the flesh. Push it up and incise the flesh easily there, and apply caustic and corrosive medications to what remains of the flesh until it is entirely removed; then treat it with ointments until it heals.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	And if the corruption has already entered into the bone, then you must incise the bone and extract it, for it will never heal as long as the corrupted bone remains within.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corrosion and corruption have spread to the finger, then you must incise it at one of the joints according to the need for its removal, and then treat it so that it may heal.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if the nail has suffered impact or friction, and there is intense pain in it, then at the beginning you must bleed the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp spatula by making a transverse cut from top to bottom. Be careful that the cut does not penetrate into the flesh beneath the nail, for you would cause severe pain to the patient, and it will lead to excessive growth of the adjacent skin in the area; then treat that spot with something that relieves pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But the adjacent digit, which often appears in many men, is largely fleshy throughout, partly bony, or partially in the nail. 
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or it is their birthplace in some nodules of the said.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But that which is born in some nodes of the vein does not hurt, and that which is born in strong joints is painful.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are born fleshy, the incision is light, and it is so that you should incise that one at its base with a spatula-like instrument.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But for that which is born at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and thus beware of amputating it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But in one where it is born between the toes, you must incise the flesh at the beginning with a round incision inside the bone, and then cut it with one of those appropriate saws, and then care for what is inside so that it heals.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	But for consolidation which occurs in the toes between their joints due to congenital conditions or by nature of the person being born thus, or by consolidation from disease or by burning from fire, or similar causes, then you must dry out that consolidation until the toes return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between them cloths infused in rubbed oil so that they are not lightly consolidated, and separate them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead until it is consolidated as needed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if consolidation occurs in the fingers with the palm, then you dry out that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suits the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From the inscription of veins, these are varicose veins. 
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore, you must administer purgation of the body from black bile several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	And the treatment of their inflammation is according to two methods: one is that it should be incised and the black blood drawn out, and the other method is that the vein should be raised and all of it extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The sectioning of it is according to this method: foment the beginning of the leg with warm water until the thick blood is dissolved, which is the dregs in the leg, and then tighten the patient's leg at the part most elevated between the thigh and below the knee with a bandage. Then apply cauterization at one place, or two, or three places widely, and then raise the black blood with your hand from below the leg upwards, until the quantity of blood that you wish to be released and which the patient's strength can tolerate is let out.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then give her that, and command her to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and inform the patient about this.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	And the elevation of them is according to this method: you shave the leg of the patient, removing any hair on it, and then bathe the leg with warm water until it reddens and the veins are engorged; or if a bath is not available, exercise the limb vigorously until it is warmed.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the wound at the site of the vein by drying along its length or at its rear where you feel the pain, or at its lowest point where you find the swelling.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then apply the chain with hooks and milk the vein from all sides until it appears to the touch, and you must observe how that which you are doing turns black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then when you remove and from the chain you take that white which is like a string.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you should place that into an elevated and laid-down position from the chain, and suspend it with one inch of lead.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then make another incision near that incision by three fingers, and then widen the cut above the vein where it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then elevate that and incise it at the back section below the heel, and then extract that and raise it until it is lifted by the second incision, and then extract that from the incision above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract that from the incision which is the highest of all the incisions, until everything is lifted; and then incise that.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you cannot extract and elevate it, then insert a needle with a strong double thread and tie that and pull it out, or insert the tip and rotate your hand in all directions until it is loosened.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to lift it, and harm will come to the patient because of that damage.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And once all of it has been completely removed, then place on the wound site wool soaked in wine and oiled and un-oiled ointment, and care for it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is constricted with a twist in which it coils upon itself at certain points, and is not straight as we have said, then you must make incisions along all parts of its twist and where it coils, and then suspend that area with hooks while you lift it entirely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful with your incision so that you do not cut into the vein and do not damage it, for it will be difficult for you to repair it; use caution in this matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Based on the language structure and vocabulary provided in your examples, which blend elements of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, I will attempt a translation:
Forma de unci orp:	Forma de unci orp:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.
De extraccio venae cruris.	From the extraction of the vein from the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the thighs in hot lands, such as in Al-Andalus in the land of Arabs and in the hot and dry lands of India with little moisture, where there is no grass or tree.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is also generated in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its generation is from putrefaction that comes from the bowels, just as serpents, worms, lice, and other worms are generated between the bowels and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the susceptibility to the occurrence of this vein is that there is a violent inflammation in the thigh where it happens; then, the area becomes blistered; and随后静脉开始从那个水疱所在的位置出来，看起来像一片树叶。
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the extremity appears, then it is necessary that you wrap around it a piece of lead whose weight is one dram. Inside two drams, and secure that and leave the lead suspended from the bed.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as you bring out any cause from the external parts, wrap that in lead and seal it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the wound is prolonged, then you cut off a part of it and wrap up the remainder; and do not cut that which has been contracted within to be brought out, for if you cut that which is contracted, it will enter into the flesh and cause an abscess, pus formation in the area, and a bad ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Therefore, it must be treated carefully and extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the rear of the patient, leaving no cause for concern remaining in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, it has been observed in some men that its length is of five palms and ten, and it has come to my knowledge that there was one of twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised at the time of treatment, then insert the needle into the channel and pierce that area with a long needle through the flesh until all the material inside is evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the site for several days with medicines; then treat that area according to the treatment of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has branches, especially when it reaches the joint of the foot or in the foot itself, and it comes with multiple openings, and each opening has a branch.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore, treat that area as we have said in the division and with what has been mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	On the section of worms generated under the skin, and this disease is called bovine sickness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is named in some lands as bovine sickness because it causes spotted growths that appear on the veins and is a worm of little size which exists between the bone and flesh, moving throughout the body up and down, manifesting its presence through the sensation from member to member until it breaks the bone and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is by the putrefaction of some humors, just as worms, serpents, and worms like roundworms and ascarids occur in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for its malice, because when it enters the body and rises to the head, reaching the eye, then it strongly afflicts it and enters, destroying the eye, which results in spotted growths.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And so when you wish to cure that and extract it, you do not act unless you sense its movement and appearance through the sensation. Then you must tightly bind what is above it and below it with strong binding and constriction, and then dry it out and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a hot cautery over the area where it resides. The greatest fear is its corruption, which can corrupt the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of the incision over the illness of the belly.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called "nafir" in our land, and it is pain that comes to some members, and then moves from one member to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that second thing which I will recount to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to see a sick woman in a village, and upon uncovering her arm, I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm. After staying there for about an hour, I observed that this swelling moved like a worm going from one place to another, though more lightly than expected, as if it were quicksilver moving from one location to another.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then it moved to the pain in that area and embedded itself in the muscle, and then stayed there for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it moved to the other arm before reaching the other side of the body.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then it returned to me, revolving throughout her body as I observed; and I was greatly amazed by its transformation and the speed at which it moved from one member to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had seen this before in my patients in the same manner; however, I have observed many cases where the pain is transferred from one member to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But do not examine it with the fingers in the same way as in a woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think it was anything but that which occurs because the woman is old, or of dry body and exposed veins, and in this case, there is a changed sensation of wind.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this reverse cure does not appear in those who are delicate and have a moist body with engorged veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to cure him, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not apparent to you by touch as we have said, then you press on that area lightly and scratch over it until that confined wind is released, and cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not feel it with your fingers, then cure it by purging the body and expelling wind, and treat it with foul-smelling pills and pills of seraphicum and similar remedies.
De extraccio de sagetas.	On the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse according to their types and the parts of the body into which they strike. Their diversity includes those with large points, small points, concave points, dull points, solid points; those with three angles, those with barbs, and those with feathers.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which affects the members and parts in which injury occurs according to two manners: for the members are either principal organs, such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and their likes; and thus when an arrow strikes one of these organs and shows signs of death to you, which cause I will recount shortly, then it is necessary that you avoid extracting that arrow in those where death would be certain if the arrow were in a place with the greatest dangers, and when these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden deep within the member, then you extract that and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the signs of the skull is when an arrow strikes it, and passes through the bone, and emerges from the cyphac which is above the brain, for you will experience violent fever, and blindness, and vertigo, and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and burning of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of understanding and vomiting of bile, and speech is suddenly cut off and the voice is destroyed, and from the wound site a white moist substance resembling powder emerges, and your appearance becomes wet with the flesh's moisture.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore if these signs appear to you, then abstain from the treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	And the signs of the arrow when it strikes in the heart, so that it is near the left breast, and one feels that the point is fixed in a hard place, not in soft tissue; and strongly there, the movement of the arrow resembles the pulse's movement, and from the wound black blood flows, and there is coldness in the extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting; and thus you know that death descends completely swiftly.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when an arrow has pierced the lung are that frothy blood comes from the wound, and the vessels near the neck become inflamed, and the patient's color changes, and they expire a great spirit, and demand a suction of fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow penetrates the membrane that is in the feet, and the pain then approaches the small ribs, and severe pain with heavy sighing occurs, and not all the muscle members are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if you catch the arrow in the stomach, then force some undigested food out from the wound.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow is shot into the abdomen and embedded in it, make some incision at the wound site, or the skin, or the intestine that has been ruptured, and there is no hope for the extraction of the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow hits the bladder and urine comes out, and some process occurs in him that causes it to spread outside, and there is pain over the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	And as for the other members such as the face, the neck, and the throat, and the shoulders and the arms, and the vertebrae of the back, and the clavicle, and the thigh, and the calf and their similar parts of the limbs, they are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not find a vein nor an artery and is not a venomous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will recount to you what I have observed about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand this in relation to your treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that in one case, an arrow was embedded in the lacrimal duct of the eye near the base of the nose, and I extracted it from the other side, leaving the earwax undisturbed, and he was healed, without any harm to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who had been shot in the area around his eye, leaving the eyelid mostly intact. The arrow was deeply embedded and only a small part of it could be grasped to pull it out; it was a large, sharp arrow of the Turks, with a lion-headed point that had no barbs.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And it is beneficial for the patient, and not accidental that a bad accident occurs in his health.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had been shot in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, and that is the one which pierces; and then I incised over that between two cartilages, and it was already submerged in his throat; and then I delicately manipulated with that, and then extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man that had been shot in his abdomen, and it was thought he would die because of it; and thus, after thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition due to any disposition, I incised over the arrow and worked on it, and he was healed, and no further misfortune befell him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow had lodged in his back, and the wound had solidified over it; and after approximately seven years, the arrow was embedded at the root of his thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had lodged in her abdomen, and the wound had solidified within her, and there was no change in her condition, and the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And you see another man in whom an arrowhead is embedded in his face and the wound has healed around it and broken off the arrow, not finding any pain here, and similar cases can be found for this.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And extract the arrow from the man of the king's knights who was shot in the middle of his nose and had slightly tilted to the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden inside.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called for his treatment shortly after the arrow entered within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I found the wound of the arrow very narrow; and then I searched for it with a fine probe, but did not feel it; however, he felt a prick in his right ear, and then I suspected that this pricking was due to the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied a plaster to the area using a substance that has attractive and digestive properties, believing that the site will become inflamed so that the location of the arrow becomes apparent, drawing it out.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And no significant accident occurred in the area where the arrow had reached; and I continued with the plaster on it for many days, and no accident happened; and the wound healed during this time, and the patient was relieved of the protrusion for about many days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and reported this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I applied an acute corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it opened up, and with a probe, I examined it, and found the tip of the arrow embedded there, which adhered to the bone.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I adjust in the wound opening with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrowhead becomes visibly apparent to me, and I proceed at my own pace with this for a period of time between four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then intensify the wound's heat, and it is possible to insert the scissors into it, and remain there, without obeying any exudation, at which time I did not cease to refine and ingeniously work on that in various ways, until one day I managed to grasp it with forceps skillfully made for this purpose, according to how the form of those will be shown at the end of the chapter, after which I extracted it; then I restored that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors believed that the nasal cartilage could not be restored, but I restored it and the wound was consolidated, and the patient was healed completely, without any cause for concern.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting certain arrows for which you should pause and consider the meaning behind what I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions thereof are not understood through mere narration nor are they fully grasped by reading the book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise artisans compare a little with much; and what is present with what is absent; and they discover new operations and novel instruments by tracing back to the strange causes of the craft when accidents occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not ejected from the limbs in which they are embedded, but according to two ways: either by attraction of the place where they enter; or by the opposite action from the other side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is ejected from the place where it entered is an arrow that has penetrated fleshly tissue and is expelled from there.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not obey the secretion of the time when you cut, then you should leave it for several days until the flesh around it rots and the attraction of it is lessened and its expulsion facilitated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it is embedded in bone and you do not obey the secretion, then leave it for several days and repeatedly apply attraction and motion each day, and it will be expelled.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey the secretion for several days, then you must pierce around the circumference of the arrow in that bone on all sides with a fine drill until the area around the arrow is widened, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is embedded in the bone of the head and has progressed into one of the ventricles of the brain, and if several of those symptoms that I mention appear in the patient, then abstain from extracting the arrow and leave it there until the patient's condition stabilizes for several days; for if the arrow reaches the sinus, then death will not be long delayed.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not embedded in the body of the bone but only in it and does not pass into the marrow, and the patient remains like this for several days without any accident occurring to them due to those causes, then you should address the entry point of the arrow and the site around it.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And if the arrow is embedded and does not come out with extraction, then you administer bandages around the wound as we have recommended, and then care for the area until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the arrowhead is already embedded in the part of the body and is not felt, then you should search for it by touch, and if you feel it, then pull it out using appropriate forceps suitable for extraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the shaft, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins in the way, then you should enlarge the wound so that it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if there are earrings with which it is held, then you should free the flesh in which it is embedded on all sides using every means possible; and devise a way to remove the earrings if you cannot extract the flesh due to the fracture of the earrings or their twisting so that you can overcome this obstacle.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in whatever part it is lodged, then use the twisting motion of your hand with forceps on all sides until it obeys; and be careful with subtle skill so that the arrow does not break and to make the extraction as easy as possible for you.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do this at that time, then leave it for several days until the areas around it can be examined, and then repeat what has been alleviated. 
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	And if there is contrary blood flow, then you administer what we have said about treatment in the previous chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And observe the source of the venous or nervous injury, or from tendons, and administer any means possible to prevent the arrow's effect; and do this with ease, tranquility, slowness, and firmness as I and you have recommended.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore, make the arrowhead contract so that the patient is according to the figure in which you should place the fire for the extraction of the arrow, for it is more beneficial. 
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But the arrows that are shot by the opposite side or from which you have already removed some part to the outside parts, or make the tip of the arrow sticky due to the sensation of the part above the prescribed chain and sometimes that area becomes prominent; then you cut over that area; and let the cutting be according to the amount taken by the forceps; and then pull it out, for it is made light to come out.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is lodged in the bone, then you twist it in the opposite direction so that the arrowhead penetrates the bone, and widen it as you go, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it there for some days, and then try to remove it again before it adheres.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is still there, then you push it out with it.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the shaft has fallen off and you want to administer an impulse, then introduce something into it, if it is deaf (blind), use a concave instrument so that its concavity enters the socket of the arrow, and then push it out with it.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	And if the arrowhead is concave, then you should forcefully push it in, because the arrowhead is loosened by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is embedded, then you must hollow out all the flesh in which the tip lies, if it is possible for you to do so, and then treat that area with whatever is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow falls into the foot, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or in the side, and is close enough that you can touch it with your finger, and it is possible for you to cut around it, then cut around it and be careful not to injure any veins or nerves, and extract it, and then treat the wound if necessary, and care for it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Method of using forceps with which arrows are removed:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let the ends of them be like a bird's beak, which are made like a saw to grasp the arrow so that they do not let it go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of those, various special sizes are made, large, small, and medium, according to the size of the arrow and its thinness, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of treating a deafened extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	And in this way, by means of a reed or similar instrument, the internal organs are lightened in the concave area and pushed with it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	From the text provided, it seems like we're dealing with a language that has elements of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Based on this mix, I'll attempt to translate each line as requested:
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	Here is the translation of the given medieval medical text line by line into English:
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	Here is the translation line by line:
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of those is below the curvature of the heel of the wild leg; and the second is sophena, and its location is below the thigh of the tame leg; and the sciatic vein, and its location is below the thigh of the wild leg; and in the thigh are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The healing of veins near the ears is for cleansing ancient and foreign and cancerous and ulcerated conditions of the head that are old.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those is according to what I recommend to you: shave the head of the patient, and rub the back of the patient’s head in the occipital region where both veins are with a broad cloth using good friction; then bind the patient's neck with a bandage so that both [veins] and their locations appear near the ears in two places slightly below the hairline; feel for those with your finger, and if you sense the pulse of those with your finger, here is where you should incise.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the lancet, which is sharp, and then insert it into the vein until the bloodletting needle reaches the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then raise your hand with the vein and the needle towards the parts above and incise the vein with a sharp incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the width of two fingers put together or around that; and let as much blood flow as you desire.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then bind it with a poultice and leave it until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already at the beginning of the book, mention has been made of these and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of performing phlebotomy on them is according to what I recommend to you: constrain the patient's head with movement until the two veins become visible by palpation, clearly manifest and their pulse can be felt with your finger; and then you will proceed with the incision.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you lift the chain above the vein at the points above with your index finger, and insert the flebotomi (phlebotomy instrument) carefully there, and elevate the vein upwards; and incise it in this way as you have done with the other two veins; and let blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then loosen the constriction of the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, and then place a pad and poultice over it and apply strong compression from above, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And the recall of them has already preceded, and from those the incision, and the attraction at the beginning of the book. 
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore, the treatment of phlebotomy of the frontal vein is similar to the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for old diseases of the face and for migraine and burns and foul-smelling ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the phlebotomy is as I recommend to you; thus, the patient should hold their arm with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument named a fleam, which has this form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the sharp point at the head of the fleam over that vein and strike it with force or by another means in the proper manner, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you desire; then dress the puncture wound of the patient and keep it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And sometimes it is opened with lateral phlebotomy, but the phlebotomy should not have a sharp end like other fleams; rather, it should have a broad end, and perform the phlebotomy transversely because the bone is close and strong, and a slender phlebotomizer would break there.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	More on the treatment of the two veins that are at the tear ducts of both eyes due to a rash in the eye from inflammation and pus, and for ailments of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient holds their own arm with a bandage, and then performs bloodletting on it, and you stand over their head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the phlebotomy is performed transversely along a little with a small phlebotomizer because there is no flesh in that area; and if the phlebotomizer is thin, break off the very end of it.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let blood as much as is necessary for you, and apply it to those areas, bind them tightly for one night, and then loosen them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	And the nasal bleeding (or more accurately, nasal vein puncture) is beneficial for acute fever and violent heat, and for illnesses of the face, migraines, and burns that occur on the face, especially when they are chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the bloodletting is such that the patient holds their head and you then hold their nose with your left hand, take a fine long bloodletting instrument and insert it into the middle part of the nasal tip precisely, because the vein does not appear to the touch there, and the blood will start to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	You must slowly withdraw your hand with the bloodletting instrument little by little and let the blood flow according to your need; then bind it for one night, because it heals quickly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	However, bloodletting from both arms is beneficial for alleviating swelling and the onset of leprosy, as well as many other diseases, impetigo, and severe corrosive ulcers, including herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the phlebotomy for them is that the patient stretches each one on their own side with a bandage; and the surgeon stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a stool.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then perform venesection on the vein with a wide-bore lancet little by little; and then extract blood in a measured quantity or according to what you deem necessary for this condition; and then do the same with the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then loosen the ligature and strengthen the two veins with a moderate tourniquet so that the patient is not choked, and leave it in place until the plague is healed. 
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the benefit of bloodletting from large veins is to alleviate small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and bad ulcers and cracks, as well as bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of bloodletting from those veins is that you place the patient in front of you, and tighten the neck with a bandage. Then spread the lips apart and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; the identification of each is by the darkness of each of both, and this is more evident where small black veins are around them. And then incise each vein through an incision made for that purpose.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	And if you have doubt and do not know which one of those [veins] to choose, then make an incision in the larger one, and from the more evident one among those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make an incision in both of the veins that are on the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	However, it is more customary to incise the two veins that are on the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of flebotomizing them is that you follow the patient between your hands before the sun, and lift their tongue, and observe its tongue, from one side vein and from another side vein, and the color of each is declining to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then bleed each one; and be careful not to overdo it when bleeding them, because those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are bled in the thigh are those which customarily occur in all men, and their bleeding is done in two ways: either with a bloodletting needle that is fine or olive-shaped; or by cutting with a lancet-like instrument, which they call alnessil, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this particular case is when you need to perform a section, and for those specific veins, use thin and delicate incisions according to the width of the veins and according to the tightness of them. 
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Forma de fleubotomi mirti:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Make an incision on his side in this way, and it is necessary to open the sunken veins that are full and have thick, visible contents, as well as those containing thick, clotted blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the method of olive-wreath trepanation: 
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this flebotomi is of lesser width and has a finer tip, and it is suitable for flebotomy of fine veins that contain subtle blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	Here is the translation of the sentence:
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is necessary for the phlebotomist, when performing phlebotomy on that area, to be very careful and have a great fear in doing so, because near there lies an artery; if he makes a mistake and punctures the artery during phlebotomy, he will cut that artery and cause a flow of blood, therefore one must not perform phlebotomy with a sharp point in that area but rather by cutting as necessary.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein does not appear through clear manifestation, then you must leave that area and move to another one, or seek some other part of the arm; or perform phlebotomy at the end of the arm where it is visible; and cut into that area with a sharp-pointed phlebotomy as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	But if you wish to perform phlebotomy on the patient, then before constricting the arm, touch the area between where you know the pulse is located, and then press upon it with your thumb; then loosen the arm and cut the vein with a concave incision using a sharp-pointed instrument as we have said; and be careful that you do not hit the artery with any force in this location.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see, as you tighten the bandage, swelling in the place where you have pressed with your finger, then that swelling is arterial swelling, and therefore it should be treated accordingly.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flow in phlebotomy like a child's urine, and the blood is fine and red, then know that it is arterial blood; and then you wait and place your finger on that spot for a long time; and then remove your finger, and if the blood flows continuously, because it separates in many places, then you strengthen the arm and leave it be.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And guard the patient from catching a cold, and keep them warm without causing any harm for several days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	And if the blood flow is not interrupted, and in cases where medicine is not available to you, then you should incise the artery if it appears to you; for the extremity is contracted, and the blood flow is stopped; or take some fig sap, apply that, take one half and press it on the site of the vein with a bandage and use pillows in between until the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the blood flow is interrupted, that is good; and if not, then treat it by recalling the location of the powders that stop the flow of blood. 
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the extraction of blood from him is difficult in many conditions because of the small space for the incision and the possibility of the arm's movement.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la parted jos del cors;
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And it is necessary for the phlebotomist to be aware of the superficial vein in the phlebotomy, because that one is a nerve; and then when adjusting during the puncture of the phlebotomy and hitting the nerve, it will cause stupor in them, and healing becomes difficult, and often they are not fully healed. This nerve sometimes appears to be felt; and if it is hidden from some people and is subtle and does not show itself, then you must place the phlebotomy tool with which you perform phlebotomy using a section of wool, and avoid the nerve with your skill.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should open the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of performing phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it attracts blood from the head and provides relief to diseases of the eyes.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And it is proper in this case, if you want to perform phlebotomy, to use an olive phlebotome or a myrtle phlebotome; for it is the safest method for all veins, as it does not touch the artery or nerves.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, it is necessary for you to perform phlebotomy in such a way that you do not puncture only the head of the vein with the phlebotome, but rather find the lightest spot, and do not hit it if it is not discovered by the first percussion over which you may perform phlebotomy several times.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, it often happens that a hematoma forms in some people when phlebotomy is not performed on the first attempt, but do not puncture in the same place where the hematoma has formed.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	However, the quality of the phlebotomy and its consequences are important factors that must be considered in their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first line of the text discusses specific conditions under which phlebotomy (bloodletting) should be performed and where it should be applied. Here's the translation:
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And if phlebotomy is performed on the third day or at the earliest pus formation, let three hours of the day have passed.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	More phlebotomy which is administered, more when it brings convenience and necessity to do so, whether by night or day, at any hour and in any season.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is necessary that a child not be circumcised until they have reached the age of fourteen years, and a pregnant woman should not be circumcised except between the fourth month and the seventh, and elderly women who have already passed sixty years shall not be circumcised.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wishes to be circumcised by any method, it is necessary to cleanse their intestines before the circumcision with a lion's cathartic, if there are retained fecal fragments within them, so that the veins do not carry the superfluous substances into the circumcision of the cleansed intestines, which could corrupt the principal limbs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And patients who are weak due to excessive sexual activity and drunkenness should not be circumcised, nor those who are recovering from illness or intoxication until they are fully recovered, nor those suffering from dropsy. Moreover, circumcision should be avoided near colic attacks and vomiting, and during periods of increased sexual activity, labor, exercise, fasting, or wakefulness, and any cause that weakens the body's strength, whether physical or vital.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And also consider the refinement of humors before this if the blood is thick, through foods and drinks, and through medicines if it is possible to do so.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And then bathe them if there is no reason to prohibit it, or let them exercise in some way so that the blood may be refined.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And perform the bloodletting in the morning around the hour of terce (about 9 AM), as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And take care that on the day of bloodletting, the patient is protected from all evil accidents of the soul, such as anguish, anger, fear, and from all bodily exertions, such as excessive work, hardship, worry, and similar things.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And let there be present in his chamber the things that are customary for people to use, such as aromatics and scents, and balms and similar items according to the extent of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And let the bloodletter sit on a higher cushion than the cushion of the person who is to be bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then extend the patient's arm, and let the bloodletter rub that area with his hand two or three times; then bind the arm with a bandage and wrap it around twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if the constriction is moderate, because a constriction that is not equal, or a constriction due to excess, then you prohibit blood flow; or it is treated with softening, and then you prevent the escape of blood from the body.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And then for the constriction, it is necessary that the person who needs to be bled should rub their hands together until the veins are swollen and can be felt.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then the phlebotomist should anoint their lancet with a little of proper olive oil; and then place the index finger of their left hand on that vein, slightly above the site where the bleeding will occur, so that the vein protrudes a bit, and the percussion can determine which veins are taut like cords, these should be avoided for phlebotomy, and among those, the ones filled with air, when pressed by the lancet, contract and reveal themselves; the lancet does not sink into the vein, and if it does, that one is narrow.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And thus, the phlebotomist must be careful and attentive to all these matters.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then remove the lancet, but if the vein is cut in one go, that is good; and if not, repeat this process slightly away from that spot, or over it with pressure, if the area is not inflamed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the area is abscessed or the patient is scared, then you leave it for one or two days, and do not tighten the bandage, because forcefully pulling an abscess can cause harm, nor should they enter into a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the phlebotomy if needed. 
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the puncture is small and thin blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will come out as desired, then you repeat the phlebotomy in that area according to rightness and adjust slightly on the puncture, and do this with haste before the site becomes inflamed, for when the place becomes inflamed in many people you should make a smaller puncture.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	And if you find that area already inflamed, then do not repeat the procedure on it, for it does not serve any purpose; and apply some part of an ointment to that area, for it relieves the body from blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this case to use oil and the other ointments.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, apply ointment in all phlebotomies where you bleed the veins to reduce blood from the body, and use theriac, alfadoc, and sagzenea when one of these is placed on the site, for the blood is thinned and coagulates when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large inflammation is generated at the site of phlebotomy, which often happens, especially to those who have not been bled before or where the vein puncture was small, then you should apply and place a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly heated, over the area for about an hour, as it dissolves [the inflammation].
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And it must be done near the emergence of the blood from that vein with completion from it or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if there remains in the area for several days some blackness or greenish color, do not worry about it; and if you wish, place over that area some substance of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some substance of mint juice or calamint or similar to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And various white swellings and elevations should be treated with bloodletting from the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then place your hand on that area, and if you find softness, apply your compression to that spot, because when there is an elevation in that area it is evil and bad; and therefore be careful not to press on that for any reason we have mentioned, for fear that blood might flow from the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make a poultice with something that has astringent properties, so that the area becomes hardened, and then treat it with another form of treatment until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And it is necessary to draw blood from every person according to the quantity of their strength and according to the predominant color of the blood as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, you should let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see it thick, you should let it flow until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, you should let it flow until its sharpness is reduced.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And for those who are full and strong and have a need for blood extraction in one session, the incision of the vein should be enlarged and the phlebotomy should be broad.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in that which is swollen, the opposite should be done, and it must be drained in frequent sessions, and the treatment should be strict.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best practice in venesection is that the cut should be transverse, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of venesection is safe from blood flow and nerve injury, and it is more praised and safer than venesection according to latitude and longitude. 
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And in cases where fainting is customary to occur before bloodletting, you must treat this condition before the bloodletting with a bit of bread soaked in pomegranate juice or warmed simple oxymel; and draw out the blood in three or four stages.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is inflamed due to a complex condition, then before the bloodletting take an infusion in myrrh syrup or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or in an aromatic and strongly scented syrup.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if you happen to faint due to bloodletting, which is caused by a great loss of blood, then it is necessary to drink water with meat broth and strongly scented subtle syrup; and use aromatics with ale, and anoint their feet with that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the section on the chapter of fainting due to evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And for those who wish to thin their blood and dissolve it gradually, it is suitable for the person for whom bloodletting is a significant evacuation. The virtue of this method is phlebotomy, which evacuates blood little by little, according to the amount of the virtue over continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	And for those who wish to thin their blood and remove it a second time, and whose body is strong, this should be done approximately seven or nine hours after the first bloodletting.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	And if one wishes to draw blood from the body opposite to the side to which it declines, it should be done on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And when you want to release the arm and evacuate blood a second time, since the vein's orifices are already closed and it has become difficult for the blood to flow out, that you press over that area with force and slightly extend the bent limb, for this is too harmful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence line by line:
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if the necessity to perform secondary bloodletting arises and it is not avoidable, then apply the bleeding at that location or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called the "cubit vein" is opened in the area of the fossa or basilic vein, when those are not found or are hidden, because it is composed of those veins. 
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient introduces their hand into hot water until the vein becomes red and appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then apply moderate tension on that area with a bandage; and then perform a puncture transversely, not longitudinally or latitudinally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the incision be wide and perform your puncture where you pierce slightly above the joint of the hand.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is restricted, then soak the hand in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your goal.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the summer days, then you are excused from soaking the hand in warm water, and instead, the body should be placed in warm water during winter. 
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, because there are no pulsating veins or nerves here.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the vein in the right hand is relevant to diseases of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the phlebotomy on him is that you stretch your hand with a bandage or with your own hand, after you have placed it in hot water, until the vein becomes swollen and well shown to the view; then puncture that transversely; and if you cut through it completely, do not cause any harm by doing so.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And keep your hand steady during the phlebotomy, because otherwise the nerves of the fingers will be exposed and unprotected.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then wash your hand in warm water and let the blood run into it, because if you do not wash that area in warm water, the blood will clot at the vein's opening, and this is prohibited for flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is drawn according to the necessary amount, then you should press on the vein with oil and salt so that it does not close immediately; and similarly, you must do this along the entire straight path.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The benefit of performing phlebotomy on the left hand is that it contributes to healing diseases of the brain.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And similarly perform phlebotomy on the other arm as you have done in the other [arm].
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the benefit of phlebotomy from the vein saphena is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as diseases of the uterus, and for the retention of menses, and for diseases of the sores and ulcers of thighs and legs, and similar diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is such that the patient should immerse their foot in warm water and rub it until the veins become visible; then tie a bandage around the ankle; and at the location where the vein becomes clearly visible, you should place your finger, from which branches spread out on the surface of the foot like small streams.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And thus, perform an incision to remove the pus from the broad vein or leave the chest cavity free of the heel and the accumulation under it, whichever is better and more advantageous.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform a puncture on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are beneath that surface of the foot, and place your incision such that you puncture across it, as if you were going to cut it lengthwise. 
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the phlebotomy be done by you.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	And if bleeding is prohibited, then soak the foot in warm water and let the blood flow into that so that it may be evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake on the first attempt, then repeat with phlebotomy slightly away from it, for the area is salty; and do not fear malice, but rather be careful of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly apply the sulfuric compound to the other foot equally. 
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And concerning the sciatic vein, the location is as we have said, place the foot with the ankle at the wild parting.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the treatment for hip pain when it is due to blood corruption is phlebotomy.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of the patient is that the patient enter into a bath, and they hasten and strain the thigh of the patient from the side of the ankle above the toes with a long thin bandage, for it only appears through this.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And so when it appears, then you perform arteriotomy on that according to each skill that is possible for you and across the transverse area, which is better; or incise that through incision or section that through sectioning, for the location of it is suitable.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in many men moderately spread out; and if you find that one, and it does not appear to the full sense, then puncture some branch of it, which appears on the back of the foot instead of the area near the little toe and the ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be careful of the nerves, and let as much blood flow as you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then release the constriction and place a bandage over the area of the phlebotomy, tightly binding the spot, for it is quickly healed.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Regarding ventilation and the qualities of using those methods.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Bleeding can be done with horns, or irons, or reeds.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And bloodletting is performed in two ways: one of them is by incision and extraction of blood, and the other is bloodletting without incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this bloodletting that is without incision is done in two ways, for it is either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And for the bloodlettings that are administered by incision and extraction of blood, there are fourteen sites on the body. Among these, one site where bloodletting is performed is alnocrati, which is the back part of the head; another site is at both sides of the neck; bloodletting from the chin below the mandible but above the mouth; bloodletting from both temples; bloodletting from alohoster, which is at the end of the spine; bloodletting from two axillae, which are the armpits; bloodletting from both wrists; and bloodletting from both thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And for bloodletting, you do not extract the blood from the small scattered veins in the flesh, and by this method you do not diminish their strength as would be the case with arteriotomy; nor should bloodletting be performed with fire or without fire until the whole body has been evacuated of excess.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	And if the necessity to perform bloodletting is provoked by illness or continuously, administer it at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of the month, and at any time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that among men there are those in whom blood is multiplied to the point where it needs extraction through bloodletting and they find heaviness and heat in their head; and of these, some experience swelling and heat in their face, head, and neck; and of these, some have sharpness in their face and forehead, darkness, and dullness in their eyes; and of these, there are those who sweat at the site of bloodletting; and of these, there are those whose menstruation is increased; and of these, there are those who experience a taste of blood in their mouth or whose tongue is swollen and spits blood; and of these, there are those whose sleep is frequent, and those who see blood in their dreams with heat, chills, plagues, and other similar causes.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when you encounter any of those causes, and particularly if it is in the third or a bit later during the month, then I command that ventilation be performed more than two or three hours after noon.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the benefit of ventilating the nape is that when you apply pressure to the head and cause it to sink into the pillows; but it must be done close to the evacuation of the whole body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this cupping is in the location of the cephalic vein incision.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not advisable for someone with a cold constitution or who has catarrh to use it, because it causes great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And by this, there is no need for the use of those old methods, and in which heads such fresh illnesses occur.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	More to the one who is continuously over that, forgetfulness (or unconsciousness) sets in; and because of this, you must command the cupper (or blood-letter) to slightly remove his hand from the bleeding device on those areas, fearing the generation of unconsciousness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica:
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is necessary that the suction cup be heated slightly with alcohol, for if it is placed directly, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the application of cupping to the temples alleviates accidents in the head and ophthalmia, and migraines, and suffocation, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is used instead of bloodletting from the temporal veins.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And you must command the cupper not to press his hand too hard during the application so as not to penetrate the artery and cause a flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And the application of cupping to the chin alleviates hiccups in the mouth and corruption of the gums, and it resembles treatments for illnesses in the mouth; it serves as a substitute for bloodletting from the veins that are near the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	And the cupping applied to both armpits alleviates caphatan, which is caused by an excess of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the cupping applied to both sides within the elbows provides relief similar to bloodletting from three veins, namely the basilica, fusca, and cephalica, for it draws blood from all those smaller veins that are in the flesh, and from the finer veins of the larger veins until the attraction reaches the three main veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the blood-letter not to proceed too much in scarification, for the area is devoid of flesh, and leave its nerves and arteries intact.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a leech with which you apply suction over the ankles and transfer to the hemorrhoids of the anus and to the pus-filled ulcers.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And you must command the bloodletter to make a large leeching site, and that it be of elm, because the area requires strong drying; and strongly apply subtle leeches and let it be scarified with scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta,
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, fever weakens the whole body and causes fainting spells in many people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And regarding the application of cupping, it is particularly beneficial to apply cupping to the two sides of the back.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the placement of the cups is such that you place the cup at the beginning, apply suction moderately, and do not prolong the placement of the cups; rather, place them lightly, remove them gently, so that the humors come to the surface gradually.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not stop repeating this and continue until you see the area already reddened and swollen, and the coagulation of blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And now you should scratch the area and gradually repeat the suction; then consider the condition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that person who has tender flesh with few pores, you should scratch them once and not more, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And instruct the cupper to increase the scratching slightly and moderately, and apply the suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if there is thickening in the blood, then you must scarify twice, for in the first time the path for subtle extraction of the blood and its moisture is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second examination acquired from the extraction of thick blood. 
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is excessively foul, then a third scarification should be performed so that the last of it may be purged.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract blood slowly or in small amounts, a scarification is enough for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we do so with a large scarification; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we must scarify with an even more pronounced scarification.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term "scarification" refers solely to the depth of the incision.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the vein is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, it is necessary that the areas for cupping be anointed more soothingly, more openly, and more resolvingly; if it is summer, then with oils such as aloes oil or violet oil, or double almond oil, or horehound oil; and if it is winter, then with narcissus oil or lily oil, or camomile oil, or blood oil, and similar ones.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick and cold, then the oil should be marjoram oil, or balsamite oil, or aloes oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the bloodletter has large pores of tender flesh, then it is necessary to abstain from oil, and it is necessary that at this time the areas for bloodletting be washed with cold water or fresh spring water, or with water from a dew, or with water from rainwater, and similar things should be done.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for the one whose blood is of great humidity, wash his bloodletting sites with sour wine, or with water from myrtle and sumac, and similar things should be done.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for the one whose excesses are thick, wash his bloodletting sites with old wine, or with water from thyme, which is marjoram, or from an infusion of dill, or chamomile, and similar things should be done.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it is necessary to protect the bloodletting before bathing; usually, it should be administered shortly before the bath by one or two hours, and it is necessary to rest near the bloodletting site.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is necessary is that bloodletting should be regulated before the actual bloodletting. 
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Consider the following translation of the provided medieval medical text:
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And restrict their foods as if they were lentils, and serve them bird meats, and foods seasoned with herbs, and the like.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for the one whose condition is acute, it is necessary that they drink almond syrup or coriander seed syrup mixed with sumac and sweet-smelling wine between old and new; and it should be advised to them to use moderation in drinking and eating, and to avoid foods like garlic, hemp seeds, pheasants, small birds, and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And on the day of bloodletting and flebotomy, drinking should be more than food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it should be given to drink at certain hours to some people theriaca alpharac, or medicines of musk, such as mastic, or alcelita before bloodletting or before flebotomy or afterward, so that the main limbs are comforted and the blood is refined; and they should not take those heated substances.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	And the bloodlettings that are performed by scarification should be done on areas such as the liver, and over gout and podagra, and on the navel, at the sites of the joints, and on the psoas muscle, for these parts cannot withstand scarification on them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired for that purpose but the suction of blood from the limb, just as placing a cupping glass on the breast in the illness of nasal bleeding; and they use this to dissolve the cold viscous wind trapped within the limb, just as placing [it] on the abdomen and navel; because this rarefies the limb and warms it and removes the pain when you resolve the wind.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is already placed on the lungs when you encounter their congestion or phlegm, because by the power of strong suction, it overcomes the congestion and eliminates the phlegm from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly, it acts when placed on the liver and spleen to expel the wind trapped within those organs.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these cupping glasses are applied only with suction; and sometimes they are applied with heat as well.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And sometimes they are applied filled with tepid water in the diseases of the spleen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is done so that the cupping glass becomes filled and thus larger, either with hot water alone or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of cupping administered with fire: the diameter of the orifice should be two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of air inside should be half a palm; and it should be placed on his side, in the area that is within the circuit, halfway, where the opening should be small enough for an needle to fit inside.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It should be made of hard wood or citrus, with thick edges, round, smooth, and flat so that it does not move the limb from its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And in the middle of the transverse bar made of wood or iron, a candle should be placed with fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this cupping should be larger than the one we have recommended; and it should be slightly smaller according to the illness and the age of the person using it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the cupping for children and those who are weak is different from the cupping for young adults and those with larger bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the method of applying this cupping with fire is to extend a cloth over a small candle of wax after properly heating it with good firewood, and place that candle in the middle of the transverse bar at the center of the cupping, so that the fire is lit around it without burning the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then it should be placed on the limb of the patient, and the finger is to be over the area we have mentioned, such that when we have the cupping vessels and do not want the finger to come off so that vapor rises over that area, then the cupping vessel will dissolve immediately.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then light the mixture according to its manner of use, and repeat that if you need to do so again.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	Use a cupping device in the treatment of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no crosspiece or valve, and it is not used except when filled with water, and is placed over the affected area only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: The larger the cupping device, the better it is, as it can hold a large quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter XC VII.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting is not administered on many members but only on those members where the placement of cupping devices is not possible due to their small size, such as the toe and gum and similar parts; or on a member that is devoid of flesh, such as the finger and nose and their likes.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those leeches that you have found in clean, stagnant water.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then they should be left day and night in stagnant water until they become hungry, and ensure that no cause of obstruction remains in their bodies; then evacuate the body at the beginning with bloodletting and cupping; then foment the patient's limb until it reddens; then place them [the leeches] on it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and spill over. 
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suck out the area with a cupping device, it is more beneficial in treatment.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the area with wine and then with clean water; it should be rubbed and squeezed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the flow of blood extends near the application of leeches and that is sweating, then soak a cloth in cold water, and place it on top until the sweating stops.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is flowing excessively, then sprinkle vitriol powder or gall and similar astringent substances until the bleeding stops; or place the paste of boiled broad beans on the area, leave it until the beans dry in place, and thus the bleeding will stop.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And it is necessary, if needed, to repeat the application of leeches, when it is possible to change them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the use of leeches is prohibited due to suspension, then rub the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the spots until blood comes out; and place them there, for they will draw out any blood as soon as it appears.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to fall (referring to something like boils or swellings), sprinkle a little bit of ground aloe, or salt, or ash over them, and they will soon fall.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the chapter of the third part: on restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine; it is about the restoration of fractures and dislocations in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	O son, know that foolish doctors and common ones, as well as those who have not studied the books of the Ancients or even read a word from them, boast about this chapter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this method of the knowledgeable is kept private in our land; and I have not forgotten it at any time; nor did I adopt what came after, but rather through the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying to understand them, from which I extracted their knowledge.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then I directed myself to experimentation and study throughout my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter everything that my knowledge contains and on which my experience has passed; since I have summarized these for you and freed them from the burden of lengthening; and have abbreviated this at the end of summarizing; and shown this at the end of declaration; and formed in this many forms of the treatments that are administered, as is done by adding to the declaration, just as I have done in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	Capitol primier.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fractorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Cover therefore we must say in the preface of this chapter the summaries of the speech; and the chapters to the understanding of which at the beginning is forced the craftsman and stands on the truth of those; so it is for you and those who are quick to know or learn this noble art other than you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And thus it is said that when you encounter a fracture or dislocation or sprain or bruise, then at the beginning you must treat with bloodletting or bandaging that area, or both together, unless prohibited by any cause, such as weakness of strength, or if it is in one who has just been born, or old and decrepit, or if it is during a time of intense heat, or intense cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then one should be content with food such as fresh herbs and meats of birds and crabs; and we prohibit heavy meats and filling oneself with foods and all foods that fill the veins with blood, except when you are sure to use cautery for an abscess, and if you do not fear effusion of matter into the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their original regimen with which they were accustomed.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And thus as the broken bone begins to heal, then the patient must be fed nutritious foods rich in thick and heavy nutrients with viscosity, such as foods made of baked wheat with water, rice, beans, fish, cow's stomachs, eggs, fresh cheese, thick wine, and similar items. With this regimen, fracture coagulation occurs more easily and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that the fractured bones in young men and the elderly cannot be naturally continued and consolidated due to the dryness of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature at all times by the drying of those members, and thus continue and strengthen those that belong to them at the end of the softness, just as the bones of young children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nevertheless nature adjusts and you should bring together the broken bone from all sides with something similar to glue in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens that space where they are conjoined and tied together, until strength and firmness come, just as fire at the beginning, until nothing prevents it from completing its work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to restrict the patient's food, food that is heavy, viscous, and thick, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Note the variety of fractures according to the diversity of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the thigh bone is different from a fracture of the skull bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the back bone; and similarly, all other limbs are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I will proceed with the recollection of each type of fracture, explained in its own chapter distinct from the other.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Note the diversity of fractures within the fracture itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And there are various types of bone fractures in the limbs; for it is made an arched fracture or what happens to the ribs; and sometimes the fracture follows the length of the bone: and these are the fractures of the thigh, ribs, and proceeding and non-proceeding addictions, just as it is done on a quill when prepared for writing, and there is a fracture with plaque and disruption in the head, and it is a small fissure.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for each type there is a specific remedy or torment in the restoration, which will come with a distinct recollection of it in its proper places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Sign of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by this is known a bone fracture: its deformity, and that prominence and change in appearance when you feel it, and also when you press on it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, when there is no apparent deformity in the location and your touch does not cause significant pain when you move the bone and the patient does not find great pain, then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	Sometimes there may be a deformity or small fissure, in which case you should not forcefully move it with your hand and through compression; sometimes place on it some medicines of which recall is mentioned at that moment when you are attending to the area; and then apply a tight bandage for subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that when the area is bent but not split in two or any other way that does not affect its structure, and the entire part of its connection is undamaged, then you should begin to correct it gently so that inflammation does not occur.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if inflammation does occur, then leave it for several days until the inflammation subsides; and then treat it in whatever manner you can with gentleness and ingenuity.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration and healing of the soft tissue is quicker than that of the bone where the injury occurred.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen that second part so that the memory of it returns.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if the injury is in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from both ends, whether it is an arm or a leg; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two ropes or one rope and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And you should position the limb in such a way that it is placed according to its natural shape while the broken parts are being extended, so that you can skillfully return those additions in their proper places using any method available to you.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful according to your strength that you do not cause pain or injury to the patient through your operation; and do your best to align one bone with its companion in the best possible way.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it is necessary that at that moment you skillfully touch with your hand the affected area, and if there is any other cause, correct it and adjust it according to the extent of your ability.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And violent extension and compression are counterproductive, just as some unskilled doctors do, who often cause abscesses to form due to their operation or cause contraction in the limb, which we have seen happen frequently through their repeated operations.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then apply, both equal and proper operation and constriction of that limb, and rest and tranquility; warn the patient about this and make them understand not to move that part during their waking hours and sleep, and observe its movement and agitation, and prevent all its movements with all its strength; and await until the position of the limb is one where pain is assured, which occurs when it is in a disposition that causes pain or injury; then it must be changed to another position where no pain is felt; and take care with this so that the limb’s position is straight and even, so that when restored, the limb does not become twisted.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the constriction of the tranquilized limb is what I recommend; so that you know that broken limbs vary in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those. 
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small, such as the arm and the thigh and the calf and similar parts, it is necessary that the wrapping be of very fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And for those that are large like the thigh or the buttock, it is necessary to wrap them with a broad and firm bandage, because the broad binding connects the large and strong limb firmly on all sides with equal tightness, so that no blemish enters.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, before your evacuation of the dislocation, to place a suitable bandage over the site of that fracture with three or four layers according to what the limb requires; and hold your hand slightly on the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then come to the highest part of the fracture site, and hold more firmly so that your binding does not loosen with which you have held the area of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then stretch the area of the fracture slightly with wrapping, and gradually loosen the binding little by little until you have straightened a large part of the site.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap it again over the broken area with layers, and proceed with the layers to the lower part of the fracture; and let your operation in the binding of the wrapping and in loosening be as we have said for the first wrapping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place between the layers of linen or cloth that equalizes the curvature of the fracture if there is any curvature in it; and if not, do not place anything in it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place another bandage over it, and then apply these carefully made plasters to the areas where there is no inflammation or cautery-induced abscess, and in places where there is an abscess, place something that reduces the swelling; leave this for several days; and then strengthen the area with the plasters.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the plasters be made of half a cane of raza, carefully prepared; or they may be made of pine wood; or of palm bark; and the width of each plaster should follow this form and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the plaster that is placed over the fracture should be thicker and a bit larger than the other plasters, and the length of the plaster according to what fits the limb in size; then secure the plasters with another bandage as per your initial binding; then apply wax appropriately as we have said about binding, which means your binding should be tighter at the site of the fracture, and as you move further away from the fracture, the binding should be looser.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And it is necessary that the threads be moderate in thickness and fineness, and they should be made of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation by some false practitioners who use ropes of twisted fibers instead, this is a great error, for it disrupts the equality of the binding.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And fine threads are not suitable, because you will not achieve what you want with those due to tightness, and it is not necessary that between stitch and stitch there be less than a finger.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is irritated by the extremities of the stars near the constriction in those areas, then place there wool or carded fleece between so that it does not cause harm to them.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that not all broken limbs are set with splints on the first day; the reason is that when the limb is large, it does not need to be placed on the splints until about five days or seven days later, according to your assurance of the onset of inflammation.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of plasters with which the Ancients restored fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of a plaster for the restoration of fractures, suitable for various complications and especially for women and children, as it does not generate heat or cold: take powdered mill dust, which is the marrow of flour that falls off during the movement of the millstone against the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And prepare it thus, but sieve it with egg white, and make the mixture neither too thick nor too thin; then use it accordingly.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of plaster for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: take assafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is the resin of wild millet, all one drachm each; myrrh and aloes one drachm each; and alcohol two drachms. All should be crushed, sieved, and mixed with alichi water or egg white if the patient's condition is inflamed; then apply this plaster, as it has a good composition that easily restores broken bones and provides relief to many people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All are pounded in a mortar with fine grinding, and they are sieved, and they are mixed with water or egg white and is administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of treating joints and bones separated from their places, and which cause pain in accidents, fractures, and cracks: take clean wool and immerse it in sweet wine and cooked oil and place it over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	But in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration; rather, it cauterizes and properly expels the swellings and pains. 
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take leaves of wild fig and leaves of wild poppy; grind all of them together and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of plaster to be administered for the restoration of a bone fracture and when you want resolution of remaining abscess: take roots of elder, chamomile, and flowers of violets, flour of iris, all in equal parts; grind them all together and mix with wine if the limb is not inflamed.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is inflamed, then soothe it with coriander water or with water and the oil of it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of plaster that is more effective in resolution than the first one, when a hard abscess occurs and you want to restore the limb: take roots of elder and seeds thereof, and pomegranate rind, melilot, marjoram, flowers of violets, chamomile, all in equal parts; grind them all together and mix with sage water or sweet water or wine, according to the nature of the limb and the condition of its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	Here is the translation of the provided text line by line into English:
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	And in Gaul, it is observed that for the restoration of a fractured limb and the causes where there is drying with little warmth, things like myrrh, ashes, and similar to those causes which we have recounted are applied.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of plaster that comforts the injury and pain: take mithridate, of cheese, of human placenta or bird's down, and of alum, and salt, in equal parts; they should be crushed, sieved, and mixed together, and then made into a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	And the quantity according to which the binding should remain and then be loosened is that you consider if it's not an accidental pain nor a severe injury nor the bone is fractured or displaced from its place, then you do not loosen for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if you encounter a place with strong pain or swelling, then you should treat or release that area at once, and remove the plaster from it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take linen cloth and sea sponge soaked in water, and submerge that in tepid water, and wash the area until the swelling subsides and the pain is calmed; then let the limb rest for an hour; then place on it wool moistened with sweet wine and oil or ointment, and leave it there overnight until you are sure of a safe abscess, and that the inflammation of the limb has rested, and the pain has been alleviated.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that subtle binding and small plaster without tightening it with your initial constriction, and treat it gently until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you find that the abscess and the hardness and the pain and the inflammation and all the symptoms are completely alleviated, and there is no need for a plaster or binding, then you should repeat the process in the same way as you did at the beginning.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if you do not encounter any of the causes we have mentioned in the limb, then do not release it until three or four or five or seven days later; and sometimes all of this is left for twenty days according to what appears necessary for the release of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and approaches the coagulation of the flesh over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And now adjust it more at the constriction than in your initial tightness entirely, and adjust according to the swelling of the food (stomach/intestines) of the patient, as is preceded by the recollection of him.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	More if you see the place of the fracture already dry and exhausted more than it should be, then know that the nourishment is prohibited from reaching there; therefore, moisten that area with lukewarm water constantly as you clean it; and do this for all three days; and slightly loosen the binding, so through this operation nutrition flows to the limb, and it heals lightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	However, what those unskilled restorers of a fractured limb do otherwise when it is not restored properly at the beginning, and is restored with deformity according to their operation, is an error, causing great fear; if this were correct, the Ancients would have expanded on this in their books and acted accordingly.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do this, which is why it is more reasonable to assume that it should not be done.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter second: On fractures when they occur in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are many, and their forms are diverse, and the causes are distinct. For some fractures are caused by the blow of an axe, which knocks all the bone inside the skull, leaving the bone exposed, just as it does in a tree trunk; therefore, this type is named ascial. Or the axe penetrates part of the bone, cutting into the flesh but not passing through to the back side of it; and this type of fracture is called levatio absoluta.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the danger of these two fractures is either great or small, and it concerns a fracture that is comminuted or impacted; and the cause of it is percussion with a heavy object or falling on stone, and similar causes.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is either penetrating and approaches the periosteum which is beneath the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the severity of these two fractures is either great or slight.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And for a fracture that occurs in the bone, in the fine hair-like parts, and because of this, this type of fracture is called capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is a fracture that is caused either by falling or by the impact of a stone and similar objects, which causes some fragment of the bone to enter inside the parts, and it occurs in the area of concavity just as when impacts happen to the tiles on the roof when they are hit and pieces break off and go inside.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this is particularly done in bodies with moist bones, such as children's heads.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And thus, to all these types of fractures, they apply pieces like separate plasters.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will return to all of this with further explanation in its proper place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And know all these types of fractures by detection on them and by probing their depths and the discharge of corrupted flesh that is upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary type is known by what is discovered on the bone, which is cleaned and covered with linen, for the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	However, in the treatment of fractures, consider at the beginning the symptoms of the patient, and if you see through the symptoms that they indicate by clear sign of fear, such as vomiting from anger, and extension, and loss of understanding, and loss of voice, and fainting, and acute fever, and discharge from the bowels and burning of them, and similarities to their symptoms in the most severe conditions, then it is likely not curable.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you encounter unusual accidents and hope for healing, then you begin the treatment of him.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	Which means that if the injured person comes to you at the beginning of the injury and this happens in the winter days, then you must study the setting of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all dispositions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then you must be careful to set the bone before the seventh day, because what remains next to the bone may be corrupted by putrefaction, and so the accidents we have mentioned may occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already progressed to the putrefactive matter covering the brain and is broken into small fragments with friction, then you must incise the comminuted and abraded area, as I will recommend to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And you should shave the head of the injured patient, and expose the bone according to your customary method and skill based on the nature of the injury, being gentle with the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you encounter difficulties in the detection of the bone, bleeding, or an abscess, then you should pause and act accordingly. This means filling the area with cloths soaked in wine and oiled roses, and allow the injury to rest until the abscess is calmed and ensure that the bleeding has stopped; then proceed with the reduction of the bone and its treatment.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this is done in one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one way is that you cut the bone with a straight incisor, and this is its form: And then apply another incisor like this one, slightly more to the side than the previous one; and this is its form.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then apply another incisor further to the side than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it is necessary to have several different incisors, some of which are more to the side than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and are sharp at their ends, and they should be made of Indian iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them easily in percussion on the incisors so that the head does not become blunt and remains sharp.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then you must drill around it before applying the incisors with the drills, which are called non-deepening drills.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are called this way because these drills do not reach the edge of the bone but only get close to it, as their end or margin is round or has a small sharp point resembling a margin or a small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take of these probes a great number, each of which should be suited to the sharpness of each bone, including one for the head, where its end should be sharp, and the length and breadth should be according to the degree of sharpness of this probe.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three types of treatments: The quality of piercing around the broken bone is that you place the treatment on the bone and rotate it with your hands until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then change the treatment to another location, placing it so that the distance between each puncture equals about the thickness of a nail or thereabouts.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Then cut with an incisor between each puncture of the bone, and make that fine pus as much as you can at the end of the procedure, just as we have said, until you cleanse the bone, either with your hand or with some other tool that you will prepare for this purpose, such as tweezers and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And you must be cautious that the incisor does not touch any part of the spine.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And once you have pierced around the bone, separating it from the spine if it is connected to it, and you have extracted it, you must rasp and level it on its rough surface with a tool similar to an incisor, but it should be thinner and finer than the other incisors.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any small and brittle parts of the bones remain, then take those away easily with the instruments you have at your disposal; and then treat the wound with lint and ointments as we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another method of operation is light and far from fear, which you dissect the wound and expose it to great light; this is what he says: at the beginning, you must start by uncovering the part of the bone where the fracture is most severe and evident. Once you have uncovered that part, place the extremity of this gentle and slow cutting instrument, whose form is as follows:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the lens-shaped fracture is lion-like and does not cut into any cause, and the sharp fracture divides it into two parts lengthwise in front; thus as you see; that the lens-shaped fracture should be aligned with the spine with its sharp edge facing towards the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then strike on the side of the incision with a small hammer so that you cut through all the bone easily as it turns, and be sure about the flap so that no accident happens in any way, and even if the medic was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant among them; certainly, and even if he were asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When if any connected cause remains attached to the bone of the abdomen in some places on the bone, cut that part from it with the sharp end of a crescent-shaped instrument, and remove that part from it easily, for it is removed without harm and without fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the subcutaneous tissue, and what is cut off or remains of the bone is its surface, and roughness and small splinters remain in it, then you must scrape away that roughness and remove those splinters with fine razors which you have prepared in different sizes so that you can use them most suitably in all places where they are needed and apply them correctly according to how you wish to proceed with your operation on that broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you must apply with your reason at the beginning the blunter side of those razors, and then use progressively the finer side of them, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach administering the sharpest and finest of all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	And in each of the other small capillary and subtle fractures, you must apply treatment according to what you deem necessary for the correction of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is important to note that not all who have studied in that field are equally skilled or experienced.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And we have demonstrated this on large fractures as well.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the pancreas is removed when you eradicate the bone, then it is necessary to take cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge that in oiled rose, and place that over the opening of the wound; and then take another folded or tripled cloth and submerge it in wine and oiled rose and place that over the first cloth and do this as lightly as you can on top of it so as not to press too hard on the area; and then apply a linen bandage on top, and tie it only according to the size of the wound just enough.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave it with this treatment for one or two days until you are sure of a non-cautery abscess; then remove the bandage and apply medicines that have excessive dryness, such as lint ashes and bran of wheat, and powder of roots and of aristolochia, and similar things to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you should make these medicines into a powder that is sprinkled over the wound when they are dry; generally, apply to it any medicine whose property is to cleanse and not irritate.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And take care according to your skill that the wound in your treatment is clean; and there should be no deafness of pus or anything else; nor should you allow virulence to accumulate in it; for when it is applied over the brain's membrane, it corrupts that and spoils it, leading to a malignant malice affecting the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And apply to the skull where the bone is damaged and especially when the care of it is neglected, and there is blackness on its surface; therefore consider now if these accidents happen to the patient as we have said, know that it is harmful in every part.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if there is no blackening except from the medicine that is applied to it, and it is due to the power of that medicine causing such blackening, then you must take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil, and with those anoint a cloth, and then apply that over the wound; and then care for it with healing spices until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	For the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken into more than two main parts, or one of those may be slightly curved, because there are two bones in it, and the part between them is cartilaginous and does not break; thus, you only encounter friction, twisting, and curvature.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two parts of the nose is broken, then you must insert your little finger into the patient's nose and align that fracture inside with your index finger, while using your thumb outside to ensure the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And this should be done gently by you, and take care not to cause further pain to the patient through your procedure.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper main part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach it, then it should be aligned using the tip of a rod that is thin enough to reach.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in both parts, then you should treat it similarly.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And it is good for the restoration of him on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then around the seventh or tenth day you should remove the pus with cauterization.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then insert into the end of the nose a piece of linen cloth if the fracture is in one part, or place two bandages if the fracture is in two parts, and let the thickness of the bandage be such that it fills the passage of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the ancient restorers say that the bandages should be soaked in butter and changed throughout the day, but I do not agree with this; instead, it is better to soak the cloth in egg white mixed with powder of millet; then leave the bandage on until the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes, instead of a bandage, a piece of wool wrapped in linen cloth should be inserted into the nose; this is especially useful when the nasal fracture is severe and the patient's breathing is not obstructed.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this method is not necessarily required; if you wish, you can do this, and if you prefer, you can use bandages.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if swelling occurs again, apply a poultice to the nose with wax or fat mixed with sweet wine and rose oil, or use diachylon (a type of plaster).
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If you do not cause an abscess to appear through cauterization, then you must cover that area externally with barley flour and the powder of crushed eggs with egg white; then place a lion's foot over it, and do not uncover its nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the bones of the nose are fractured or comminuted, then you must incise over them and extract them with instruments suitable for that purpose; then close the incision, treat it with methods that promote healing and consolidation, and use plasters appropriate for that treatment.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if you encounter inflammation inside the nose, then you must treat it with cauterization and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not inflamed, then check if the fracture is only external and not split into two parts or bent internally; in such a case, the treatment is simple.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the right index finger; and with that finger, gently push the joint of the fracture inward to align the parts externally, using your other hand to support the external part of the bone; in this way, you properly realign it.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then it is necessary to administer extension from both sides according to correctness until it is possible to align it.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if you encounter the displacement of teeth to disruption, then strengthen those which you hope will remain with a gold or silver wire or cord; and then place cerot over the broken jaw, and then place a doubled cloth over it, and place a properly made splint or a piece of linen as long as the jaw over the cloth; and then bind it according to how your binding is prepared and where you need to apply it until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and place their food in sipped broths.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you suspect that the shape has already been altered in some way, then on the third day, be cautious and unbind it; then correct what has already been altered and apply a plaster made with powdered alum, egg white, or flour of squill, after you have removed the cerot from it, and place wool over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then when that plaster is placed and adjusted on it, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it alone, do not remove it until it is healed and the fracture has strengthened; for often this fracture takes three weeks to tighten.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if swelling occurs again, then administer what we have said multiple times during the patient's sedation until it is healed, and let that swelling be reduced. 
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, then consider whether it is a piece of bone that has separated or splinters, and you must carefully remove those splinters with what is appropriate for the removal of such debris.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you should enlarge it with trephination according to the amount needed.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And then when you have performed those tasks, and nothing unsuitable flows from them, then sew up the wound opening if it is large; and if not, apply one of the plasters suitable for this purpose to promote healing until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the collarbone when it is fractured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Often the collarbone is fractured in front of the muscle, and this fracture can occur in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	For it is either broken, separated, or divided into two parts without any complications; and its restoration is easy. Or it may be such that there are complications, making its restoration difficult. Or it may be that the fracture is accompanied by a wound.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation for that case, when the fracture is with a wound, is that you have two assistants present, so that one holds the support and follows the broken collarbone, and the other extends the neck to that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then align the fracture with your fingers into the shape that is needed, and it should not be on a small prominence nor in a concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then you must place under the patient's limb a sphere made of cloth or wool, the size of which should be according to your need; extend and lift the fork and compress the sphere with your hand until you align the fracture as needed.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the end of the fork to the outer parts because it has reached the shoulder, then the patient must be laid on their back, and place a cushion halfway in size over the muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant should press the muscle of the limb below so that the bone of the fork is raised towards the shoulder, and then you correct the fracture and align it with your fingers.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel splinters of the fork and they are causing pain, then you must cut over that area and remove those splinters easily.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you should plan an incision on it using one of the incisors that you have prepared for this purpose, since you have already placed the forked instrument called the sturnent, which serves as a clamp; and the sturnent is made of wood or iron, and this is its form:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a spoon, of which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to what you need from it, according to the size or smallness of the bone.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	And let the length of it be as much as is possible for you during the operation; that it have two ends just as you need, and one end be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you have extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and there is a risk of pus formation, then you should approximate the two edges of the wound with sutures.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear pus formation, then you should fill the wound with cloths and poultices according to the extent of the tear in the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if pus does form, then soak a cloth in sweet wine and rose oil and wine, and place it over the area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	But the fixation of the bone when it is wounded and severed is that you apply a plaster made of ground meal with egg white, and place lion's fat over it, and then place a splint if needed, which should be long enough and its width about one palm; and then place doubled poultices over the splint and the plaster; and then take a thin wooden board whose width is three fingers and length similarly; and then wrap that in cloth, and then wrap that cloth with the board at the site of the fracture; and then apply plasters as if wrapped around, wrapping it from the neck down to where necessary on the patient's limb, and extend it over all parts, and when you fix the bone with proper fixation, this is what should not be hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And altogether, the splint above the broken bone should not be loose; and therefore you must see the patient every day, so that when the bandage is softened or you notice the splint already to be loose, then you correct this and strengthen the binding.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient’s head on their pillow, and put under it a small cushion so that during the night the patient's head is elevated on one side; thus, the support of their shoulder is raised along with that side, and therefore the clavicle fracture is lifted by the elevation of the muscle; or have the patient's arm tied to their neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not remove the bandage unless you encounter pus or an abscess within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Then renew the plaster if you have seen that its surface has become like this, and adjust it to the constriction, restore it, and leave it until the fracture of the collarbone is restored and coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and healed according to the method in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men, it is done in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula part is broken on the outer side of it, and not through it but only at the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And thus when the area is broken — and it is broken at the middle part of it — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture, force its preparation and reduce it according to its natural shape in every manner of skill that is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then apply powder of ground meal mixed with egg white and lion's wool over the area; then place a layer of doubled cloth; and then cover it with a thin piece of linen according to the quantity of the entire spoon or somewhat more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	And if the thin piece of linen leaves a depression in any part of the spoon area, then fill that depression with lion's wool, and then raise the linen accordingly to make it level.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen it with a long bandage applied tightly and secure the thin piece of linen so that it does not move from its position.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And examine the bandage each day; whenever it becomes loosened, apply another layer and tighten it, and adjust the thin piece of linen if it has moved from its position.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And turn the patient onto their side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spoon area is restored in twenty days or twenty-five days.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And therefore, when this number of days is completed, then you remove the bandage, and be sure to know that this involves bones whose beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you process from the site of a bone splinter and place the chain there, then you cut into it, remove it, and proceed as we have said in the fracture of the clavicle: cauterize if an abscess occurs here.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol .vii.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	For the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	When the foot sometimes breaks in the middle and it heals slowly; however, the ends heal and are joined together.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of the accidents when the middle is broken, it declines into the internal parts and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, severe fever, and vomiting blood; and it is evident in the cavity where the bone is fractured and not hidden to the senses.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of him is that the patient should be laid on his back, and place a cushion between his shoulders; then press on his muscles, and align his ribs with both hands, and be delicate in the operation and in the adjustment according to every possible manner that suits this, until the bone returns to its proper shape.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place an ointment and lint over him, and cover it with a thin cloth of sage or calendula or something similar in lightness, as you wrap that in cloth; then be delicate in laying that on the broken bone so that it is not damaged; go around with the bandage according to the roundness of the back several times, and tighten that with a proper binding; then monitor the bandage at all times, and when it loosens, tighten it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity arises from corrosion or irritation, or pain, or an abscess that may occur in the area, then you should care for it by loosening and removing the bandage and eliminating the ointment, and correct whatever happened due to this using methods of healing him; then reapply the ointment if needed for that purpose; and adjust the binding until he is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol .viii.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	For the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Sure, here is the translation of the given sentence:
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And knowledge of it is not hidden from the senses; therefore, an investigation should be done with the mentioned methods. 
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration is such that you equalize the fracture with the mentioned methods as possible, so that it is aligned correctly, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a splint, if needed.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is penetrating inward, then it causes severe pain and puncturing in the patient, just as a puncture wound occurs in one who has been stabbed, and because of this, the bone pierces the membrane; and it leads to difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this condition is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the ants are engineered in such a way with many engineered parts.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And among these things it is said: one must prevent the patient from consuming foods that cause inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly does not become swollen and extended, and the fracture is not pushed outward.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	And let us take care of this so that it does not easily cause the formation of an abscess, if it has not already happened; and if it has already occurred, then it helps with this.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them said that a suction cup should be applied and then sucked strongly; it seems reasonable, but nevertheless it is feared that the suction cup might draw the excess substances to the area due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them said: the area should be covered with wool that has already been soaked in oil, and pillows should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, so that the binding is as when you wrap around that second roundness; then the patient should be treated with a cure for pleurisy using food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the patient suffers from severe constriction that is not tolerated, and the bone pierces the membrane with a puncture, we are concerned about the patient; therefore, it is necessary to incise over the area, expose the broken rib, and then place an instrument over it that holds the spine stable, remembering which one precedes, so that we can cut the bone easily and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then we bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with stitching, and we treat it with plasters until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if you encounter an abscess inside, then apply and soak pillows in oiled rose oil and place them over the area, and treat the patient with what is necessary for the internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let him lie on his side on which he sleeps until he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the spine and the neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and similarly to their articulations, and likewise in the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider, for if their hands are already softened, stunned, and lifeless, and cannot move them nor extend nor stretch them, and when you press them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle and they feel no pain, then you know that they will not be healed, and in the days of such conditions, it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you feel swelling and notice constriction with the fingers and pricking, then know that the bone marrow is safe and that you will heal the patient with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if it appears similar in the vertebrae of the neck and you want to know if it will heal or not, then consider the feet of the patient.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	And if you see that they are already softened, apply to those what is applied to the muscles, and then when he lies on his back, there is windiness and involuntary discharge, and sometimes he turns onto his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you know it is mortal, and thus do not labor in his treatment.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if none of those causes apply, the cause is better and lighter.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment is to apply a sedative to the abscess by placing olive oil or rose oil, or boiled hen eggs, on the affected vertebra; place this on it several times a day until the abscess is sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And now apply one of the comforting and stimulating plasters, and bind it tightly with a bandage; and command the patient to rest and stay calm and not to sleep on the painful area until they are healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if you happen to scrape the bone surface or any cause that has already separated it from the flesh, then it is necessary to dry out the wound and remove that piece of bone; then bring together the two edges of the wound with a suture if it is large; then treat it with some flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	And if the rear part of the bone in the buttocks is broken, which is the end of the thigh bone, then you must insert the thumb of your left hand into the buttock and align the broken bone as much as possible with your other hand according to the principle of equal pressure; then place a plaster and splint over it if those are needed, and finally secure it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel fractured flesh in it, then you should incise over that area, remove the fractured part, and treat the wound with the previously described treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the ankle.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the ankles are often broken, and when they break, the fracture is usually a communication at the ends of those bones and extends lengthwise, inclining inward toward the center; the patient feels pain in that area and puncture sensations, and the leg becomes numb when fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that area which is above the fracture, which is the shape of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the extremity of it, then you should align that according to what is appropriate for setting, so that it resembles its natural form.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	And if the fracture is in the spine or has already declined to the lower parts, then you should have the patient lie on their stomach while you prepare the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And then, once you have aligned that, place a plaster over it, and then place a splint of wood or a bandage over that, and secure it tightly so that there is no concern of puncture from the fracture nor displacement of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And align the concavity by filling it so that it takes on a tight form according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	And if an inflammatory swelling occurs, then you should stop the extension and restoration of it until the inflammatory swelling is reduced, and apply something to reduce that swelling as previously indicated; then proceed with the restoration, securing it as appropriate.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if it happens that the bones are splintered or broken, then you treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	For the restoration of the fracture of the auxiliary [bone or limb].
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Helper is that which is between the thigh inner to the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of it can be done in one of two ways, of which one is that you take flat wood of medium thickness according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And let there be two ligaments at the two ends, and then let it be suspended from a high place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And place the patient on a seat; then extend their broken arm over the wood until it reaches the tip of it at the middle point where the curvature of the wood is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend something heavy over that, or the servant should stretch it at the ends; and then the doctor should hold the fracture with their hands together until the fracture returns to its proper position.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other method is that the patient should lie on their back and suspend the arm with a ligature from the neck; then command two servants, one of whom holds above the fracture with their hands, and the other holds below it; and each of them stretches their respective end.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you pull on the fracture with one bandage and on that [fracture] with another bandage, and each of the two assistants extends their respective parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And therefore, if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then it must be that half of the ligament is placed over the tendon and the other left below the fracture by the knee.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is near the knee, then it must be that a bandage is placed over that area and over the knee.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Apply that with ease and perform the work, then when it is properly aligned as needed and applied correctly, strengthen that area if an abscess does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if an abscess does occur, then release the binding by the seventh day, and place on it wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess heals, and then strengthen that area.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the method to strengthen that area is to place a plaster over the fracture, then put a bandage of clean cloth over the plaster; then adjust the arm on that support, and place your open hand over their muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth and strengthen over the support the arm so that the arm is in a stable position, unless any cause from the broken bone prohibits this.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And now use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that you place over the fracture that splint which is more oblique and stronger than the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers on all sides.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Then secure the splints with the binding that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your binding over the site of the fracture should be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is more extended, the binding should be looser.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And thus you should adjust the position of the splints and the binding as we have said at the time when you restore the limb to its proper position, that is what you do.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess may form, then you should loosen the binding and the splints until the seventh day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Then examine the limb in all parts for three days so that no pus or inflammation occurs in the area; and ensure that the food supply does not reach the limb due to excessive tightness of the binding; thus, correct everything according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are confident that there is no cause for this, then do not remove the bandage until three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's body lie on their back, and their hands be placed on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place over the splint a pad full of wool equally, and ensure at all times, whether night or day, that the shape of the broken limb is not loose nor dissolved, or that the bandage becomes loose; therefore, correct this entirely with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And give the patient food according to the order we mentioned before, such that the food is light at the beginning until it starts to strengthen; and then you must gradually make the food more substantial for them.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	For it is customary that the splint and the bandage are kept tight for forty days; and after this period, they must be loosened, and a bath should be administered and treated with ointments that correct those issues.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is a complicated one, then you should not remove the bandage and the splints until forty days or up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	The given text appears to be in an archaic or constructed Romance language with influences from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here is the translation of the provided line:
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	For the restoration of a fractured arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And often the larger bone is broken alone, or the smaller one, and often both are broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller bone above is broken, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is even easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the lower bone is broken, then the fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when two bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the broken bone is the upper small one, then it is appropriate for the doctor to restore it with slight extension easily until it is aligned.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large bone is the one that is broken, then it is necessary to apply more forceful extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both bones are broken together, then you must apply even more forceful traction.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you must position your hand appropriately for its restoration with the extension stretched over a cushion, and place your wrist above the parts, more so than all other fingers, and the little finger should be lower than the others, and the patient should sit on a lowered chair.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion in front of him at his height or straight ahead, so that the patient does not move around.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then the minister extends the arm of the patient using his hand or with bandages, and another minister extends it similarly. 
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor applies the bone back into place according to the best alignment that he can.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there is any doubt in the setting of the bone, then you must reduce every piece to its proper place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears to be a separate doubt that the joint is dislocated and there is no hope for the restoration of it, then you should operate on it and set it according to the method we have described above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is due to plague, I have already made a separate chapter on this, and thus take the treatment from that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with a salve made from rubbed oil and white wax, which is mixed between spiced and subtle, and tightly wrap the cloth around it with gentle binding until the abscess has drained; then remove the salve and apply a poultice prepared with ground powder and egg whites, and then bandage it; and let the bandage that is placed over that fracture be wider and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of bones in the arm is seen in major dispositions, or rather a fracture in one part or two parts together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your bandage firmly and strongly over the location of the fracture, and when the bandage reaches the parts above or below the fracture, make it slightly looser according to how the memory of it is described at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, and not hard or rough, and the thread with which they are bound should be of a proper balance between fine and thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and the joint for a few days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause occurs for which correction is necessary, such as a swelling that appears on the limb, and now it is required that you soak the limb in warm water until that swelling subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And leave the limb unstrained until it rests, and then reapply the bandage.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the bandage is already softened and the bone is well set and resembles its original state, now correct everything with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider if nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive constriction, for then it is necessary that you soften that area slightly and leave it untouched for several days until nutrition can flow there again, and then strengthen that area.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if in the patient there is none of those causes that we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to perform the procedure within about twenty days or around that time.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	Then the arm of the patient should be suspended due to its restless movements, and make the patient sleep on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-two days, or it is often restored in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the composition of the body and the condition of the healing power.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of fractures of the wrist and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that the wrist of the hand and the joints of the fingers can fracture, and they do not occur there except due to sudden impacts or blows.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when the hand is fractured or broken, then the patient must follow a regimen and lie down in front of you, properly aligned according to equality, and then place the patient’s hand extended on that surface.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the minister extends the broken bones, and the doctor aligns those that need to be joined together with good alignment.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And now it is necessary to apply a plaster and lint, unless you want an abscess to form; then place a cloth over it according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in a piece of cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	And if the break is within the palm of the abdomen, then make a ball-shaped object out of cloth, and instruct the patient to hold that with their broken palm; then bind it with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the cloth be wrapped around the hand with a piece of cloth in which it is lifted, so that the hand is applied to the palm; and bind it as necessary. 
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	And if the fracture is on the outer part, then you must place a splint over it and another splint under the broken part in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; and then apply the bandage, just as the hand is turned towards the wrist between the fingers with ligaments.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if you encounter a fracture in one of the bones of the fingers, then if it is a bent finger, it should be straightened as needed and then held with the palm; if you wish, place a small straight splint on it so that the fracture is raised and not compressed.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	But if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as in the middle finger, or the index finger, or the ring finger, or the little finger, then it should be straightened and tied with the adjacent finger; or they can all be tied together continuously, which is better; or place a small splint on it, just as we have said for the bent finger.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and also that of the patient, the disposition of hot abscesses and their opposites—through your operation—with what is necessary when any cause of these occurs, as is repeatedly narrated about it.
Capitol .xiv.	Capitol .xiv.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	For the translation of the given line:
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone of the thigh is broken and declared by sensation according to how it turns toward the front and to the highest swelling.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration is done in such a way that a bandage is tightened over the fracture and another bandage is placed below the fracture, and the patient is laid face down on their stomach.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the minister extends the entire limb to its proper position according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	And if it is applied at the root of the thigh, then the limb should be pulled down to the joint of the kneecap, so that the extension can take effect, and the other limb leaves the fracture. 
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the fracture is close to the joint, then the bandaging should be done near the joint, and the extension should be made to the parts below it.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Then the doctor equalizes the bone with both of his hands so that it is reduced according to its natural form and the bone is joined by good conjunction; then it is necessary to apply a plaster and binding, unless swelling occurs in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if swelling does occur in it, then you should leave it for several days until the swelling has subsided, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The binding should be done as follows: you must wrap a hard bandage over the fracture, fold it two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap the limb until you reach the ankle and the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long band between the thigh and the limb near the joint towards the parts below it, so that the ends of the band come from the higher part of the two sides, and then wrap over the limb and the thigh what is excess from the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place over the thigh at the site of that fracture some splints, and put one splint on the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the spaces between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the swelling is compressed.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin with strong binding in the middle over the site of the fracture with three or four layers, and as you move away from the area of the fracture, make your binding looser and lighter and softer.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend to both ends of the field to the areas between where it reaches the ankle of the foot, and tighten both ends of the splints from the other side so that the binding does not move from its position.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then apply the binding over that in such a way that you do not cause any damage to the limb, such as cautery blisters or swelling and similar conditions; and if any of these causes occur, then loosen the binding from it, and correct whatever occurred right away, according to what we have said many times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If there is a piece of bone in the wound that protrudes, then you must clean around it as much as possible; and if not, cover it and remove that part, and treat it with whatever method allows for memory restoration before it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And at times this thigh fracture is treated by setting it with splints, as we have said in the helper and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	And however in the restoration of him in such a manner done do not cause limping to the patient; and if it is restored alone, besides that which should be applied to the other side, then it is necessary that he limp who is always affected.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the thigh is strong in forty days or a little more or a little less, and all of this depends on the diversity of the constitutions and other conditions.
Capitol .xv.	The text you've provided seems to be a mix of medieval Latin and Romance languages like Italian, Spanish, French, with some unique spellings. The title "Capitol .xv." suggests that this is the beginning of chapter 15 in a larger work.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	For the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that a fracture of the kneecap can occur rarely, but it often happens with repeated attrition.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	And if you come across a fracture, then it is not just a crack or break in its parts, and this can be one wound or several wounds, and all of this has been determined by the examination.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is such that what is broken in its parts should be aligned with those within so that it can be added and joined as much as possible by equalization, facilitation, and construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply a plaster and place it on that round spot, if you need to do so; and bind over it with an appropriate bandage.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the treatments that we have recommended in other fractures, such as applying a poultice and similar measures to address any accidents with what is appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of a fracture in the thigh.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the thigh there are two bones, one of which is thick and is named for the thigh itself; the other is slender and is called the fibula.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens to some types of fractures that what happens to the two bones of the arm also occurs, and thus the restoration of it is done in the same way as the restoration of the arm, and the operation for it is the same.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are broken together, the thigh is displaced in all directions.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the bone is broken more delicately, the shoulder is turned towards the parts in front.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the largest bone is broken, you will find that to be one of those causes that are not within your control.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then apply extension, equalization, and ligature of the splints according to that alignment.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the thigh is slight with small fragments, the extension should be less and lighter, and relieve it with your strength.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the thigh, there is a reason for surgery on the arm, which is when you align the splints and complete your entire operation. At this time, you will take pieces of pine wood that are placed under the causes which are placed on supports, and they are made somewhat like palm branches; choose those with small thickness, not too thick, and the length of these should be according to the length of the thigh, and from the knee up to the middle. 
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each leg with two layers of cloth according to its length, and place one layer under the thigh on one side and the other on the opposite side, and they should be placed in the lowest part of the foot. 
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then bind the two straps at three points of both extremities and in the middle point, for with this structure the body is prevented from tilting to the right or left side, and remains in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And already a piece of wood according to the length of the body has been administered; and let the body be placed on it so that it retains that position without movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And it is especially important that you do this in the case of a fracture, and when it is properly treated in this manner.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then examine the body every day and study it with previous knowledge, and you guard it from abscesses and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of those causes occur, then attend to it with what is necessary until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The entire ankle does not usually fracture; however, fractures do occur in the bones of the foot from time to time; and fractures rarely happen to the toes, and they only suffer abrasions during periods of predisposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if there is a fracture in the bones of the foot and often those bones need to be elevated above themselves [each other], then the patient should place their foot on the ground prepared thus as they go.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then place a pad over what is elevated from those bones, and then press on them, and massage them within that area in the locations.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply a plaster and a bandage over it, and place a small board with two rounded ends under the foot.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then secure that with the foot using a proper structure, since you have wrapped that with cloths and other materials as needed.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And after three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, for you will find the bones massaged, whether they are broken or dislocated, and the operation on them is thus as you know. 
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	And if some teeth are broken, then restore them, and align them just as I have shown you in the restoration of the teeth of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place the fractured finger under a splint according to the length of the finger, and position it slightly to one side; and then lay the foot on this table which is recommended for you, and secure it with a proper binding.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	And if what is fractured are two or three or more bones, then you place a splint on each finger wrapped in linen cloth, and secure the splint at the lowest part of the foot, and it should be placed such that one end of the splint goes through the sole of the foot so that it holds firmly in place. 
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes which have been told to you in other fractures and accidents we have mentioned; and prepare yourself for any accident with what is necessary.
Capitol .xviii.	The text provided appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in an archaic language that shares similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The given line is simply a chapter heading:
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Regarding fractures of the female chin, of the pubic bone, and of the male penis:
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the neck of the woman is fractured, then make her sit on a low stool, and then incline her slightly to one side, and hold her from behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife fills the basin with water, and it is done in his basin as if he were a child; and then the woman is shaken, and lift up the back of the baby little by little, for all this is forgotten before she reaches the opening of the birth canal as if she were a child and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place pillows under his back, and when he wishes to urinate, he can lift the sheet with ease and urinate, and afterwards return it in the same manner as you placed it initially, and then return to his original pillow first.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or around that time, for the patient is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take a sheep's bladder and place a reed tube on his wound; insert the entire bladder into his anus, then blow into the tube with force until the bladder is inflated inside the anus, for the fracture will be reset.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be filled with cloth and left for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the thigh in a man or woman is broken, then administer its restoration and setting as we have recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right is not hidden in these rare and nearby fractures, especially for one who has some study and practice and understands my writings; for that fracture indicates to you the greatest proper methods in its restoration and binding, and thus understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	And when the man's penis is crushed, take chicken suet and put the penis in it; then cover it with a cloth wrapping, keep it wrapped up, and leave it for three days or so, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX. 
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	For the restoration of fractures of the bones when it is by trauma.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for those to whom fractures with inflammation occur, and especially if the bone is large such as the thigh bone or the shinbone, or similar to these, that you apply heat and perform trepanation immediately if the conditions for trepanation are suitable to you or testify as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the inflammation causes bleeding, then you must apply something to stop it, such as powdered and sieved earth, if there is no other suitable remedy available.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Then begin to restore the fracture on that very day, and do not delay this, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess occurs, then you should delay the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess has drained, and do not approach it on the third and fourth days, because you may cause bad accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone protrudes above the skin surface, then you must carefully reduce and align it using your hands with ease and minimal extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if the extension is not prepared by you and the reduction of it with your hands, then you reduce that with your hands using this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being seven digits or eight, and its width according to the quantity of the injury; therefore, it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of these, according to what is needed in the treatment for any kind of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be round, and slightly thin at the end so that it does not bend when you apply pressure on it during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should have a sharp end with its edges on the extremities; and the upper part of it should be somewhat thick, tapering from the middle towards the ends.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem," which means a slightly thin spatula.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	Therefore, it is necessary to raise the end of the instrument above the prominent part of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And press that area continuously until the bone returns, and keep it aligned with some sort of splint.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And thus, strive to align the ends of the fracture with each other, and if the broken end is delicate and does not hold the instrument properly, then you must incise the end of that bone until the instrument can take hold.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone completely by the methods we have recommended, then cut it with whichever of the cutting instruments we have mentioned is suitable; or saw through it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Then smooth out any roughness and small splinters that remain on the bone.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction the patient experiences severe pain, then you should know that the bone has not been returned to its natural position; and then do what you can to greatly alleviate the patient's condition.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration of the bone is complete, then soak a cloth in black styptic wine, and especially if it is summer, do not place cerot or any other oily substance on the wound, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer poultices at the time of the completion of the bone restoration, and leave the wound uncovered so that you cut away the scab with scissors and use bandages according to the extent of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be cautious to not aggravate the wound with the fracture, for many times foolish doctors have done this, causing their patients to suffer death or a corrosive or suppurating illness, which is gangrene.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if your fracture is light, flexible, different from the other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or is a bad wound, and you fear the various accidents we have mentioned, and find pain in the area, then it is not advisable to leave poultices on it, but instead use a bandage of hard cloths instead of poultices and bind it tightly with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And after one or two days when the wound has begun to generate pus, then you should remove the cloth that was placed over it, and then apply plasters, ointments with which we customarily treat wounds, such as ointment tetrapharmacon and similar ones for that.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is necessary for you to loosen the bandage and examine the wound each morning and evening until it is consolidated and stabilized, and it must be prepared in such a way that pus can run from it to other parts easily.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If many days have passed since the wound and it has not healed nor separated from the arm, then you know that there are pus pockets within which require you to probe the wound with a probe.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those varicose veins that are separated, remove and extract them; for those that cannot be separated and press on the limb causing pain, you must incise them according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if you encounter the plague or smallpox, or any other form of corruption and putrefaction, then you must apply to each one of those what is appropriate for it, according to the treatment previously described in its own chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And on this point where my speech must stay and you pay attention: when the bone is fractured, treat the limb as you would the thigh bone and the helper bones and similar to those of the large limbs, and do not assume traction or extraction of it, which often leads to death; leave that inside so it rots, for in about twenty or thirty days, it will fall out on its own; then treat the wound if visible, and if not, leave it be.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter .20.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of nodulation that occurs in the vicinity of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Motives observed occur this nodulation in the aftermath of fracture healing, and especially near the joints, which deform the shape of the limb; thus you strongly prohibit the limb from its natural movement.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer those medicines that have astringent properties such as alum, ashes, myrtle, sage, and similar substances; choose some or all of these, mix them with vinegar that has astringent qualities, or with egg white, or with sweet wine, apply this mixture on the swelling using lint, and bind it tightly around it with good compression.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And leave the binding for several days without loosening it; then loosen it and repeat another binding until the swelling is reduced; or apply a piece of lead gently over it, for lead has the property of reducing everything that is swollen in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the swelling has already turned into a hard mass and is constricted, and it is necessary to carefully remove it, then incise it at its highest point, and excise the excess and prominent part, or reduce it with suitable remedies until it is diminished; and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then the limb remains delicate and does not heal according to its natural state.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and then the limb remains thin and weak, this does not happen except for several reasons: one of which is an excess of solution in the ligament and the binding done not as it should be; or due to an abundance of tightness in the ligaments that prevent nourishment from reaching the limb; or because of excessive application of ointment; or due to unnecessary movement not at the right time; or due to a lack of blood in the patient's body and their weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to give food to the patient and make their heart tender until blood multiplies in them; administer baths; and bring joy and happiness to them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then place a poultice on the limb so that the poultice attracts more nourishment, or continue to apply warm water treatment until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural state.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the treatment of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and preventing the proper operation of them.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When you encounter a restored limb near the healing of its curvature and prominence at the broken bone and knotting, and this is due to the deformation of the shape of the limb, yet the limb is not prevented from its natural function, it is not necessary for you to believe the words of one who thinks that the limb has been newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But there are indeed foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is greatly reproachable, leading to great fear, the sign of which is deadly.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if the limping and knotting are recent, then they should be treated with tepid water in which softening herbs are boiled, such as the leaves of elder and its roots, and melilot, and similar ones; and a poultice should be made with a softening plaster, like well-made cerate; or the mucilage of elder root should be prepared and mixed with green vitriol or oil of cypress, and applied in a poultice; or fat figs should be crushed with pigeon droppings, and similar medicines that are known as consolidating remedies.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And at times it is dissolved through constant light friction that should be with the wettest hands, and the movement of the limb should be administered to all parts at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	Here is the translation of the provided text line by line into English:
Capitol .xxiii.	Capitol .xxiii.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of speaking on dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when you encounter any dislocation, then it must be reduced immediately without delay, for if it is delayed, the area becomes inflamed and swollen, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, it should not be massaged or stretched during the time of inflammation, because doing so can cause spasms and increase pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	However, when this occurs, then you must prepare for the incision of the patient, and allow time for the inflammation to rest; then apply warm water and oil to the limb, and afterwards reduce it with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every limb should be treated in such a way that its proper position is restored.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation according to how they precede in fractures; from the part of the body most superior to the part most inferior.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So dislocated the two jaws do not snap; and the dislocation of both is made according to one of two ways: that either they are displaced from their places by slight movement, and so softened a little; or they are dislocated by complete dislocation and fully, between which saliva flows from the patient and cannot hold it nor can close his mouth, and the tongue of him is wrapped in his words.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its proper place with little cause on its own.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete and total, then it must be gently reduced without any delay.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the minister holds the patient's head, and the doctor inserts the thumb of one hand into the area of dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth of the patient if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides, while the other fingers of the hand are outside with which to equalize; and the doctor commands the patient to relax their jaws and let them go from each side; and the doctor aligns the jaw and pushes the jaw until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, then apply evaporation with hot water and oil until the gentle reduction of both is made, and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And then when they are returned and aligned, and the patient's mouth is closed and not loosened, place over them a cloth poultice with cerot, which is made of wax and oil rubbed together; and then bind it easily with moist bandages.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on their back, and his head should be resting between two pillows, so that it does not turn to the right or left; and do not force them to chew anything; before their food is minced like lion's fodder, until when the pains are alleviated and the jaws relaxed, then they can eat what they wish.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be administered easily, and do not work near the mouth opening; let them eat, drink, and urinate, until the jaw is relaxed and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two dislocated jaws is difficult at any time and they do not return to their proper places, then often fevers and frequent urination occur, and the patient's belly is greatly distended, and they vomit pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of deterioration; and often the one to whom this happens dies within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and the end of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula (wishbone) is not dislocated inside the shoulder due to its continuation with the leg; and sometimes it is dislocated outwardly, and this is evident by feeling. 
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of him is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then compress the area with your palm using strong compression, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then place an ointment and poultice on that area and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	May the extremity of that which is sick and continues to be affected not be dislocated on any day; therefore, it must be reduced and treated as we have said and according to what you are prepared to do.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then place an ointment and poultice on that area, apply compression, and instruct the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this same treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of muscle dislocation.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is dislocated in only three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated at the joint near the tendon.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated above the muscle, and this is done slowly; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And particularly is it dislocated and comes out at the sites where there is less muscle, and especially in those whose flesh is scanty, it dislocates easily; but in those who have more flesh, it comes out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And often such an injury occurs to some people due to a blow or fall, and the muscle swells with a hot abscess, and it is known by this that it has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then it is necessary that you apply this treatment while you are properly positioning them, and then proceed with the treatment of the condition.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation is known when it occurs at sites where there is less muscle; so that you can distinguish between a dislocated muscle and a normal one, as you find a clear difference between them; and you find at the head of the dislocated muscle a concavity and less muscle, such that the touch of the head of the muscle feels like an egg, and the patient cannot bring their hand to their ear nor move it in any way.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If the foot or its parts are dislocated, you will then find a clear indication, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And of this dislocation, easy reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction is when the practitioner raises the patient's hand to parts above; and then places their own thumbs under the protrusion, and forcefully elevates the joint back to its original position, and the practitioner raises the patient's limb, extending it upward; and then holds it so that it returns gently.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	And if what we have said does not return the joint to its original position from when the dislocation first occurred after a few days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water and given a treatment that softens and relaxes as though it were a mixture of roots of elder, fenugreek, and mallows in water, which should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be laid face down and their protrusion should be supported by a woolen cushion that is neither too light nor too tight. Then the doctor places their foot on the sphere (likely referring to a tool or a specific part of the body), elevates the head of the muscle with strength, and pulls the patient's limb so it does not remain distorted at its parts below, while another practitioner holds the patient’s head so that it is not twisted at the parts below, for then it quickly returns to its proper place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce that [hernia] in the following manner: have a man present who is taller than the patient, stand on one side of him, and insert his muscle beneath the hernia of the patient, lifting the hernia upwards until the patient is suspended in the air, and another assistant pulls the hand of the patient from below his abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	And if the patient is light, then it is necessary to suspend them with another person, so that they are supported, because the dislocation will return immediately otherwise.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it can also be reduced in another way: take a long pole and make its head round like a mortar pestle, neither too thick nor too thin, and place it under the patient. Then cover the top of the pole with lion's hides, and have the patient stand along the length of the pole. Extend one hand to the side opposite the other, and forcefully extend their body from the other side, for the joint will return to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction is difficult due to all the reasons we have mentioned, then use this method: take a pole that is two cubits in length, four fingers in width, and adjust its thickness according to the size of the hernia in this manner:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then place linen cloths over the round head so that the splinter does not hurt the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then the patient's little finger is placed down, and the hand or arm is extended over the stick between the parts below, and the stick is tied to the support and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And place the arm on a step of a ladder according to its latitude, and the hand should be extended towards the parts below it, and the other body part should be suspended from the other side, for the joint will soon enter into place.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the treatment of him is completed according to whichever way that is possible for you, and now it is necessary for you to place upon him the soft woolen bandage of an equal amount; then apply a plaster prepared with ground alum and egg white over all the muscle, such that it is wrapped around it, and then secure the bandage tightly with a proper binding; and the dressing should be wrapped over the plaster, and his hand should be attached to his neck, and it should be left like this, and do not move his hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And it is necessary to reduce the food of the patient temporarily, until the limb is strengthened, for it is lighter for the recovery of him.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	Then increase the food significantly after seven or five days and exercise some movement; and if it is stabilized and not softened, then he is already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated repeatedly due to humidity that affects him or for other reasons, then it is necessary to apply a cautery with three marks, according to what was previously stated in the chapter on cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed and the joint is not stable, and the plaster and the compression are reapplied several times, but it remains unstable and weak, so that he cannot lift his arm to parts above, then you know that the nerves of him, which are at the head of the muscle, are already cut or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	Regarding the dislocation that occurs in the feet and ankle or the parts behind them, the reduction is done with impulse and extension using the hands until it returns to its place.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And another compression should be applied there, and care for it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if during the healing you notice heaviness in the limb and slowness in its movement, then the patient should use baths several times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original natural state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocation of the knee.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the joint of the knee is displaced with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it is displaced in all directions, more so forward than backward. The displacement is not hidden from you when you see or touch it according to whatever figure it is displaced into. And when you adjust the dislocated knee with your hand, this is made clear to you because the joint becomes concave and cannot bend the leg, nor can it touch its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And it is necessary that you cool [the area], and reduce the dislocation before it becomes a hot abscess, for if it turns into a hot abscess, it is difficult to reduce it, and it does not heal completely; especially when it is in the parts behind, for it is worse than all other types of dislocations, and causes more pain, and often leads to death with that.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is one that can be reduced, is to extend the hand with two fingers, and expand the arm, and place the doctor's hands over the elbow and push, pressing the joint with the tips of his fingers together, or with the edge of his palm until it returns to its place. 
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	And if the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it by bending the hand with his hand, so that he strikes the knee with the edge of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer strong extension and forceful movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and two ministers hold that limb so that the extension is not reduced or lessened.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then the arm should be rotated in all directions, since it is wrapped with a long folded cloth over his hand or joint.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that those causes which help in the lubrication of the joint are facilitated; then forcefully push the joint until it returns to its proper place.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Then for the reduction of a dislocated shoulder, it should be placed on a pad that has astringent and compressive qualities with egg white, and it should be extended with downward traction, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and left like this for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Then it should be loosened; and if the joint is returned to its proper place, then you unbind the bandage from it and leave it.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint not well strengthened, then you reapply the plaster and the bandage, and leave it for several days until it is fully healed; then remove it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	And if you encounter a serious injury near the reduction of the joint, and its position is in motion, then administer moistening with baths and gentle friction, and compression until it is alleviated; or place a supportive splint over the joint to stop the fatty movement; then bind it and leave it on the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Then remove that, and place it in a bath; and when it rises, then you should rub the joint with moderate friction, and then reapply the splint over it, which is for stopping movement, once, and the second time, and the third time.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	with immersion in a bath until it is softened.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place a split of a moist and scraped cow's hide over it and bind it tightly; do this several times, for it is moist and will help return it to its proper position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	For the treatment of a dislocation in the joint between the arm and the hand,
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	When the hand is dislocated sometimes it can be easily reduced, and the reduction of its dislocation is light, but the opposite is true for other joints; however, it must be done quickly in reducing it at the time when it is dislocated, before the area becomes inflamed or an abscess forms there.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the patient's hand joint on a table and the assistant extends that hand, and the doctor places his hand or palm over the prominence of the joint, and pushes it until it returns to its proper place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it must be considered that if the palm is already dislocated towards the back of the hand, then the patient should place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is towards the back of the hand, then the position of the hand should be naturally placed on the table so that the doctor's hand can press over the prominence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns immediately, that is good; and if not, then strengthen that area with a soft bandage to prevent inflammation and leave it be; do not repeat this, because otherwise, the pus will accumulate and you won't be able to reduce it within days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	But however the joint remains according to its tortuosity; and there is no cause noted in the patient, except that the hand is softened and cannot grasp any cause; then know that the nerves are cut or crushed, and at this time it is not born within him but must be strengthened with a cautery near the wound site and by doing so you confer some improvement.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	When the limb has returned, then place over it the poultice we have recommended, and let it be left and strengthened for five days; then untie it, leave it, and exercise the hand of the patient.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if the movement of it remains impaired and you notice some severity in it, then alleviate that with warm water and friction several times until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes the fingers are dislocated entirely.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when any of those fingers is dislocated on the back of the palm or on its belly, then hold the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the finger, suspend that part which is dislocated, and leave it like this for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it and extend it until it is straightened out on that same day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it can sit upright, bandage it according to that method, and do not stop unwrapping it during the day and exercising with movement, and wrap it at night; do this for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same if it is dislocated at the wrist; bandage it in that area and perform this as your first operation until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do the same when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the spine vertebrae.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation occurs in any of the spine or neck vertebrae and multiple vertebrae are displaced from their positions, then there is no cure, for death is expected in the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the excretion of the patient is expelled beyond their will, and they cannot retain it; and often some parts of them are softened, such as the legs or both arms or one of those; or a vertebra is dislocated from its place, for often it is dislocated and often the relocation of these occurs in four directions.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	And when it is dislocated to the back areas, it is called gelbozitat (a term that seems specific to this medieval context and might refer to a particular condition related to spinal displacement).
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	However, the treatment of it is that you should consider whether the gelbozitat occurred during early childhood, for in that case there is no cure and no healing at all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	However, in cases where it occurs due to trauma or percussion or similar causes, the Ancients have described the methods of treatment with long speeches, most of which return with benefit; but I have already summarized that which excuses the excess by its brevity, due to my closeness to my own understanding exposition, with which I have explained and formed this from a different instrument than that with which they would show and elaborate on it.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And it says that in gout which affects from the front part to the feet, there is neither generation nor cure of that; and similarly in that which is caused on both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, it is not cured except for that which occurs in the back specifically with what I recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient should be extended face down on a flat surface near the wall, and place under them a warm mattress to prevent their feet from being cold.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then a straight stick should be placed, fixed in the ground at one end near his head, and another stick across his feet at the other end of the bed.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister should hold the rod, and it should not be fixed in a socket; and another minister should hold the other end according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then wrap around the head of the patient and leave the thin thread loosely tied; extend the end of the thread to the rod which is near the head of the patient, and tie it there; then tighten another thread over the hips of the patient, below the buttocks, and position them towards the chest; and then adjust all the threads and tie them to another rod which is near the feet of the patient.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the minister should extend the thread to the end of the rod, and the two rods and the threads should not remain in their original places where they are placed, but rather they should not be fixed as we have said. 
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or he places them on a table, and then adjusts his feet on the table until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If it does not return by this method, then take a table whose width or length is about three cubits, and cut into the wall where we have said is near the patient a place in which the end of the table can fit.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	Then place the middle of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and pull strongly so that the spine is compressed and returns to its proper place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, use a drill that is turned by hand; and it is such that when you place it on the ground, you should put the patient's head between the ends of two wooden poles, the length of which should be one arm, and place the patient’s head at the end of the two poles as well; and the distance between each pole should be a palm, and already make holes in each pole through which the drill turns, and secure each pole firmly to the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should be one round pole in which the drill is attached, and it should rotate in the two holes of the two poles.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it there is a notch in which the rod is formed, the length of which is one palm with this that is twisted; and in the other two rods is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the straps that you have placed on the patient's feet at the place where his head is located, and the straps that you have placed on the patient’s thighs at the spot where his feet are situated. 
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then each turn should be held by a minister who twists the turn with their hand, and the doctor applies the splint as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the treatment:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And then when the vertebra is returned to its place and the area is leveled out, it is necessary to apply a drying paste with egg white, and then some cotton; and then place over the paste strips of linen cloth whose width should be about three fingers or around that, and the length should cover the area of the dislocation, and over the part of the vertebra.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then bind it with the bandage we have mentioned, and let the patient consume subtle nutrients until they are healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if any prominence remains in the area at the end of the healing process, then it is necessary to administer medicines that mollify and dissolve through prolonged application of the cloth we have recommended; and a sheet of lead is already applied to that area.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes a prominence occurs at the rear of the vertebrae of the back, and it is caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone which protrudes so much that one should not apply this medicine to it, for it could cause death if applied.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol .xxxi.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	For the given line:
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the bone and the joint of the muscle can only be dislocated, and not affected by what happens to other joints with small movements and cavities.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the ankle is dislocated in four ways, for it is dislocated towards the inside, or towards the outside, or towards the front, or towards the back.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is most often dislocated towards the inside, and rarely towards the front or towards the back.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of the dislocation towards the inside is that when you align the healthy leg with the affected one, the affected leg appears longer and the heel more prominent compared to the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot properly. The area where the tendons are inflamed due to swelling indicates that the head of the femur has already moved here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of dislocation towards the outside is that the symptoms are contrary to those described above.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of dislocation towards the front is that the leg extends fully, but it cannot bend due to pain in the heel. If forced to move forward, it cannot do so; the urine of the patient is retained, and the tendon is swollen, making movement on the ankle difficult.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of one to whom a dislocation in the rear parts occurs is that they cannot stretch out their leg, nor can they bend the front part before bending the knee, and the thigh on that side is shorter than the other, and the knee is loosened, and the head of the thigh bone is displaced from its proper place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	And in the case where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then you should be careful to return the joint and extend it both inside and outside, and move it left and right, for when it is firmly returned, no other treatment is needed.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	However, if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong assistant and extend the patient's chest from the part that is lower, or with their hands, or by tying a bandage over the chest above the navel; and another assistant extends the hand of the first one upwards so that they can place their hands under the thighs; and then tighten with a bandage around the groin, and another assistant holds the end of the bandage.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And the extension of the patient or the part inside the armpit to the shoulder area, or the part behind to the back area. 
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And it is the extension of all those at once within which the patient is elevated with their body off the ground and remains hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then in every special case, we must speak of the proper treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the dislocation, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is within the joints, the patient must be placed on their side; then place the ligaments over the thigh joint in that area between the head of the thigh bone and where the hip socket lies; then extend the ligament upwards from the part near the knee to the higher part of the fork (likely referring to the upper thigh or hip).
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another minister should strongly take the arms of the patient, and apply pressure to the thick area of the thigh of the affected side and extend towards the outer parts with strong extension, for this will return it to its proper place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is a lighter cure with which this member is reduced compared to the other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	And if it is excused on you and you do not obey this type of treatment entirely, then the two feet of the patient must be tied together with a strong, light binding over both ankles and both toes. 
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each thigh be the quantity of four fingers, and let the patient's chest be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers. 
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then the patient should be suspended over the head of the post, and they should be in a house; and the length from the ground should be the quantity of two arm-spans.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong young man to hold the thigh by its end, and suspend the patient with another young man, and have the other young man forcefully press the thigh, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	And in the proper reduction, when there is a dislocation at the outer part, the patient must lie on their back according to what we have recommended in having prepared with cold; and the limb should be strongly placed over the affected side of the chest properly and over the feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then two sticks are placed, one under the feet of the patient, and the other at the head; and then sticks adjusted to the middle of the thigh are placed on which wet cloths are wrapped, so that the patient is not harmed by the stick being between their thighs, because you must ensure that the extension to the parts below is not hindered.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then each minister extends to their part, and the doctor with his hand equalizes the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you reverse it, it will heal greatly; and if not, place your hand on it diligently and thus equalize it as we have said in the case of yellowing due to this balancing.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But it is necessary that the patient lies on their side quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then it is necessary that the chest be extended slightly, and it is according to this same procedure regarding the thigh; and the doctor places the palm of their right hand on the diseased joint, and then compresses it with the other hand, and with that compression extends it towards the lower parts.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the rear parts, then it is not necessary to extend the patient behind them, and they are elevated above the ground; however, it must be that they rest on a hard surface, just as it should be for the examination if their shoulder is dislocated outward, according to what we have said about placing them between two supports; and they are on their face with the limbs extended, as we have mentioned, there should be no delay.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And compression must be applied with a board over the area where you have placed the joint.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Thus, when the reduction is completed as it should be — and the sign of the reduction is not hidden from you, which is that you extend two limbs of the patient, and when you see them equal and the patient stretches their own limb and expands its articulation, then you know that the member has returned to its proper place — then adjust both thighs and apply a bandage so that the joint is not moved in any part; and keep the patient at rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then remove the bandage and the dressing, and compare one limb with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	When you see those marks on their body, then know that the dislocation has been fixed, and then let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, then return and plaster that area, and bandage it according to your initial structure, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then unbind that area, and let it remain in ambulation for several days until it is comforted.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outward, inward, and more to the back; it is not dislocated toward the front.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that you command the patient to apply their chest with the thigh; then you will know that the shoulder is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration for all types of dislocation is as follows: make the patient stand straight, ensuring they extend their chest if possible; press your face against theirs, and place their foot between your feet; then hold their shoulder with your palms, keeping them steady between your thumbs on their shoulder with strength, and another assistant should stretch their arm until the shoulder returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And a sign of recovery is that the patient's chest adheres to the thigh without effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then apply a plaster to that and make the chest adhere to the thigh, then bind those areas with a bandage for three or four days, and then unbind them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not let the patient walk for several days until they are healed and strengthened.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction for you is necessary, then administer strong extension with the ligaments, as previously described in the treatment of the hip.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of dislocation of the talus.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The talus is sometimes injured by slight movement and sometimes dislocated completely. The dislocation can occur either towards the inside or towards the outside.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that the talus often swells toward the side to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	More than the treatment of the displacement is a slight reduction, and it should be extended with ease using the hands and smoothed in before it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	And in the treatment when it is dislocated according to completeness, you must make the patient stand straight, and have a strong and valiant assistant from behind that person in the middle of them.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you hold the foot with your right hand on the higher side of it, and with your left hand on the lower side of the foot at the ankle area.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand for two times, and then extend with your left hand; and push the toes of the foot with your right hand away from the chest.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this two times as we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the toes of the foot towards the chest for the third time, and you should be at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Thus, it returns in one attempt or two following this method, and if you rotate the foot gently, that is good; and if not, then repeat the operation on it until it does return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if it is prohibited for you to reduce it by the method we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a small pillow moistened in clay firmly between the patient’s thighs, and you should wrap a cloth around it so that the patient does not feel any discomfort.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the minister holds the patient's thighs, and another minister extends the foot with their hands or by using a band that lies over the top of the foot; and then each minister extends against the extension of their partner, and the penis is extended between the patient’s thighs holding it thus, so that the body does not pull away from its proper extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor aligns the dislocation with their hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh to the sides, for the dislocation returns easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and you confirm the health of the reduction, then apply a plaster and bind it tightly with strong bands, and tie the foot to the chest with bandages.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And you must be careful of the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage over it is not too tight and does not compress them strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave it for two or three days; and if the bandage becomes loosened, tighten it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then untie it on the third or fourth day, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	And if it is necessary to proceed beyond that space, there is no guarantee that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted, and then it will not receive treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if you encounter an abscess to cauterize, then it is necessary that you administer in the discharge of it what was previously mentioned in our narrative, at another site for treatment and application, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Capitol .xxxiiii.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	For the translation of the given line:
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Cover that which is dislocated with slight extension of its joints; and this is not difficult, first it should be gentle.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	And if the dislocation is in some of the toes of the foot, then you must make the patient place their foot on the ground or on a table, and they should be positioned as if walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then you stand with weight, and place your foot over the area near the joints, and then press that area with your foot firmly until it returns to its place, and ensure that it is leveled and does not appear raised in that spot.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then place the patient's foot on a table that supports the entire foot, which has two ends, and then secure it tightly and firmly for three days; then release it and allow the patient to rest and walk for several days, until it is strengthened and recovery is ensured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the types of dislocations that are caused by blows or fractures or any combination thereof.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of those causes occur, and you proceed with the treatment and restoration, death may often result.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And by this it is not necessary that the patient presumes over his own cure, but rather one who is wise in the art, experienced for a long time, merciful and pious; cautious, not daring nor presumptuous; and he should use at the beginning medicines that only slightly reduce swellings and boils, leaving the patient's fate to divine judgment, unless it is someone from whom you hope for salvation from destruction, some relief from illness, and in whom there appears any hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then strive to make the reduction of it at the beginning of the cause, before a boil or swelling occurs.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the member returns as we wish, administer treatment that slightly reduces swellings and boils, and cure the wound with one of the drier ointments suitable for it.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and occurs in separate bone parts, then you pierce their membranes and do as we have said in simple injuries of those that are treated in the areas of those bones.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid, according to your ability, those in the paths of fear as my teaching precedes you; for this is better for you to serve your Creator, more enduring for your glory, and more beneficial for your body as you will see in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	And so you perfect the words of Avicenna perfectly from which God be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
