O, friends, please do not neglect this book, which is the end of medical science and its purpose in life is to complete it, and for its exposure and declaration - that's why I recommend you read it, because surgery is part of medicine.
This operation has been removed from our region and time completely private; because it was very light, the science of it is exhausted; and there are no longer any small descriptions in the ancient books that could correct this error or improve its accuracy.
It is advisable to live through the exposition and declaration of this treatise in that way, with the forms of instruments used for cauterization and other tools of the work when necessary; and it is also important to make a declaration preparation, which causes necessity.
The reason why this was not a popular art of medicine in our time is because the study of anatomy that we were practicing there was long-lasting and to know how the limbs and their forms came about; and how connections are made between them, how they are separated, and more detailed information on bones, nerves, and cartilage.
And for that reason Ypocras calls this method a mot and work little, and mostly in the craft of the master.
And for those of you who have not yet understood anatomy in this way, but rather follow the traditional method, will fall into error and may cause harm to themselves or others, as it has been seen that some do when they first learn about these things.
A doctor who performed an operation on the abdomen of a woman and found some arteries in it that were flowing with a great deal of blood causing her to die between two o's.
Another doctor who believed that the pain of an artery had been caused by its obstruction in his state, removed it and attached part of the vein to it, causing him to die on the third day.
They appealed for a surgeon, and seeing the size of the artery and the disposition of their patient knowing he would die.
Another doctor who took on the task of performing surgery for a noble from our land with his own personal funds and performed an operation on a black crow that was expected to break its leg in their cage; instead of the fracture being set properly by the surgeon, he left it gaping open, making wounds over the plumage, pulling out feathers, tearing at the strong structure, leaving the chest exposed.
The first sentence to translate is: "Apro the sleeve according to their desires.
Here's my translation of the first sentence: "We urge you to embrace it [the sleeve], and please grant your desire for this treatment, so that tranquility and serenity may come over your pains.
This is my translation of the next sentence: "Moreover, if this corruption has been confirmed in a member and cannot be prevented from spreading to another part of the body.
This is my translation of the next sentence: "And another physician who performed a cautery procedure reported ulcers appearing after several days.
This is my translation of the sentence: "And if this pain comes from cold humors, then do not make incisions anywhere else but where it hurts.
This is my translation of the next sentence: "In this case, therefore, it's necessary to carry out surgery in two stages: first for an operation that is associated with health and another one which is perilous when performed on major organs.
This is my translation of the next sentence: "And you have already seen this in many places where operations are performed which cause errors and fears; therefore it's necessary for you to keep that in mind, and set aside such things so that others do not go around talking about them.
And therefore your arms should be stretched out for protection by God, and your wounds should fall away and heal.
And through the mercy of God you will have salvation and the promise of success, and heal wounds that are difficult to treat, and put aside your fears so that faith in yourself and in your name does not abandon you: because what is left for your glory, and wealth among people and in heaven, is for your sanctity.
And gather up all of their possessions "Do not say that bad doctors don't know better.
And you must have three books in this way to learn
Begin by dividing the book, and first of all take the first division. The first chapter begins with a description of the instruments and procedures used by doctors for their work.
Second division. The second chapter begins with a description of the methods used in incision and extraction, wounds, plagues, etc., described systematically and arranged according to the forms of instruments.
The third chapter begins with a description of the methods used in healing and straightening broken bones, wounds, etc., described systematically and arranged according to the forms of instruments.
Please specify what you mean by the qualities of young people and old people with regard to cauteries, and what restrictions there should be on cauteries
The qualities of young people and old people regarding cauteries are as follows: they tend to be long and complicated, subtle in understanding, and secret knowledge; also, their memory is poor, they often disagree with each other, and some of them avoid lengthy discussions about it due to fear of being bored.
Cauteries are commonly associated with all kinds of matters or related subjects, except for two categories: cauteries about bones (gout) and cauteries that involve hernia.
In the category of cold and dry matters, it is advisable to treat them differently: for those who are young (go figure), and others do not - because cauteries that cause pain from dryness or coldness are better treated if they involve cautery and drying out.
When comparing the body parts of man to the temperature and moisture in them compared to the amount of heat, you will find that the cold cauteries are more prevalent in people's bodies.
When you have opened up space between a patient's thighs, place cushions under them, another on their legs, and one more on their chest while holding their hands.
However, it is important to note that the exercise should be performed with great caution due to the nature of sharp points and frequent use required for this procedure, as well as considering the diversity in size and position of patients' limbs, causes of such injuries and the duration of the recovery process.
Complications are not to be feared in general but rather should be expected and anticipated by doctors when performing this procedure, especially for gouty and wet conditions as all medical practitioners agree on these procedures being the most suitable ones, and it is not recommended to avoid them at a young age unless medically advised.
Understand this procedure to be used for both hot and wet conditions as cautery is a form of medicine that can burn the area it is applied, so when applying it only the area being cauterized will feel heat but other parts near by may not receive any burns at all or just some minor ones.
The medicine burn procedure may cause severe pain in the affected member and make it difficult to heal or worsen conditions of a nearby member that was already difficult to treat.
The procedure with its power and substance may cause harm as well due to the risks involved in studying it and understanding its causes; therefore, you should be excused from long speeches if not performed carefully as this will lead to disastrous consequences for both patient and physician alike.
In these cases, when it's appropriate to perform cautery or to pause its healing process during the most favorable time of day
You say that cautery is appropriate in all times, to prevent the incident of time from drowning out during the youth when attention should be given to cautery as a remedy for pains or necessary pains, especially if it's for pains or necessary pains, then the delay may not be necessary because they fear those who will come with malice that are more dangerous than minor pains entering through time.
Therefore, in your opinion, those who do not believe in the common people and doctors' wisdom are the ones that consider cautery to be a cure for all times, and then it pauses that consequence.
The cause is not that the cautery should be done in this place where medicine only alters the composition and moistens the fluids which are the cause of pain.
However, cautery may be performed in addition to medicine for the purpose of increasing its usefulness and virtue and large size of its master.
It is possible that the patient's illness may return at any time due to the nature of their ailment and its location in the body, and the virtue of it, and because they are well-prepared for the introduction of excessive fluids into them, and what comes out of them from those causes; or if not administered cautery is a subtle illness with few excess fluids and humidity, so that when cautery on pain occurs, it may be possible to prevent that return of that pain.
When common cold is caused by a physician's remedy, it is dry and bitter, not to be taken unless one understands what it does.
The cause of this is in contrast to that; and the intent is only when the causes of cure are given to some maladies, not by those medicines, but at the end of the cause it should be applied, and so on. The pains of here come from a physician's remedy, and not following the intention that I understand from the vulgar and various folk doctors.
The ancients used to say that cautery is the greatest of remedies and not this one alone for equality with the fire and sublimity of its essence.
They would say that the place for cautery should not be touched, as it is absolutely forbidden, because in addition to this one alone among others, cautery applied to such a part of the body causes only that same kind of pain elsewhere and cautery to such a part of the body is good but greater than when done with fire, unless you touch heat from above which then you declare it as an act of burning oneself, in addition to other ways for taking care of this.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customary for doctors to call this gout.
After you have already made the first point for cautery and placed it in the second capital, order them at the head of the legs to ensure that they reach below the feet, so that he who wants this may do so
The first capital
This cautery will cure the pain caused by coldness and moisture on both sides of the surface from the top to the toes of the limbs, and the face, mouth, gums, teeth, head, ears, eyes, back, belly, bowels, genitals, and universally throughout all injuries that come from coldness, equally in paralytic attacks or apoplexy.
The form of this cautery is such that first you command the patient to take medicine in order to evacuate his head immediately, either three or four times, after which you inquire about their virtue and age, as well as their usual practice.
Then place it on the surface of his head with a pointed cautery and press between your hands onto another bench so that their forehead is pressed downwards and their chest raised.
When pain occurs between the fingers of your hand, place a cushion under it on top of the nose bridge between the two eyebrows. However, when you have reached the end of this section and it has been read through, place that point here to continue.
And after placing this point, gently stretch it little by little so that your hand becomes accustomed to the movement gradually and you move on from there.
And after gently stretching and checking the area, if you see that some amount of hair has been uncovered somewhere on your head, then measure how many strands have fallen out with each passing day, raise up your hand in case it is necessary to take further action as instructed here.
And after taking a small amount of salt and dissolving this over the area, leave it for three days
And place that point on top of your forehead and let it stay there until the scar is completely healed. And after treating the area with tetrafarmac, continue to keep it clean as instructed.
After you have finished washing your hands thoroughly and dried them completely, then take a moment to moisturize them as instructed for the most youthful freshness.
And you are also to ensure that all cauteries and punctures have been healed completely so as to prevent any infection in the area.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customarily called gout.
And if necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. They also estimate that location as an outlet for releasing steam.
And if the abscess is to be healed over a long time or cured, place it there and wait.
I also show you these special cauteries that are not used elsewhere but in the head; and it is customary to place them there when necessary for relief from constant headache caused by nature's evil spirits.
The first special cautery is used with the greatest care and most of all, as I said.
And second?
Cautery on the head.
When all of the head suffers from chronic and long pain that lasts a very long time, and in such cases it is used on the head by doctors who have applied another cautery due to those causes, they consider whether or not the head is naturally strong in its nature; and when this is done with another cautery, as mentioned before, it will not harm or cause any more pain. When the pain in the head has become so intense that it splits the skull open The incision has been made and it is discovered how much of the skull was cut through; a cautery is applied to close the opening in that place where it is customarily called "the skull split. And you place your hand there and do not see the eye, because in this case the evil spirit brings great pain different from all other cuts on the head
You direct this cautery to its place, which is the subtlest of all cuts on the head, and it is placed in the location where it was previously applied at the base of the skull; that is how
I am not sure what the next part means but here is my translation:
There's a mistake in your text. "Emigranea" should be "Cauterisation".
When the pain in the head becomes so severe that it splits open the skull or comes through into the flesh, then the wound is treated with the immediate administration of medicine to close the wound and prevent further damage; otherwise a second cautery may be applied either for an acute treatment like surgery or as a last resort.
The cautery applied with an acute medicine is to cover up the wound and prevent any further harm coming from it. The first sentence means: "You have already placed a cushion beneath them (the patient's legs), and now place another servant on their chest.
"You should keep the servant on for three hours, and then move it to a new space of three hours as well. After that, place another servant between two or three days depending on how quickly he falls asleep, and put a pillow over him when he goes under water.
"Take care of the servant in such a way that it remains healthy.
If you want to know more about gout and other medical conditions mentioned in the text, consult a book on medical treatments or remedies.
The second way of cautery for this method is as follows:
It's called a 'crooked nail' cautery, in which the tip of the nail is cut in such a way that there remains some curvature, and the middle part of it becomes smaller.
After placing your hand over the area causing pain and sealing it to prevent any more harm from happening, slowly reduce its size step by step at a steady pace.
If the quantity of blood passing through the vein is as great as it should be, and you place your hand in such a way that its artery does not get cut off from being supplied with blood, to prevent any bleeding.
Place a cushion beneath them and let it rest upon the place for three days; also, place another on top of their stomach, so that its ulcers are treated with care.
If you want to perform a cautery on the second extremity of an artery, and guard against cutting into it in this way:
The fourth paragraph.
Cautery on the ancient emigrage.
When you perform the cautery on this one that we have mentioned before in the sections of the ailments and do not proceed with the treatment, it is customary for doctors to note that you missed the cautery scar at that point where the pain line lengthens from which it extends, or as if it were: And pause your hand for a moment so that you do not accidentally cut into the artery while attempting to penetrate this area.
However, it is necessary to be careful when you continue the mandible as it may be painful from biting and not to cause any nerve damage or spasm.
And if it is about the caution and control of blood flow in relation to an artery that has been damaged, especially as its blockage may occur even at the beginning of treatment, let the operation begin only after you have taken all necessary precautions.
When you have opened up a space between the patient's thighs, placed cushion under them, another servant on their legs and one more on their chest holding their hands, here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
If you find that the patient is not responding to this cautery and finds it unbearable on their chest, burn it off at the top of your head as I mentioned earlier, and treat the blister by removing it if found
If you are using the cautery that I mentioned earlier in the top of your chest and it is causing a lot of pain but providing little relief, then this is the preferred treatment and most beneficial option.
The word "capitulum" refers to a bandage or cloth used for applying pressure on an injury or wound to help control bleeding or stop a flow of blood.
Gout treatment.
When the joint has pain caused by cold humors and is being treated with the other cures mentioned earlier in the division but still experiencing pain, then apply a pointed cautery to it.
And if you want to burn it at the tip, and make sure there is no flame from around the entire joint as well as in each attempt that the pain occurs, then apply cautery only on that spot. Make sure you are applying the cautery to the right side of the joint very slowly and carefully, as mentioned earlier.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened up space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
When you cure this hernia and prevent it from protruding or coming out of the body, and if there is no bleeding, then cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one to close off the opening of the cavity, another a small one for closing the thigh muscle, and the third to close both labia.
Do not open the bowel or hernia until the opposite of bad luck occurs, as it is only beneficial in its occurrence.
The way of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cautery on the right side of the thigh slightly above the knee cap, and another one further up to its length which is second from the length of a finger's thumb, and do not burn too much or overcook it.
This is the form of cautery, it's a specialty of phlebotomy, called mesentery. However, please note that the latter is one less compared to the former
Then treat this area as if it were about to become sick.
Chapter 7 of the Capitularies.
The cautery for an old stroke
When an old stroke occurs and you do not confer the doctor's diagnosis or treatment plan to the patient who does not have a fever, doctors will cauterize four points on top of their head; and in the area below the scalp, as well as around it. The cautery is done second after that is said.
Then it was cauterized on the stomach's mouth, and in the greater part of its surface; and place it over what is about to happen.
Chapter 8 of the Capitularies.
The cautery for the relief of a cramp.
When giving to the patient first give them large and small pills that will relieve their stomach pain.
Then treat the entire head of the patient, and place a bandage as described in the chapter on plastering.
When the joint pain has been caused by cold humors that have infiltrated every part of the body, then pain occurs in the feet; it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
And if the bones are not damaged and otherwise, doctors will apply three needles in the back of the head to prevent it from coming out through the neck. After each needle has been applied at its proper place, then proceed with the cautery as you have done so far.
If you have added more to the patient and there is room for another cushion, then place a cushion on top of the two that are already there; if you need to put in even more cushions, doctor will apply the cautery over both buttocks.
Proceed with caution and as usual in how it is being done so far.
And then comes the next sentence to translate.
The application of cautery on hemorrhoids and the moisturizing of all parts of the body.
Proceed to the application of the head and neck massage as you have mentioned so far; then apply the needle in the back of the patient's head, proceed with cautery on the top of the buttocks that are present, perform the cautery over all parts of the body except for the perineum (area between the anus and scrotum), and three needles to both sides of the buttocks.
When a patient has gout in their thighs and the disease is very severe, then the doctor applies four cauteries over both shoulders of the patient to bring down his fever. And when it heals or becomes better after that cautery, then place another one on the forehead as well.
The end of the text.
The end.
It was not a gout attack, but rather an inflammation of the intestine.
And so, when the patient's condition worsens and becomes resistant to medication, you begin cauterization of his belly first as well as other measures mentioned in division
And if the patient does not respond to medication, then doctors will apply cauterization of his belly and also provide nutrition as a remedy at that time.
Place a cautery on the patient's head first and then place another one on top of his forehead second, and also on the back of his neck as well as the back of his head. If the patient is very severe and resistant to treatment then the doctor applies cauteries to all parts of their body except for the thighs and abdomen.
The following text should be translated as follows line by line into English: When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
The second sentence should be translated as: When the patient has just given birth, the doctor pauses and performs a subtler cautery.
XI refers to the number of the chapter in a medieval medical treatise on medicine, but I cannot determine the meaning from the context provided.
Melancholy cautery
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and gross, doctors cauterize those areas that paralyzed themselves in their limbs.
If the cause of melancholy is declining into melancholy and the patient's body is wet, doctors pour water on them to divide it, after which they had already done in the division.
And put a cushion on top of the patient's head, place your finger in his mouth and gently massage it to loosen up, and then place one hand over the mouth area to keep him from making any sounds while you are performing the procedure.
The patient has become too sedated to be moved around or talk during the procedure.
And put on a soothing ointment and wipe it off gently with something soft. Heat that up over the fire to quickly warm it up for use as soon as possible. And put one finger in his mouth and gently massage him to loosen up, after which you will apply something warm on the area.
"The healer should apply a special cautery to the affected area on each day of the week, and if desired, after the second application, make punctures in order from the largest part downward; otherwise use a flat hand with this type of cautery.
"Place it gently on the abdomen or groin area.
"Chapter 12.
"The application of water will descend as long as desired.
"When you declare the beginning of water application in their ears to which they have told them to divide it, the pain begins and gives them to drink that moistens his head, and keeps him from all the humidity.
"He should stay in the bath for days.
"You should command them to raise their head, and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of his head; and if they are at the beginning of drinking water from two ears or one ear, do so as well.
"You should cauterize all the veins and arteries that they have designated as such, and place them at a height in relation to the temples.
When you are cautorized, hold your breath; if you see the flow of blood, do not apply any medicine, as there is no cure for it
You will find a remedy in extracting bile and excising those parts with caution of the flow of blood
Some veins are cautorized between two bones, causing them to produce a pain similar to that of gout.
13th chapter
Cauterization of ancient tears.
When ancient tears pass through the veins and arteries of which part of the head it is revealed to be unnecessary, doctors cauterize that point with a pointed cautery in order to prevent the tears from coming out again. If you desire to add, doctors cauterize that point in the bottom of the ear on the side affected by gout near a small cautery.
14th chapter
Cauterization of nasal odor.
When you are advised not to treat the nasal odor by your doctor and do not apply your treatment, doctors will give the patient three nights of drinking the juices of bitter herbs; after that they put a bandage on his head and cauterize with olive cautery. When joint pain arises from cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call gout by doctors.
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
The cautery clamp is this way.
Chapter 15
To prevent the eyes from getting red, you should use a cautery to cool them down.
When the eye's eyelid is swollen due to illness or moisture, doctors use a cautery on that eyelid with this one.
If you want to cauterize both eyebrows at once, use two cauteries in total, and they will last for a long time. The length of each cautery is determined by the size of the brow.
Do not overuse your hand when using a cautery, as you should keep the area clean and free from dirt.
Chapter 16
To close an eyelid when the eyelashes become entangled and touch the eye.
When eyelashes become entangled and touch the eye, doctors should apply two eyeshadows or make an ointment.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and causes pain in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out, and do so with a pointed cautery.
And put it on the surface of the foot or in the groin.
And if you are using a pointed cautery, this is how it should be done.
And then perform the cautery on that part of the body in a small area at a time, making it burn and gradually cover the surface as much as possible, without causing excessive damage to the skin around it, which will give you an appearance like magic.
The goal of cautery is to sear the skin around that part of the body, making it painful and forcing you to remove it from the leg as quickly as possible.
Then hold your hand over that area for three days and place a cushion under it to make sure it is kept covered until the scar has healed. "And apply a poultice on that part where he is afflicted.
"If it returns because of any cause, and the eye becomes inflamed, then apply another cautery over that part in the same manner as you first applied it.
"If the poultice is on the eyelid and causes inflammation there, then apply another cautery over that part in such a manner as to elevate it back to its normal location while keeping both eyelids open.
"The cautery to be used is such that you command the patient to lie down with his legs elevated and keep them open while another servant applies a poultice in the manner of a bandage.
"Then apply a washcloth soaked in warm water and vinegar to the affected areas gently, rubbing them until they are no longer inflamed; then spread it over the bandage as before while keeping one eyelid open, so that nothing gets burned.
"Then stop the cautery and gently apply a small amount of the medicine to where the patient feels it is stinging from the medicine, making sure there are no burns.
"Once you see that the eye inflammation has stopped, then apply some water to wash it clean; and if there are no burns or irritation in any part of the eye, then reapply the medicine over that area as before.
When you have opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands, here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
You must ensure that you have taken all necessary precautions to prevent any injury during the operation, and if there is no cause for concern on the day of the examination, then proceed with your treatment at this location where the eyelid was softened up until now.
This is how the medicine should be administered.
You know that people's heights vary in size and proportion, so accordingly this is the measure you should take.
Do not be concerned about the way to approach someone who is studying in this field of study.
Chapter seventeen.
Cautery for fistula in the eyelid's hole.
When curing fistula in this location where you have indicated it is between the divisions of the maladies and do not trust your cure, doctors will recommend cauterizing that in order to prevent the head from touching or being agitated by the affected part, make sure there's a minister at least one centimeter between its head and yours so as not to be hurt nor bothered.
When a patient's pain has been relieved or when they are cured of their ailment, then you should give them this ointment to be applied gently over the affected area:
This is how to apply the cautery:
When it comes in contact with skin or mucous membranes, apply it gently from one extremity to the other.
If it is applied on both sides of the same extremity. If you want to apply it in this manner:
One must be careful when applying the cautery, as if done improperly can cause harm.
When it is applied too harshly, or if not properly dried, then you should ensure that both hands are clean and dry before continuing with the cautery application: If it is not applied too harshly, then remove any excess from the patient's hand.
When the cautery is applied too vigorously or if it is not properly extinguished immediately remove any excess from your hand and apply a little of the cautery to the patient's nose to prevent burns on their hands, mouth, or face, and then you should extinguish the cautery in the affected area.
If the cautery comes in contact with their nose, it is best to wait a little longer or two before applying another one, and then you should apply one more time after three days for good measure. And make sure that they keep their hand clean between applications while continuing to dry off as much as possible.
When you do not feel well for 10 days and there are no signs of illness, the doctors pause on their sharp corrosive medicine to ensure that an ulcer has not formed in their gut or esophagus, as it is second only to their head in terms of importance.
The other cautery technique used by surgeons is to seal the opening of a fistula and then apply pressure over it to prevent any discharge from escaping out; this can be done using gauze soaked in alcohol or water, depending on which you prefer as long as they stick tightly enough to the wound to achieve this.
If the fistula has been treated and cured as mentioned earlier, then good; otherwise, doctors are required to administer a tourniquet on the neck and reduce the size of the fistula in the neck as soon as it appears in its proper location.
Chapter 18.
The cautery technique for treating wounds.
These cauterizations usually happen in the lips and mostly on children's lips.
Then if you fail to heal these wounds as mentioned earlier and do not apply the small cautery technique described here:
The second cavity of him has the subtlety of the heart
Then, return to that incision and let the cautery penetrate into the wounds.
And then apply a cure in order for him to recover.
The 49th capitan
Cautery on the fistula of the mouth
When the ulcers of the tongue or palate or in the folds of the lips are infected and you apply cautery, your hand must be opened up to a certain extent (not specified). After that, let it rest for a while, until it is healed; then cover it with a bandage if necessary.
And in case the illness disappears and it is healed, yes, but otherwise, you must find out what has happened to him from his condition.
The 48th capitan
Cautery on the teeth and mollification of veins.
When the veins are mollified through humidity and the teeth become swollen, cure them with medicinal remedies not to confer, then pause the upper part of his chest in the middle of the night sleep, and let the cautery be applied as it will come about soon, unless you pause when there is a swelling on the tooth and enter into that cauterized part painfully, and cover your hand over slightly so the patient does not feel the heat from the fire onto the skin of his face.
When you have opened up a space between the patient's thighs, place a cushion under them, another on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Place a cushion under them and another on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
This is the 21st chapter of the book.
Cautery for toothache.
If toothache is caused by frostbite or the like, then the cautery should be performed on the affected part of the body - either on an artery, or close to a fire.
Cautery on the artery is when you apply it to a vein and place your hand over the affected area, applying it gently so as not to burn, and pausing at its end while feeling for pain that might indicate frostbite.
When performing cautery on an artery, make sure to check the opposite side of your face and ensure there is no redness or pain in the area where you applied it.
If you are using a needle or thread for cautery, make sure to plunge it into the artery and pause at its end, then check for redness in the area where you applied it, pausing if there is any sign of heat that might indicate frostbite on the side of your face closest to the affected tooth.
When the cautery is applied to the point where one artery ends and another begins, there should be pain in the chest as well as the heat of the flame reaching the patient's mouth.
Then apply the cautery in its appropriate shape, and place a cushion on his hand so that it is held at an angle while the cautery is being applied; and if necessary repeat this for several days until the pain subsides or after some time.
When applying the cautery, make sure it does not cause the patient to open their mouth wider than they already are, and hold them there for about an hour while keeping it steady. And this is the shape of the cautery.
When applying the cautery to the second extremity where you suspect that doing so might be possible, do so.
And this is the shape of the needle.
Chapter xxii.
On the treatment of extremities.
When extremities are affected by cold humors and it is not possible to treat them with medicines, you should apply the cautery in its appropriate shape as described below, keeping both extremities separate so that heat from one cannot reach the other extremity, and place a cushion over each of them, ensuring they remain separated.
When the arrow is small, the arrows pause in relation to the length of the arrow and then release them after three days and place a bandage on it to prevent infection from occurring as the flame has burned
After taking care of that, you can try again/again
This is the end of the document.
Cautery for curing warts and tightening skin
When the humidity is excessive and most often when this occurs in winter months, doctors recommend that patients should begin using laxatives immediately followed by cautery on their anus to prevent the hemorrhoids from getting worse.
Please remember not to apply heat directly to the anal region, and avoid squeezing it as well unless necessary.
Cautery should be performed on both junctions of the rectum in order from top to bottom. The cautery procedure will proceed as before.
After taking care of that, please proceed to the previous step in order for it to be healed.
This is the end of the document.
Cautery for curing bronchitis and pneumonia.
When the pleurisy of the lungs is caused by dampness and the patient does not have a fever nor chills, then the doctor shall burn that place with two cauteries on either side of the breastbone in the locations where it has been burned; another cautery inside the chest between the two breasts; and the second one as before.
If you wish, then your cautery points to the place where they are called 'cautery', in accordance with the form of doing so when there is joint pain.
Then make points inside as well, and place that cautery where it was mentioned before to prevent the pain from happening again.
And if three cauteries are used, do so in this manner: first one is placed on the forehead; another on each side of the chestbone; and a third one at the point mentioned before.
Chapter 25.
Cautery for the top of the head.
When the head is dislocated due to dampness and does not return on its own, then you have to move it back into place as follows: first reduce the dislocation, after that put pressure on both sides or one side respectively; and finally straighten the neck so that it returns to its original position.
And place a pointed cautery here
And apply the cautery to cut off further penetration into that area, and bring the figure of cauterization to stop any more cauteries in those areas.
Some of the adjustments are made in order for them to be used more frequently.
And place the cushion over the cautery so that it is smooth and firm, and make sure the patient's arm does not fall off or move at all during this time of discomfort.
And if the dislocation is in the areas of the shoulder or elbow, then the doctor will apply a cautery to the affected muscle area, which can be on the back of the arm by pressing it with a pointed cautery, ensuring that both the joint and the moisture are restored and the patient recovers.
Here is another sentence to translate:
Stomach cauterization.
When vomiting occurs in the stomach and moisture levels drop, causing an extra layer of mucus to form around it, so the amount increases over time, if you continue with curative measures but do not conform, then the doctor will place a cushion on their back, extend their arms and legs, and apply three cauteries: one at the chest area for the amount of one day's cautery, two at the two corners of the stomach, to form a triangular shape of cauterization; and among those that are not adjusted they must endure.
When making a deep incision of two thirds of the depth of the chest cavity
If you want to make a second incision with a larger cautery in the same location as the first incision, or if you prefer making it into a larger circle.
If you have made a first incision in the stomach and now it's scaring you, then try to make another small one next to that previous one, making sure not to go too deep as before to prevent further damage.
This is a continuation of section 27 from a Roman history text. What does this mean?
Cautery on the forehead.
When the forehead gets pain due to coldness or dampness or too much humidity until its normal function is restored by the escape of superfluity, and as I mentioned earlier, let the patient be put on their back in a prone position.
The space between each incision and the right length of the incision are specified.
No more than two cauteries per patient, please.
If the quantity of what you have applied is equal to or greater than half the breadth of the chest cavity and it was not adjusted properly; if the patient lies on their back; and if they are not lying, then let them remain as before and lift up their heads.
Sure! Here's another one: "If you are skilled in subtlety and prudence in this art, the cautery should be applied to the cutaneous cautery.
Absolutely! Here's one more: "Remember that too much caution is needed in the cautery process and should be avoided as it may spread to all parts of the body and enter into the bowels.
This could be a section heading from a medieval medical treatise, possibly indicating the start of Chapter XXVIII or Section XXXVIII.
Certainly! Here's another one: "Perforation with an abscess through the cautery.
Certainly! Here's another one: "When the abscess is to be opened in the finger and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the finger or in its sheath, the physician should determine whether it is in the flesh of the finger.
Certainly! Here's another one: "If it is in the sheath, then the pain will be great and sometimes the doctors are exhausted by treating it.
Certainly! Here's another one: "The abscess should be placed on the patient's forehead; and then place the incision of the abscess here to try and prevent it from coming out. When a patient's veins are inflamed
And then you perform other applications to cure the inflammation of those areas.
Do not use cauteries in this manner, but instead you should seek out those practitioners who are well-versed in the art of medicine and have encountered many illnesses through their practice; may these individuals experiment on performing some operations with new cures to be applied to this procedure.
29th capitol
Burn treatment of the pleura.
Those old cauteries of the pleural pleura that are used after this manner should be done gently and carefully to prevent any injury to the ribs; it is by doing so that you must take great care when making a long cut through them, and it is important to have knowledge of their location in relation to the sternum.
After the patient has been prepared for surgery with a dressing over them and the area around their sternum has been cleansed by immersing it in oil and then igniting fire on it to sterilize, you should perform cauteries at several locations: one below the furcula (breastbone) up towards the chest; another between the fifth rib and the nipple; another above the stomach; three beneath the back ribs; and a final one between two flaps of skin behind.
When you have opened up space between the patient's thighs using a cushion beneath them, another servant on their legs to assist with holding hands and so on.
The previous sentence translates to: "The attendants who are accustomed to performing cauteries of this type also apply it in the same way between the thighs and buttocks as they do elsewhere on the body, so that when applied there, the cautery burns gently without causing harm.
The previous sentence translates to: "In this application of the cautery there is no fear because it does not cause harm as much as in the place where it was applied that isn't healing.
I am unable to provide a translation for this acronym without additional context or clarification on what specific organization, institution, or field it may refer to. Could you please provide more information about its use and any associated definitions?
The previous sentence translates to: "Cauterization of the vulva.
When you cure the male genitalia as instructed in section D and do not apply your treatment there but instead apply it here, then the cautery will be applied in two other ways that are right-handed, both of which involve making three cuts or four incisions depending on the length of the male organ compared to the figure of the cauteries of the body.
The previous sentence translates to: "And between each cautery there should be a certain distance of one or two millimeters, and the manner in which to apply the cautery is the same as that with which you applied it on the body.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customary for doctors to call it gout.
If you wish to cauterize, please be careful not to burn yourself; for instance, if you use it on the area around a dislocated muscle, it may cause pain and injury in that part of your body.
The elevation you are aiming for should be towards the direction of the chest; please do not make it too close to your body.
Please ensure that both cauterizing points are in place, but be careful when aiming at the other side of your body as well.
Please put down the cautery; then apply another one.
If you have already used three cauteries, please do not use any more.
Please be careful when using a cautery for several days in a row; as you may need to consult with other doctors if there are any complications arising from the previous treatments.
The next sentence should translate as: "Chapter 21.
Cautery of dropsy.
Do not apply the cautery to dropsy, but only on other areas as well.
When you treat dropsy with the methods of treatment that have been described in Division and do not comply with your treatment, then apply a cautery on the chest, another one on the stomach, another one on the feet, another one between the back muscles, and also two cauteries over each shoulder blade. And a final cautery at the bottom of the ribs, an additional cautery on the stomach, and finally two cauteries above each shoulder blade. When making points on the surface of the foot using a pointed cautery, it is customary to make them small in order not to cause discomfort or pain.
The cautery is being applied gently in order that your hand may remain there for some time.
No matter how vigorously the abscess is opened with the cautery in order that coagulations may be added to it and healing may begin
The form of the cautery used to cauterize the belly is similar to that which was previously used for the anus and secondarily for the vagina
This text appears to be the end of the medical treatise, with no further lines or information following it.
Cautery of the feet and thighs.
When the feet are burned and replaced with a substitute fluid so that you may cauterize them over both thighs between the ear and the nose, raise your hand to the cautery and do not remove it; also raise your hand to apply it and do not retract the previous one as its use is exhausted.
The second form of the cautery is as follows: And apply another cautery on each thigh at its extremity from the cautery cuts. The second form of the cautery is as follows: And apply another cautery on each thigh at its length and place one beneath, the other above it; on each thigh two cauteries.
The patient will be bathed in hot water for a long time to ensure no residue remains of it.
Then the doctor proceeds with treatment, having identified the cause.
The thirty-third chapter.
Cautery on the abdominal cavity.
When the abdomen is inflamed and infected, it should be drained using the digestive and retentive gut, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it should be done with a pointed cautery as per the previous procedure of cutting into the stomach, also do the circular and four-point cauteries around the small intestine, and also the cauteries above the collar bone if inflammation is present at that location, or two cauteries.
If the patient is not tolerant of the infection and inflammation at that time, then do the cautery over the abdomen and also above the intestines, making sure to place two cauteries on the stomach as well.
The forty-fourth chapter.
Cautery on ancient hemorrhoids.
When ancient hemorrhoids are found in nature or accompanied by gross humors or corrupted moistures, the doctor should perform three cauteries on each small and little triangle of pus at two points on the abdomen.
"If the stomach of a patient is inflamed and the veins are not degenerated, and the face is often affected, doctors burn off those parts with a pointed cautery after another.
This text appears to be from a medieval medical treatise on ulcers (gastric or otherwise), as it mentions cauterization of various body parts.
To cauterize the abscess, apply heat.
When you excise the abscess, doctors use a cautery that is assembled from rays. After excising the abscess, place the cautery in the opening of a vein through which blood flows to the affected part
And if these measures are not effective in healing them, doctors burn off the ulcers in the following manner:
If you burn a large cautery over it, it may cause harm.
This text seems to be about administering treatments for various medical conditions and symptoms, such as those caused by cold humors or other reasons.
When a fistula is formed in the body's natural channels, doctors burn off that part with a cautery.
If the nature is not obedient to the prescription given in that place, and if the patient is troubled by it, doctors use heat to treat it.
"When you encounter any fistulas in the nature thereof and are ancient, then cause the flesh to be corrupted by dampness, so that what is being said may come true when it comes to trying to find a subtle opening for oneself.
"Apply a caustic as similar to lye. "Then apply the caustic in that fistula, and after finding out how much it takes for each attempt.
"Repeat the caustic on those burned parts until they are completely cured or healed within one to three times depending on your needs.
"And remember to cauterize nerves and veins if the fistula is on the surface of the bladder or the bowels, and avoid doing this unless it's located where you know for sure that it will not penetrate.
"Then cure those places so they are healed.
"If the place is sealed up and all materials have been removed for a long time, then you know that it has already healed completely.
"If the materials are still in place and you know that it is infected or corrupted with those causes of which a memory will come to light.
"The final chapter.
Cautery of veins.
When the veins become painful due to cold or heat, and in order for the patient's breath to be cured, doctors will cauterize that vein with a cautery over each vein as they would over one specific vein from which it is necessary to remember the remedy.
And after applying the second, they will apply a third one in between these two, and thus there will be three in total over time.
Chapter fifty-eight of [book name redacted].
Cautery of the bladder.
When the bladder becomes painful and moist due to cold or heat so that urine does not stay in it, doctors will cauterize that part of the bladder with a pointed cautery over the bladder itself, at which point they will also cauterize on the left side (right side for right-handed people) as well.
The length of each point should be equal to the number of feet, and if necessary, cauterize that one at a lower point on two points rather than one point.
And after applying the cautery
Chapter fifty-nine of [book name redacted].
Cautery of the liver.
When the mayfly enters and infects the water supply, it is forbidden to approach or touch it, as well as corrupting its masters, causing delayed actions from them, and it brings about pain in their bodies, and so the doctors call this gout
The first sentence translates to: "When a mayfly enters and infects the water supply...
The translation for that part is: "The cauterization of the detachment from the gut.
When the humidity makes it go away from the opening of the intestine, and its cause is in their location, then they are said to have prolonged symptoms compared to others. The location of detachment should be in place before cauterizing it.
When you cauterize the intestine through the opening of it as mentioned before, make sure that there is a barrier in place to prevent leakage into the surrounding area and ensure that nothing goes outside the circle.
And this cautery from before serves as an example for the cauterization of the stomach.
If that cautery is not present now, then doctors will cauterize it with three additional ones or more if necessary.
When a second cautery has been applied to the extent of the incision, you should then take care that it is not infected.
Capitulation
The cautery for sciatic vein
When pain occurs in the large vein and its cause is cold and dampness, it is customarily treated as gout by doctors and not given pills or artificial ones, but instead cautery may be applied to that.
The second method of cautery is as follows: either cautery by medicinal means or cautery by fire.
The second method is as follows: either cautery by medicinal means or cautery by fire. And the spaces between each cautery should be equal to the extent of its length, whether it is a small one or large one.
Some guards are placed on top of the head to prevent four cauteries.
If you wish, cautery may be applied to a circle that is positioned in the cautery of dislocation of the vein, and which must have circumference equal to the extent of the incision.
This is the method of cautery during times when pain adheres to the vein and does not extend into the tissue.
When the buttocks are separated, two cauteries will be applied to the ass over the location where the patient feels pain; and a cautery on the thigh for four days to relieve the lower limb.
If the cutaneous cautery is done deeply, then consider how much of it should be used based on the severity of the burn
If the buttocks causes the pain to spread to all of the feet, then doctors will apply a cautery there for three days or four if necessary based on that location.
If the buttocks cause pain from a hernia, then doctors will apply a cutaneous cautery there.
Also remember that cauteries should not be applied excessively as they can cause nerve damage or excessive bleeding.
You have already seen and learned that cauteries should be applied to the thigh and groin, and finally on the chest, where a tumor has been treated with fire or other methods and the chest is burned and corroded all over. The most painful solution for stomach problems, and in such cases death occurs.
If pain is occurring at two different locations, then doctors will apply a cautery to each location separately.
When you make a point on the foot with a cautery, do it in such a way that the center of the circle is at the level of one finger's middle; and if there are two servants, each one should be positioned just above the size of an inch or thumb.
The second circle should be added after the first one. And since there is space between them and the quantity of the points on their feet, these circles are placed above two parts each; and the length of these arches is measured in a note or two notes, and you do so in those margins gently touching inside the circles; this is how it should be done:
Once you have made the point on the foot with a cautery and the circle is complete, then the patient should be placed over their left side onto a bed or table, so that they are comfortable while sitting up straight. Then remove all three points of cautery from one leg and place it on the bed/table for the patient to sit up comfortably.
Then place him on bed/table for three days, and then apply the bandage that is above all parts of the body to prevent any further bleeding, or ensure his health.
The words Albucasis are: "O, sons! This small cautery that many of you used for the torture of suffering from it, and by this cause many found themselves afflicted with it.
When the doctor is doing treatment on someone who feels pain in his legs or chest
Two openings are made in the patient's back, one through which a large needle may pass out of the body, and another smaller one for entering it.
If the space between two parts is less than half of their length, it should be treated as follows.
When treating someone with a hernia who is lying on their back, first place your hand under the patient's arm to support them, then take the water droplet and gently drop it into the circle between two rings, making sure its size matches that of one hour, and causing pain to stop as you drip.
Then place your hand on the instrument and remove the water droplet from all of it except for one drop, which you should drip onto the patient's chest.
Then let this be done over three days, and keep it on that area until the redness is completely gone, then continue with the treatment for another 7-10 days. This one is recommended for young patients.
Then treat this as soon as you find it.
When joint pain spreads into the thigh or leg, make it clear that there should be water inside to prevent any leakage when he urinates frequently.
The passage seems to be describing medical procedures or treatments for gout treatment in medieval times. The recipe for salt and sulfur to remove gout attacks by removing the excess moisture through a small hole, according to the quantity of water it contains.
The pause is to put the other pillow over the inflamed one, and pour the salt water onto those compresses that you will make yourself with good compression; be sure there's no acute water in the part of the inflamed pillow.
Once the water and new salt are applied, put both on top of each other; it is administered in surgical procedures and cauterization for other members as well, which operation may involve fire.
The medicines mentioned are the ones that cause cauterization to be applied widely as well, and those who make a mistake or apply it inappropriately may suffer severe consequences.
The person in question underwent an operation and treatment for sciatica pain in the ankles and veins; it should be noted that this is not necessary anymore, as recommended by doctors.
When the pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and if it does not arise from them, seek a recent figure; and let there be applied some drops on or near where the pain arises, whether in the cavity, the thigh, or the leg, and there it lies.
And let three hours be applied for a quantity equal to that which the patient seeks release from the adhesion.
Then place it in the sun and let the pain cease as a remedy for the body being swollen up to avoid its spread
And be aware that you should not resort to cauteries in these medicines, but rather an evacuation of the bowels is advised.
Then the veins of the legs are cautorized in the same manner as when a horse's vein is cautorized; and for the second cautery: place one on top and another below, between the toes of the foot and between the heel.
Then apply it to the dry wound and embalm that within fire, so as to make sure it is well-attached; then place it above the thread and let it be inserted into where it should extend. Then apply this, but don't overdo it until the feeling of cutting penetrates to the very depths and relieves the pain.
When you do a cautery on the surface of the foot
Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Cautery for joint pain.
Some veins become inflamed from the causes of joint pain, such as gout or excess fluid buildup, and through the infiltration of cold, damp matter.
Cautery is not used unless it's specifically for the discharge of damp matter.
Therefore, make pills with similar effects to that one, but spread them over the three lines according to its latitude and distance apart, so as not to interfere in each line when using cauteries or more if necessary depending on the patient's tolerance and strength.
Cautery is used for points.
If you wish, use three or four cauteries on the median collateral to do this way:
Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Cautery at the beginning of the blister.
When the illness occurs in children, it begins to spread through their extremities and ends with inflammation of the skin at its base, causing redness and movement.
When the joint pain has spread to other joints, they start to swell
Then when you want to prevent it and are using cautery as a treatment, apply the cautery in this manner: Cauterize both sides of each joint equally.
If you want to, cauterize around the circumference of a single joint at two or three points. Place them in order.
In this case, treat the area where you mentioned as follows:
Do not administer cautery in situations that are caused by nervous spasms.
"Thank you for your help.
Gout and joint pain cauterization.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
If the cause of gout is removed and the pain does not return, then it was cured by the doctors through the cautery.
Cauterize around the circumference of a single joint with several points.
This is how the treatment should be done for this condition:
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. If the pains occur in the joints or tendons and it is necessary to drain them, then the doctor burns a hole into that part of the body with three or four cauteries from all sides at once.
If you need to make the cauteries necessary, then burn that into it and do not put your hand over the cautery before, just send a signal to indicate where to apply it.
If the pains occur in both of them, then administer the cautery as mentioned in its capital part.
If the pains are only on one side and it is called a sore, then burn into that part of the body in two lines as you rotate, then burn into those two sides.
If the pain is only in one area and it has come from there, then burn into that part of the body with two lines as you rotate, and place your hand over the part where it came from.
If the pains occur at the joints or muscle areas, then burn into every part of the affected area.
Do not open your bowels without proper training and reception of medicines, lest if you are to do the correct procedure with this cautery it will be beneficial, may God help.
When joints are afflicted by cold humors that pervade every part of the body, causing pain in the feet, it is typically called gout by physicians.
Cautery to remove sores (ulcers).
When you have a hernia protruding into the abdomen and it's causing pain, put your hand on the area to prevent the hernia from coming out, but do not apply any soothing remedies in that day.
Continue to place the patient between your thighs on their back so that both legs are elevated and press down gently with both hands on either side of their abdomen, aiming for it to have a small opening or appear from under the sheet/blanket.
Continue to hold the patient's hand tightly and try to tear away pieces of flesh from their abdomen, so that it resembles the same shape as the part closest to your face on each side of the abdomen.
Continue using the cautery in this manner:
When you see it is moving and feeling for a heartbeat, Continue to return the intestine or hernia back to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent it from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them; another servant on their legs; and another one on their chest holding their hands.
When you have made the first cut, take your knife and make another one on top of that in order to get rid of the remaining bits of phlegm from the throat into the chest; then place a cushion under their head so they are supported by it while doing this maneuver.
Pay close attention to the position of the intestines during your cautery procedure, or else risk causing damage that could prove fatal to the patient or result in great harm.
You must ensure that you do not block their airway during the cautery procedure, as this can prevent proper breathing and could lead to complications or even death if it is severe enough.
The cautery should be performed gently on children, considering their smaller size and the need for greater care in order to avoid harming them accidentally during this procedure.
Place a cushion under your hand when performing the cautery, so that if there is any risk of fire or sparks, it will not cause harm to you.
Ensure that all other bystanders are kept at a safe distance during this procedure.
The patient should be placed on their back, with the legs slightly elevated to prevent any leakage of urine or feces that may occur as a result of this procedure.
Ensure that the patient is not fed during the course of the procedure in order to avoid any additional efforts from vomiting if they should vomit afterwards.
When it's decided to remove a tumor, doctors will administer appropriate treatment promptly, and keep that under observation for several days.
The remedy against baldness and hair loss through diet and drinks, and the use of violent remedies, as when using this regimen for treatment it should not cause harm.
Doctors cauterize the rupture in the abdominal wall, and immediately after, to prevent it from happening again, doctors cauterize a second time that amount of tissue, and do so according to what they said, but are not adjusted.
The first rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cut of cautery, as it is said that way in attempting to do so.
After pausing the lines on either side of the rupture and another line from above it, place your hand over a cautery claw to make the first cut more effective than ever before.
This is the end of the text
Cauterization of the torso.
When pain occurs in joints or when struck with pain that persists for a long time and does not subside with medical treatment, doctors call for cautery.
When pain occurs in joints of any size or proportion due to cold humors infiltrating each part of the body and pain occurs in feet it is customarily called gout by doctors
So if the first cautery is done, go ahead and do another one; otherwise, apply more cauteries to that member in order to alleviate those pains as are commonly called gout by doctors.
Chapter 57
The Cautery of Leprosy
The lepers' sores are treated with cauteries when they are young and especially if the leprosy is caused by putrefaction of flesh and blackening of the skin.
When you wish to cauterize that, consider if the leprosy is contagious and whether it is necessary to treat the entire body with those cauteries or not do so, neither doing nor this one, fearing about the corrupted parts of him coming out in all the body's parts and completeness of him, the doctors cautorizes that over the head with a pointed cautery. First on his forehead, then on the second part of his face below the eyebrows, behind it to prevent its escape from under the chin.
Lastly apply a small incision into the mouth to drain off thick vapor, and after that cautorize the middle part as needed.
When leprosy spreads over the patient's body and becomes manifest, doctors will burn it with cautery on those parts that have been mentioned earlier in this passage; they will also burn it over the nose extremity, two over both buttocks, two over the spine of the hip, one over the entire back from the chest down to the hips, one over each arm, two over the thighs and two over the calves. They may also burn it over any bones or joints that are protruding, and finally they will burn it on all the muscles themselves.
Remember to avoid burning anything connected with nerves in those areas where you do not touch them.
The doctors will burn one cautery over the throat and another over the stomach's mouth, and a third over the digestive tract.
You know that when many joints are cauterized simultaneously, it is more painful and debilitating; you also know that the patient does not feel pain from cautery like others do, because their heart has already been affected by it.
You know that the cauteries are either large or small depending on the size of the member and the joint mentioned before, as specified by the tools' parts.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Chapter 58
Cautery for numbness.
If any member is paralyzed or asleep and it's being treated by the medical staff, they should apply cautery after trying everything else to restore function in that part of the body.
And if there is a need for cautery to remove a few scabs. Then return that member back into normal function.
The numb parts of the member will be cured if cautery is applied to those areas and also on the back of the elbows and the backs of the wrists as well as on all the veins that run over them; this will restore feeling in that member.
Do not touch it unless you are familiar with the anatomy of the body and its movement from nerve exit to nerve entry, otherwise damage may occur.
Chapter 59
Cautery for ulcers that are bleeding.
If ulcers are bleeding and not responding to the usual treatments of medicine, then you should apply cautery over that area after a few seconds for it to restore the white skin tone back into its original appearance, and change the color as well.
When the patient's thighs are burned and their legs turn red and their hands start to shake, then they should be placed under a cloth so that nothing comes out.
The patient is suffering from symptoms of a stroke or paralysis.
Cautery for an ulcer
When cancer is suspected and you want to remove it or prevent its spread, the doctors perform a cautery in a ring around it as long as it remains inflamed.
The surgeons told me that it had been cauterized at the earlier location; however, I am concerned because I saw some ulcers there as well.
It is recommended that it be cauterized in a ring around the tumor circle if you want to remove or prevent its spread, but alternative methods may also be considered.
The patient's legs are trembling uncontrollably and their skin has turned red all over.
Cautery for a burn
When someone gets burned and it's too late for the fire to heal, or because of the patient's age which is declining rapidly, causing weakness, or through time, you want to treat their burn at that location; the doctors cauterize in a ring around the affected area, and they try not to let them spread further.
When you want to perform a cautery opening on him, the doctors take that cautery away from this procedure which is how it should be done: and remove it from between his legs so as not to penetrate inside.
If the cautery is in that place where you should remove it, in order for his arms to be relaxed; and make sure that area is treated properly.
Capitol means "capital" or "head.
Cautery on a corrosive substance.
Corrosion is the corruption that affects the member, which it will eventually eat away like dry tinder.
If once that corrosive substance is in the location where you are performing a cautery with fire, doctors will take away the cautery sticks and wait for it to burn out completely before proceeding further into that location.
And then cauterize that from its entirety in order to eradicate the corrosion and prevent any damage to it.
And then apply that for three days, and wait over the cauterized locations until all scars are removed and all corrosion is gone.
Then treat it with something that prevents the spread of germs or bacteria.
If in three days the healthy skin grows where there is no corruption, then good for you that cautery sticks to those locations are rotten or spoiled.
When a patient's pain arises from acute medical treatment, it may be due to cautery. Cautery can be risky for young patients.
When the patient has acute medical treatment in one area, then check for any injuries that may have arisen from it.
Good-bye
Good-bye from cautery and others like it.
When the foot is inflamed due to gout and causes redness, causing pain in it; and cautery can be performed on both feet at once for these types of cauteries, one type for fire and another for cold water.
Cautery for fire can be used to perform a cauterization which is similar in pain intensity compared to the entire area it covers, and with subtle variations as well.
Then place the pointed instrument above the area and move your hand around it in the area of the clot until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the clot. After three days, begin with a band. Then place the pointed instrument on blisters covered in salt, and leave it there for one night until they are completely healed.
When a painful swelling occurs on an internal part of the body between the ribs, it is called a hernia by doctors.
If it is not a hernia and the swelling occurs on the surface of the body, especially in the legs or feet, you should administer to these cauteries with water, holding your hand over them so that they are compressed; if there is very little water available, compress your own hand as well. If necessary, insert an extremely small cannula into the vein near where the swelling has occurred and then remove it from the vein once a short time period (e.g., one hour) to prevent further complications or bleeding due to overcompression of the vein by the cannula
And you should place your hand on top of all of them in order to cover their entire surface.
You should remove the stitches from the affected parts, as they are likely causing inflammation and redness in the skin.
The end of a sentence with three exclamation points is considered to be an exclamation or strong emphasis on that specific word in the text preceding it.
Cautery for fever.
If you need to perform a cautery on the nerves or due to fever as a cause of pain, or for any other similar reason, then doctors would recommend performing it at four points along each side, between each vertebra and one point on chest, stomach, and liver.
When the tremors of him cease and quiet his illness, health returns to the patient.
capital of Latvia
Cautery on the skin.
When the skin is inflamed by white spots and pustules form due to putrid, corrupt materials, then cauterize it with a subtile cautery near the tip of the finger that is stretched towards light, or an extended cautery for phlebology longue; or a lenticular cautery.
When the veins are cauterized from the start of expulsion following this manner, and it is not painful, and excess fluids are removed that way, health improves in those who do so.
However, I must remind you that this is a cauterization for phlebotomy.
capital of Lithuania
Cautery on the arteries near the incision.
If the veins are cut from an artery that leads to a region of the body where blood is necessary for life, or if it is necessary to cauterize a member, and then later, and it's difficult afterwards.
However, when it happens to the artery you mentioned earlier and pauses over that, then put your finger at the opening of the artery, and keep it there so that no blood flows out; do not let it go away.
The first sentence translates to: "Put a cushion under their thighs, another servant on their legs, and another one on their chest.
The second sentence translates to: "Put a cushion under the small or large artery in the area where it is ruptured and inflamed, over that vein pulsating with excitement as you press down on the artery called the femoral artery.
The third sentence translates to: "If the artery is ruptured from pressure when you press down on the femoral artery and remove the cautery, doctors should immediately apply another cautery prepared in the same way.
The last sentence translates to: "And remember that you must not touch the nerves here and cause any other harm to the patient.
The last sentence translates to: "And remember that when an artery ruptures, doctors cannot tighten it, but if the artery is large, there are four possible options: either apply a cautery as described above or remove one with extreme caution and prevent it from being torn off; if torn off, apply pressure on both sides of the patient's legs to restrain it; or use a ligature made of silk or cotton to tie the artery shut while maintaining its integrity. In all cases, make sure that any restriction reduces pain.
"When someone is experiencing a restriction of movement due to joint stiffness or joint constriction, this does not interfere with breathing.
"When there is no doctor present or medicine, the physician should instruct the patient on how to perform a test of that vein as described, and understand the great significance of this in determining whether the blockage is within the superficial veins or in more deep-lying ones, and also on what to look for when performing this procedure.
"Injury, perforation, and bleeding; phlebotomy (a surgical procedure to remove a vein); ulcers; and similar conditions.
"In the first book of this work there are various chapters on how to perform cauterization when it is convenient and in medical situations, as well as causes and instruments required for cautery, and I have listed all the chapters related to cautery at the beginning.
"You will proceed through this chapter in a manner consistent with what was described earlier, so that it is clear to the reader what is being asked for.
When you start doing this procedure, remember that today is the first of the series of cauterization capital
For the sake of great caution, remember that in this operation where you are cauterizing capital arteries Remember to be afraid and trembling during all this, as death may follow closely after.
Remember that you should not perform this operation in a rush, because there is always the risk of complications from mistakes made while rushing. Remember that the procedure is to be done slowly and carefully in order to avoid any risk of complications or death due to haste or a longer process.
Remember that you should be careful and thorough in performing this procedure for the sake of your child's health, expecting to cure his disease and wishing it were not deadly.
Remember not to rush the procedure and be thorough in your approach as haste may lead to complications and lack of precision.
"In the treatment of all your ailments with prognosis and indication for recovery to which health is converted, in that one is helpful on acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
"Oh sons, God send you understanding rather than death in order to give direction and protection so that it may be at your side.
"You have arranged this chapter to follow the previous one on cauteries, from curing the head down to the feet, so that it is at your disposal for what you need.
"First chapter.
"From the treatment of water, which contains in the head of children.
"Do you know what that ailment means when it occurs between the eyebrows and the forehead of children?
"Some pains caused by unknown causes.
"You may not see that ailment in children alone, and to all those who see it as the cause of death, so they are to my regret.
"You saw that a child with water filled head, whose head was so magnificent until they could not say whether it was caused by the greatness of his head or just being too wet and causing death.
When a cold humor infiltrates between the knee and the thigh, or if it infiltrates into the cavity of the thigh.
When performing the operation if the moisture is between the knee and the thigh and there are few openings, then make a small incision in the latitude of the chest to allow the passage of the humor.
And if the moisture is greatly increased and there are more openings, then make two incisions according to this manner.
If the moisture is located in the thigh, then you should make an incision all around the top of your head and open it when you arrive at that point without delay or risk of injury. Then make three incisions according to this manner.
Cut through the whole moisture and cut through all its openings; make incisions in the front and back of it; and tie up this opening at the top, so that the body does not come out or leak any more, and place your hand on the chest to cover the area, making sure to remove any excess moisture from around the member.
Another way to perform the incision is by considering the size of the opening and the collection of moisture - some openings may be greater in the forehead or back than others; therefore make incisions on both sides of the opening where it appears and remove any excess moisture as you go along.
When you have opened up the space between the patient's thighs, place a cushion under them, another on their legs, and one more on their chest, holding their hands
The next sentence is: Observe that no incision is made in the artery or vein of the limb being treated to prevent damage from bleeding due to the application of cold water vapor
When applying cold water vapor to the elbow or knee joints, it is customary and does not interfere with the administration of medicine; however, if there are two arteries in this area, then a first incision should be made into one of them.
When you want to make an incision in the area from which the head of the limb extends outwards and approaches it directly, place a cloth over the arm; when approaching, place your hand on the chest of the patient near the elbow, so that you can observe both arteries; also consider putting one on each side next to the areas where they are close by the arms.
When approaching the artery from which you are trying to make an incision, and when making the actual incision into it, place your hand on its surface in order for it to be visible towards the head's location; do this at a similar angle as that of the upper part of the body.
If you want, enter through the opening of these veins and go to the artery at the end of the passage in your hand.
The length of the incision is two fingers wide, and if any vein is incised it means there will be an exit from pulse pressure, causing pain to frequently occur.
If the artery does not appear at the moment, then you should measure from the ear to the amount of space three fingers wide and make an incision there
That is the amount of veins you should get from it, no matter how many or few there are, and that's all second to the amount which appears on the surface of the patient's body and under the artery of them.
And place your hand on the area without causing any harm to it.
Then stretch out the cloth gently and use both hands to pull apart the dressing from around it, making sure there is enough space for the patient's arm.
You have reached the end of this medical treatise.
And remove any additional arteries that may be in temples.
When you arrive at the temples, and if there is a cold or dampness in them that cannot be treated with warm cloths, then apply heat to those, as well as for any other ailments of this nature, so that doctors may attend promptly on these cases
"The preparation for the operation and extraction of that patient is as follows: first, remove the bandages on his temples; understand that in those who are affected by them, there will be a rash on their hands; it disappears only when covered with few people because of its strength.
"If it is hidden, the doctor will pour some water over his body and wait until the rash clearly appears. "The form of the bandage that this refers to: "Then put it in the same way that makes it easy to get into and out of its cavity; then take off one by one and throw away those that are worn out entirely.
"If the artery is delicate, wrap it around each extremity of your hands; then cut off one piece for a certain amount based on which extremities are affected and how much they are stretched out; do not leave any space free, because if there is none left uncut, nothing will come through.
"Then remove the three remaining pieces.
"If the rash is large, wrap it around two or three times tightly to prevent loosening up and to avoid necrosis of the flesh due to prolonged holding; also keep in mind that there may be a risk of infection.
And you put a cushion beneath their thighs in that space, place another servant on their legs at this time or later
If you wish, apply a hot Cautery to the external hemorrhoids in that area, and hold it in place with a bandage.
It is better to avoid fever or scalding complications when the cause of the ailment is coldness; Cautery should be used for those causes that help end the final moisture, and therefore it's best in youth.
The abscess is to be removed from the part of the body that is causing discomfort and placed on a clean cloth; then it should be carefully applied by the physician with dry medicines, so as not to cause harm or scalds when healing occurs.
If you observe any further signs of infection from the abscess, then you are to close it off with Cautery or other measures, and hold your hand over that area while trying to restrict its spread. If the cause of those is not present in this moment, then stop applying the Cautery on that location until the abscess becomes cold and strictures are loosened, and hold it tight as you can after that.
It is necessary to Cautery the vein with two fingers, making sure that you hold both points at once and try to prevent it from coming out in two parts, so that it is elongated as much as possible between the extremities of the patient, ensuring that it is not held together by any Cautery.
The form of cautery
And it's the sharpness of two needles. If you want the sharpness of two needles to be higher, then when both needles are placed in each part they should pierce deeply and not cause excessive damage quickly.
So with that being the case, it is recommended to apply heat from fire in those areas and let the flesh heal naturally.
This procedure is the best one of all works and the easiest one.
The space between two needles depends on its thickness.
The third part.
The treatment for gout in the extremities is sharp and acidic.
When the veins of those extremities become inflamed and cause pain in the forehead due to their severity, it is not a medical treatment but rather an additional measure taken because of that, as they are exhausted by them being rubbed so hard, causing hair loss on their legs, and scaly patches caused by their sharpness.
You command the patient to remove the hairs on their forehead and apply incisions in three parallel lines at a length of the forehead's width. When the fissure is two inches in length: The first fissure should be equally distant from the nose tip to this point on the forehead, and the second one a little further away along an imaginary line that connects the tear ducts of each eye
You should keep your arms still and continue to hold them in place while I perform the second part of this procedure on both sides of your jaw. If each incision is three inches wide, adjust the quantity accordingly
Do you mean that you want me to remove any dressings or bandages that are dry and in contact with the affected area?
After making this incision, place your fingers on either side of it. The first incision is made between the eyebrows and then moves to the second incision. Remove all the stitches that are between two incisions near to where it is over the nose, and prepare for the second incision to move into place after this one. After making the first incision and placing your fingers on either side of it, you will use another tool called a scalpel, one from each hand separately.
After holding the skin tight and making the incision, you will remove any excess tissue from around it, leaving only what is needed for closure. You then align that with the fissure to move into place, and remove all the excess material that extends down from the top of your head.
"Continue cutting into this flesh at where you find the opening, then close it in a small cut inside that.
"Make sure to take as much of the contents from between the toes and press them into the pockets of the legs.
"Place a pause inside each small cut to hold the contents in place and oil it gently so that there will be no need for additional caution.
"On the third day of treatment, apply a large gauze bandage or towel to the affected area and wrap it securely so that any sores will heal.
".
"The treatment of the gums for those who lose their teeth from the head.
"When the gums are cut and continue bleeding, sometimes the patient's teeth become exhausted, and it is necessary to relieve their pain by applying a poultice made of herbs over them. If the ulcers on the forehead are severe or cause bleeding from wounds in the head, then you should understand that this happened because the veins between the teeth have been cut.
"The best cure in these cases is that you command the patient to raise his head, and then make a small cut below the forehead extending towards the temple (and starting from the left temple going to the right). After making this incision across the eyes, remove it.
The first sentence translates to "With dry air, open the mouth and place a cushion between the two lips of the wound. Then put in your fingers gently into it to prevent any further bleeding.
When you have seen that the abscess has decreased, it is customary to insert a warm compress made from one part of flour and another part of colophonia into it.
I am not able to translate this last phrase as there are no words in my database with such spelling or meaning.
Of the cure of that which is above the breasts.
The cause that is above the breasts is one of four kinds: it may be mineral or similar to mineral, whether fire or water, or plant, or it could be due to frostbite and freezing, or any other beast.
And when you see a cause on the breast or any other cause similar to those causes that are not suitable for the breast, put it in the sun and if times it happens, doctors distill into whatever is causing this, and apply extraction of it, and say no more to it, and oppose with the nose and open the blood vessels. The first sentence is translated as follows: "And place a cushion under their thighs and another servant on their legs to support them.
If not given, the physician will administer an extract from a subtle instrument called a fetid cicatrix.
If it is given to perform the gesture, then yes. Otherwise, the physician will administer a small extract from an instrument with few duplicates.
If not given for this, the physician will insert a needle and thread through the arm into the vein of the patient's arm tightly closed to prevent any bleeding or leakage from the needle. The physician will take out a thread and tie it fast so that the patient can feel when they are being cut
If not given in this manner, the physician will take a length of thread and tie it around an instrument with known dimensions, place one end at the patient's fingertip, and gently pull on that side to feel when being cut. The physician will insert it into the vein of the arm easily, and gently pull on its side to feel when being cut.
If not given in all the previous cases that I've mentioned earlier, then the physician will apply cold or spasms to that particular part of the body.
When you have opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed cushions on their legs and chest holding their hands, you should now start massaging the sciatic vein from below upwards towards the heart with pressure applied to it If the fissure of the moon occurs on your finger, and if you can find an appropriate tool, make sure to close it as quickly as possible and care for it so that it heals.
If the cause is in the abdomen and it spreads, treat with care and extraction of it; however if you notice any improvement, apply gently as this shape: Treat that fat which has been removed from the abdomen.
Do not do this when you realize it is already moist from the abdomen's sweat and pause in extreme cases or gentle handling, but otherwise, remove it as usual to extract it.
Make sure that the patient's abdomen is filled up to its capacity with water, and insert a tube into it as soon as possible; if not possible, proceed otherwise by injecting fluid in the same way along its length, and hold one of these tubes in place over his abdomen while another goes into the arm. Then put a pillow under their thighs, another on their legs, and another one on their chest, holding their hands.
Then put a pillow under their thighs, another on their legs, and another one on their chest, holding their hands. Then pour water over their body as soon as possible or if you can't find any, place a towel on them and lay the one end down to protect it from being burned when applying heat.
Then pour water over them as soon as possible or if you cannot find any, lay a towel on top of it and apply heat using the appropriate cautery strip to soothe the pain.
If there is a large incision that causes pain at the time of healing, then provide a different treatment for that part and consider all other parts as well.
If the incision is open and causing pain during healing or when it's not clear how to treat it, then you should avoid exposing it to direct sunlight.
Then if there is any worms causing the issue, remove that from the dressing or gentle one from underneath it and take a look at what kind of worm it might be. When the patient is lying on their side, insert a slender finger into their anus and gently massage that area until the pain subsides; then apply something very warm to soothe it further.
If the patient is obese or has difficulty passing stool through a catheter, then irrigate their rectum with distilled water as mentioned earlier; otherwise, use a suppository to treat it according to medical guidelines.
Use this device for the specific purpose of irrigating the anus with medicated water, as prescribed by a doctor. You may use either gold or silver, just remember to sterilize it before use and clean after each patient.
When irrigating the rectum with a catheter for continence purposes, you should proceed as necessary here. If you wish, insert a straw gently into the patient's rectum and apply pressure there to relieve the pain or if any herbs are available for this purpose in the catheterand that is in their anusinsert it inside as well, and press firmly until the oil is expelled from the anus and relieved of the pain associated with hemorrhoids.
When the cold humors infiltrate in the ear, one feels a slight burning sensation. If the cause that distills into the ear is not too hot, then the medications for the ear will not suffer from it.
(Translation: Chapter 7 of the Capitularia)
Of hearing and speaking
The hearing and speaking of the ears should be as good as possible, without perforations in the ear canal or skin; if there is any perforation then it would require treatment at a specialist center for the ear
This type of issue in the ear can be a very serious matter and requires extensive medical treatment.
In cases where hearing is restored after an injury to the ears protect that area carefully. If a sudden increase in hearing occurs, it may be due to a benign tumor of this type, which is often treated with surgery
If the extremity to which this occurs is small and one of them is acutely painful while the other isn't, it would be wise to place a cushion on that part of the ear to prevent any damage to the ear lobes
When the opening is made through raw flesh on the earlobe or in his belly, then heat and pain will be immediately conveyed throughout all of the flesh
If the opening is on the earlobe, then heat and pain will spread gradually towards it with a few minutes, and bring it to his belly
If the opening is very painful and unbearable to bear, force the oppression of him with a gentle pressure, lest he should press on your earlobe.
After inserting it into the ear canal with an Egyptian bandage of appropriate size and shape, place this in a closed position for several days to ensure its consolidation; or you may insert something else and wrap around as tightly as possible, then remove any excess and pulverize it on him. If the earlobe has been sewn up, put the same thing back inside but be sure that it is tight.
If the pain occurs from a blocked ear canal, then apply warm compresses or a cold compress over the earlobe and use the other method to constrict the flow of the pain, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
"When joints are affected by cold humors that infiltrate every part of the body.
And when you want to relieve pain in the palms,
When you want to relieve pain from joints caused by dry and hot humors on hands.
Therefore, if you have these items and don't want to remove them from the surface of the joints, hold back slightly so that they cannot move.
When pain occurs as a result of cold humors coming through, then doctors use a pointed cautery to relieve the pain.
When a cautery is properly applied and the veins are burned off, then the joints return to their normal state without causing any more harm; when cauterized on fire, they burn up and cannot be used again.
"When it comes to treating hemorrhoids.
When you want to treat hemorrhoids on the palms of the hands,
When you want to treat hemorrhoids on the palms of the hands in such a way that causes swelling and hardening, it is called enlargement.
And when there's an excessive amount of humidity on the palm of the hand, it can cause the skin to become dry and cracked.
Therefore, the treatment is to consider whether it's caused by an excessive amount of moisture on the palm and if so treat it thoroughly without fail, as its cause can be very light.
"Then spread out that flap of skin to the latitude and fasten it so easily into place such that you can remove it with ease.
"And if the figure is large, then adjust that stitch and sew it closed so that it is healed.
"If there are only a few, you won't do much harm by removing the flap and sewing back up.
"If the greatness is decreasing from the parts of the eyelid you can remove it and sew back up, otherwise you will start at one end and finish on another, or if the eyelid is pulled, there's no harm in that.
"Put the beginning, wash it with salty water, and sew up the place where you want to heal so that it is healed.
".
"Remove the flap of skin from above the eyelid.
"The grey area around the eyelid is generated in the eyelid's tunics, and usually it develops into ulcers on the hands of those children who attend school; but you cannot look at the sun through this because if people are exposed to them.
When the joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and when pain occurs in the feet as well, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
If a hernia has been reduced in this manner and its cavity is restored, place the patient's head on it as they have placed their hands to prevent the hernia from coming out again.
In the event that you find a way to seal off all openings that could allow the passage of air into the abdomen, as described above for hernia repair, use white gauze dressings to cover and secure any wounds or incisions made during surgery in this manner.
Then take the dressings that you have wrapped around your fingers and thumbs on both hands, put them between the wounds or incisions made to open up the abdomen, and rotate between the right hand and left hand so they are spread apart in such a way as described.
And make sure that you do not adjust or pull on the wound to prevent it from coming out and closing up that hole.
If not all of the wound is closed at first, make sure to adjust it a little bit by gently pulling on it until it separates from the skin; then place gauze over it and wipe away any excess fluids that may come through as well, making sure they are pressed against the area as described.
When it is necessary to insert something into the cavity of a wound in order for that moisture to be removed,
And after doing all these things,
And if it happens that the ulcer or sore remains even after all this is done,
In other words, if the ulcer or sore still persists after everything has been done as prescribed in the previous points, then you should cover the ulcer or sore with a poultice made from fresh bread and honey.
The many forms of treatment for gout are:
The many forms of treatment for gout are:
These are the many forms of treatment for gout:
These are the many forms of treatment for gout:
This sentence translates to "Let it be known that the figure is in accordance with the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, as this has been differentiated between humans, which refers specifically to those who have more than double the amount of softening required for the eyelid.
Then put your finger on both sides where you have made a hole, and start from the larger tear duct to the smaller one. If it is necessary to make an incision along natural lines as close to those of the king,
Then make an incision at one of the two angles of the knee, and extend it all the way around, and then adjust to a narrow slit between the two thighs, thin enough for a delicate slip of leather, remove the stitches, and adhere firmly to that which will protect the flesh on both sides from tearing in some places where you want this done.
Then sew up the skin within three or four days and then do it.
If you want to, close the eyelid by stitching up around it so that the lining dries and swells, covering the lid; it's better this way than any other as far as I can tell.
Let it be known that in its use against a patient, the operation is good and not frightening.
The first eye is opened with this means that the finger is inserted into it
If it is not possible to do so, the doctors take a needle with a file and insert it into the eyelid's corner, then enter another one into the lower eyelid, adjust between the two fingers in such a way that they are equal in height, and raise your hand as if you were about to strike.
Then close both eyelids with sutures, and take care of it until it is healed.
If you lose your eyelid or tear off part of it, sew that back on and to the other side, and return
And if you remove the eyelids and sew them back on as described above in that part where we said to make an incision, may sutures be made in those places where it is possible to do so artificially.
After opening the eye, insert a small piece of cotton or gauze into the cavity. After opening the eye, sew the eyelid and divide the figure as described before, placing two small strips of gauze or silk that are half the length of the eyelid and half the width of its top edge. You have already opened up between the patient's legs, placed a cushion underneath them, another servant at their sides, and another on their chest while holding onto their hands.
You should gently place something under the patient's eyelid to support it and prevent it from being pushed out or distorted by their hand movement during the procedure, as they will need frequent breaks due to the stricture causing pain, which could potentially lead to injury if not done properly.
If it's late, then break off the tourniquet and quickly apply pressure over the wound to stop any bleeding.
Once the patient is secured, they will be gently lifted and held in place so that their head does not move or cause discomfort during the procedure.
These are the bandages you would use for this step. The length and width of these bandages should be neither too short nor too wide.
Chapter XII
Gently lift the head when it is heavy to prevent injury from being pulled with force.
When the head is heavy and unnatural, causing pain when lifted, doctors will perform the operation slowly, inserting a soft needle and remaining still in that position, adjusting their hands to prevent any unnecessary movement. The length of these bandages should be equal to the width of one hand.
When you have already opened up space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands, here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
You are to gently place a cushion beneath the patient's head in order for their work to be declared as it is a subtle and small operation.
You are to introduce the needle into the groove of the skin that requires the necessary skill, and then carefully penetrate it into the weeping eye in order to extract from the natural fur.
You are to pull out the hair inside of him and insert it into a container for one or two or three times, as needed.
You are to remove your hand from the patient's head in order to pull out the hair that has been cut away into a container for the eyelashes, so as not to damage the natural fur.
If you are not removing the hair and it is causing discomfort to the patient, then remove the hair from the area that was treated with care in order for it to be removed gently out of the remaining excess.
You are to gently remove the hair from the vision as you may do with any other, and follow each step carefully until all of them have been completed, and then apply a bandage on the area for two or three days so that the hair adheres well to its place and grows over it in good condition.
When the belly is swollen due to a burst of natural bowels, and if it is elevated towards that direction, hold onto that area tightly to prevent its escape.
Chapter Thirteen
Regarding the cure of a cataract in the eye's lens.
When you have an eye cataract, and the eyelid is contracted to one side or the other, for good or bad, it can be cured by either consolidation of cataracts or through application of cautery, whether it's natural or accidental, so that the cataract may be consolidated, made into a solid mass, or cauterized.
The surgeon's goal in the operation is to cut away the consolidation and separate the eyelids from one another, leaving a space between them so that it can be covered with a dressing or bandage as needed.
And do not forget to use cautery if you suspect the causes that can lead to scarring or contraction; because if you do this, it will return and worsen what would otherwise have healed over time.
Use on those causes that are very cold and have a tendency to freeze, by wrapping it in the water where you find it, or wherever else, such that it becomes liquid when exposed to the air, and immerse it in that liquid.
When your treatment begins it should be smooth and not consolidated after its form, as you focus on the beginning
This operation which we call for is only a correction of this particular location that returns its form after focus
It means "This operation, known as 'the coup,' corrects the unusual shape at one point on your body when you are focused.
The treatment of this particular location is done in the eyelid.
This operation known as 'the coup' can be either necessary or accidental, and is done in the eyelid of that particular location.
The accidental operation can occur through a cut, a tear, cautery, or any other way.
The way of the operation is to pierce a needle which has two branches, and fix that in the flesh, and then make it pass from the inner tear duct through the outer one, until the thread goes through both ends of the skin.
After inserting the needle into the flesh and fixing it at one end, cut the other end off and extend it outwards. After you've corrected the shape of the eyelid as much as possible, or if not, take a thread and fix it in the split figure, and then attach it to the eyelid, and divide the two cuts at the bottom of the eyelid.
"The two fractures of the two angles of the incision have been opened, so that they run together and form a figure with them.
The Greek letter used for this is lambda ().
Then take that flesh on the amount as long as it takes to cover his eye, so if necessary use a bandage
Then adjust the separate parts and combine them with wool thread; and care for those mentioned in the prescriptions of soothing medicines and waters so that health is restored.
If you need to make incisions or sutures or cauteries, the doctor will do so with a sharp blade on the edge of the eyelid after it has been mentioned. Then separate the water between two lips as indicated.
In the sum of the chapter on treating wounds when they are treated or removed, that should run in their operation, after it has been prepared in a way to treat wounds, and this is in the form of various stitches.
It is necessary to prepare each time that there may be an opportunity for the figure to return to its normal form or from it, and that patient after surgery and tools in larger amounts.
When a person has a sudden onset of severe pain in one or more joints caused by a cold humor, it is known as gout among medical practitioners.
From the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea
When this adhesion occurs on the upper eyelid and is solid enough to block the passage of tears through it, and prevent natural movements as well as artificial ones, causing that eye to remain raised or extended.
Then you cut a small incision in the subtle adhesion which is not too painful to perform an operation without causing distress for the patient and remove the skin as little as possible while keeping its sharpness.
And after cutting through this adhesion you will return the eyelid to its normal position and heal all adhesions completely.
Then you rinse or distill it with salty water until dissolved in the water.
Then you separate it from the tear ducts and let it dry in a cool place before using causes for solidifying to ensure its safety.
When there is inflammation of the eyes caused by cold humors that spread into them, causing pain and redness, doctors call it ophthalmia among medical practitioners.
From incision in the eyelid to the emergence of tears from the tear ducts.
"The second vein opens with a sound like that of the first one; either it is nervous and similar to a sharp pain felt when pinched or it is not-nervous, similar to dried up white moisture, which when applied causes it to be taken away by anyone nearby.
The latter vein does not run like the others, but rather it starts near to the eye and gradually moves downwards towards the forehead, preventing any light from entering or moving across its surface.
When the vein of work is inserted into the patient's body, it should be placed gently in their head and covered with a hand or glove to protect from infection. The needle is inserted into the patient's body in any way you want - through the ear canal or nose, for example, or by making an incision near the finger and placing it there - but once inside, hold it firmly with one hand while using the other to penetrate its surface, ensuring that both are used equally. You place a bandage over their right shoulder.
You insert a bandage gently and securely on the brow to prevent sweat from entering or causing any other discomfort during this procedure.
"When pain occurs in the soles of the feet when cold humors infiltrate each part of the body.
Keep your foot away from the exposed skin and prevent tearing it. Also make sure to puncture a hole in it if necessary
Insert the incision with a small amount of salt water or vinegar, and let it heal for one day; then take care of it as it is now healed.
If the sole is not numb and you cannot put the needle in it either, then the wound may have been cured by medicine, and so do as recommended by the doctor in this case
If you want to insert it, place your hand over the patient's buttocks and apply a soft cloth soaked with cold water, as this method is recommended for such cases. As a soft cloth. If the wound is often contaminated and infected, apply vinegar or salt water to it as needed until it heals
After the operation is complete and if it does not heal properly or conversely if it worsens, take care of the wound as before until it heals, and cure it from the beginning in order for it to be healed.
The operation will be performed on that arm as soon as possible for health reasons
The emission of tears from the lacrimal gland if not controlled properly will cause great harm to vision; therefore it is suspended immediately; and incisions are made in that area only, without making any cuts on other parts for fear that the flow of blood may be disturbed.
The tear ducts should open gently and release fluid gradually to maintain health.
This is the seventeenth chapter of the Capitularia, a collection of laws and customs established by Charlemagne's court.
The incision should be made on someone who has a tight skin fold; that is to say, the incision must not go through fat tissue.
Any vessels in the eyes of those born with tight skin are sealed off so that they do not open to reveal the pupil, or come into contact with the eyelids and eyelashes; it is covered over them by a patchwork border.
The operation will be performed on the patient with their head facing downwards so that they do not see; and place both hands of the surgeon on the area to perform incisions as soon as possible in order for everything to be completed by this incision, and guard them from seeing it lest you regret your operation.
That is the incision that should be made in relation to the one used for the arm or the abdomen; and those are recommended by us who perform incisions of the hand, or the little finger which we have taught you about on this chapter.
When the incision has been completed and the wound is thoroughly cleansed with salt water or burned with corrosive medicine, let it rest until the pain from the infection subsides, and then apply soothing ointments to prevent further damage
If no other cause of infection is found and the suspected infection has been treated appropriately, apply soothing ointments to the affected area while continuing normal wound care until it heals completely, also keeping the skin around it clean and protected with special ointments.
If you find yourself in a situation where all treatment for the wound has been futile either naturally or accidentally, stop trying and do not put your hand on any of these operations until you see that the member is suffering from this operation.
[No translation provided]
With a sharp knife in the wound.
The bandage should be applied over the wound and may cause a delay to the operation; it will also cover up until healing is complete.
Therefore, it's necessary at the outset that you consider whether the knife in the wound is sharp and there are no other injuries to be addressed first, then bandage the wound with this one.
If you order the patient to raise their head in bed and support their neck with one hand or two, as your discretion allows.
The first sentence translates to: "Here you will find a certain form.
"Here you will find a certain form of restraint, that is to say gentle control and restraint, as soon as they come into contact with these delicate veins, gradually increasing the pressure until those veins are opened up.
"Remember to not press on the extremities of your fingers; and if you perform surgery when it's light out in the open air, make sure that you do not squeeze them but those veins.
"After completion of the operation, the doctor will remove that which has been drained from under the skin and the affected area will be treated with something to prevent any corrosion.
"If you do not remove it within a certain period of time and the pain persists for some days, then we will ensure that it does not come back by using a cauterizing agent.
"Then place another bandage to cover it until it is healed.
"This is how the bandage should be applied:
The end of this text.
Reduction in appetite for food.
If the cautery or acute medication is applied without first having been followed by a description of the injury and not being healed, then it will be made to remove all moisture from that part and reveal any bones underneath until they are uncovered.
When you discover an abscess or ulcer in the body, then call for a surgeon to examine it.
You should not only make a cut but also feel it; and the tip of your finger, in case you have to apply pressure subtly.
Place it between the toes and gently squeeze it to see if that is where the ulcer is located.
And after that, restore the place from dehydration and strictice
If the wound is now completely healed and it's on clean skin without any sign of infection or scarring for 14 days, then you know that the patient has recovered.
If not, then you should go to a surgeon and have the wound reduced back to its original shape; second option is to use cautery.
The edge of the incision should be triangular and its furrow deepened into that part of the limb.
Then gently hold it with your finger and press firmly on the other side to push all of it out; then place a cloth over that to prevent any discharge or spillage when you remove it.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it's customary for doctors to call this gout.
Then, with the patient's thighs spread and their buttocks separated, they lay the mattress over them so that it does not come out onto the floor.
The capital of Spain
Reduction in height
When the gout occurs in its entirety and does not cause any of the other symptoms mentioned or reduction, doctors usually advise treating it with colchicine, a natural remedy that is also an anti-inflammatory drug used to treat arthritis, as well as cooling applications such as ice packs and poultice (a medicated compress) on the affected joint.
The purpose of wrapping with four sheets is to hold the body heat in order to increase circulation and ease inflammation.
Then, place one on top of the other as necessary according to the amount required by the gout. Then, hold tightly on the thick layer of the mattress to prevent movement and minimize friction against the affected joint, as well as applying soothing heat for pain relief and increasing circulation through gentle massage motions along with it.
If both of them are loose, doctors usually advise not to wrap the mattress around their legs.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, you should apply warmth to soothe it on every member of the chest, especially when pains occur in the feet, as doctors usually call it gout.
If necessary, you should reduce the heat and if not, apply warmth to soothe it on every member of the chest, especially when pains occur in the feet, as doctors usually call it gout.
The text is incomplete and does not form a complete sentence or phrase in any language you provided earlier.
This could be the beginning of a statement, perhaps referring to the significance or importance of wearing clothing (tunica) as mentioned before.
When the disruption occurs in clothing (tunica), and you want to put an end to it with a pointed cautery or sharp instrument: apply warmth to soothe it on every part of the chest, especially when pains occur in the feet, as doctors usually call it gout.
After extracting the needle and placing a damp cloth on top to soak up any excess blood or fluid that may leak out of the wound, you should hold it there until the thread is dry.
After applying warmth to soothe it and every part of the chest as doctors usually call it gout, continue to care for the wounds that are healed.
"When you have opened a space between the patient's thighs and placed cushions under them... Now comes the first sentence to translate.
"Now come the first sentence in translation: 'Place it gently, for it is delicate'.
"The second part of the medical treatise refers to Chapter 22.
"Treatment with a lancet.
"The type of gout called 'alconati' is actually just the kind that settles in similar ways to how water dissolves, but it is not that one.
"The goal is to make the patient lie still and let them feel the pain so they can distinguish it from other pains.
"And if not in bed, then you know it's water.
"If not in bed, you should let the patient lie still and gently hold their head between your hands to prevent it from going down.
"Now that you are done, you should pour water into their mouth mixed with salt or wine and vinegar.
With careful care for the joints causes that are the cause of pain
22nd chapter
From the direction of water descending from above
I will declare the veins and their division that you must pierce in order to establish that the ailment is present.
Make sure there is a pillow between your thighs and place it on top of their stomach to support them during labor.
If the vein is on your left side, place your right hand there, but if it's on the right side, use your left hand.
If the vein is in the left arm, place your right hand there, but if it's on the right arm, use your left hand.
Place a small pillow behind the ear lobe to support it during the illness of the nasal congestion, and place your hand over the affected side while turning around.
Insert into the eyelid so that the pillow is in front of it due to its swelling
You will measure the length of the eyelid to the width of the space that is between the pupil and the end of the eyebrow, which is the eyelid's brow; so you will look at the pupil through clarity of the corneal layer.
When the patient's urine flows to that location, they will quickly notice a lump in their bladder and it becomes visible from their own view.
After a short while, if the urine does not flow away from that location, it means that the lump is growing and they should inform their doctor about it as soon as possible.
When that is the case and it doesn't flow away, then you should add some clear salt water to make the lump dissolve quickly.
Those who are in our times can try using a compress made of clean cloth soaked in warm water and apply it gently on top of that affected area.
If the lump is not going away by itself when it comes to men's urine being painful - which are common for people who have frequent urination problems - you should seek medical help as soon as possible.
Perform it on that location and not at the very last moment of your hand near it, as if you were to add some water over there gently.
And after doing so, inform us right away.
When you have completed the first sentence translation, please reply with your guess for the second sentence.
This sentence means: "Pause in her nature to prevent her from being startled or disturbed at any time.
The second part of the sentence is as follows: "And he should have intercourse with her on the third day.
This sentence means: "Let him approach her in that dimly lit place and ask for a cause; after she has given one let him return to his task on the seventh day.
Do not do this during the time of curiosity or when you are close enough for her to see it. This sentence means: "Do not let him do this, lest the water will cause great and excessive harm.
This sentence means: "If you see that he is in the seventh day, make sure to correct him as soon as possible.
This sentence means: "Take away her sight and place your hand over her mouth to prevent any movement of hers for a certain number of days; she should be kept in the darkest room.
This sentence means: "Let him approach her gently and ask for causes, but don't let them lead to anything improper.
When you enter the room, do not excuse yourself from looking around; tell the nurse that you are ready for surgery.
It is said that the king of this country, when he was passing through, gave orders to dig a well for his wife.
It is true that you have never seen a well in our country that was capable of fulfilling this order, nor did they accomplish it according to the rules set for free people long ago; and it seems likely that what he ordered may be new.
Those are the forms of magic which cause knowledge to go out of those who do not know them, and they seem to have come from that place
Some are the forms of those who are or will be good at doing them, and some of their skills may involve a triangle formed by the sharp end of an edge, which is also what they do
This text is part of a chapter in a medieval medical treatise that discusses ways to diagnose gout.
Do not cure flesh wounds on the nose
When nasal cartilage is affected by various injuries that may include the cause being an inflamed polyp or peptic ulcer, and this condition is called polyps because it resembles what has been represented in such wounds. The skin cancer looks pale, inflamed, and is of a reddish color; the healthy skin will not look like that color.
When the woman's legs are not swollen or cancerous but instead have turned pale and thin from illness, place a cushion under them, and put her head between your thighs, and wipe away the tears that may come from those parts. When you have comprehended that a certain part of the body has been affected by the subtle ailment mentioned earlier and is already in its last stages, if there's any cause for which excision can be performed, doctors will take it into account when using one of the delicate instruments to prevent its spread from that particular area. If the pain or swelling in the arm is caused by malignant tumors, doctors will cauterize it to prevent further spread; if the cancer has already infiltrated all cavities then they must remove it entirely
Place a cushion under her head and put your hand over her nose so that you can speak to her If the patient's nasal cavity is inflamed from excessive moisture in their mouth, doctors will be able to ascertain that they are already healthy.
If the excess moisture does not penetrate into those cavities that are not affected by cancer, you will know that their bones have been spared from any such operation.
When inserting the needle into one of their extremities, whether it is the hand or foot, make sure to take note of how much fluid was withdrawn and stop between each digit counting the number of times the needle entered through both digits of that extremity, unless there are other reasons for doing so.
When pain arises from cold humors that infiltrate into the nasal passages and cause pain in the nose, it is customary for doctors to hold a pointed cautery over it.
Then hold the two extra fingers of one hand over the nose and place another one in the nostrils to prevent the finger from going into the nose.
Then hold the finger tightly and place a small bandage over it to prevent any bleeding that may occur as a result of pressing on the veins for three days or more until the skin around it has healed completely.
Then in the end of the cause, place a cannula filled with medicine for three days to ensure that the pain is relieved.
If you want to use it after all, go ahead and do so.
This is the form of the tool used for draining off phlegm from the nose that contains medications to treat colds.
And do this with silver or gold, which is like a small torch, and its size as well, in the same way.
If you wish, put the cannula closed like the one from the instrument and make it flat, uncovered; on which there is a small hole in its upper part so that you can insert your finger or whatever else you want to drain the secretions and causes of diseases when you want to extract their juice or cause them.
25th caput
Through the nostrils.
The days in which it is used should be kept as a secret until the moment to use it arrives.
So that you insert him at the beginning of using it and read all of this. And place your hand over the area where a cautery or medicine is applied to the location of use.
If it is too late to make the incision when it should be used, then consider making a cut on top of that.
And if the letter is small and not dark in color, times that it can be inserted into any of those locations, then remove the patient's foot and insert it there with caution, keeping both sides free from injury and ensuring healing occurs quickly.
When joint pain occurs due to cold humors infiltrating each part of the body, particularly in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
If the continuity (or union) of the nose and lips, or the earlobe is dissolved due to tears or a similar event.
If the solution of continuity occurs in one of these parts, it will be performed by only that surgeon and not another.
Then it is considered to be a fresh tear that caused this condition and the doctor adjusts both eyes of the patient with sutures, and takes care of the area where it was found as well.
If the lips of the solution to continuity are already separate and both are healthy, then you should cut off each part of her chin separately where it is not visible without stitches. And then adjust the two lips with sutures and stretch them, over these bruises of dragon skin and apply ointment on their surface, over the surface of which powder is applied to prevent infection and after three days or more, remove it and replace it with another one, so that if they are separated, take care for a few days or even weeks, and adjust in case it's healthy.
The solution to the continuity may be added at the same time as you apply it in the belly surgery or add it on its own according to your decision.
When joints are inflamed by cold humors, causing severe pain that spreads throughout the body, this condition is traditionally referred to as gout, typically diagnosed in physicians.
The cause of gout usually presents with inflammation and pain in the joints or areas affected by cold humors, often observed on the feet specifically.
The gout's symptoms may include redness and swelling in the affected joints or areas of the feet, with some patients experiencing more severe pain than others, depending on the extent of the inflammation and size of the affected joint(s).
Therefore, you should thoroughly clean and cleanse every part of the affected limb, then place a bandage over it to prevent further damage from occurring in case it becomes swollen or inflamed; also wash your hands before treating this area to avoid any infection that might arise during treatment.
This is the conclusion for the translation of the medieval medical treatise, providing some guidance on how to treat and prevent gout attacks.
The skin should be gently trimmed around the affected joints.
The skin should be gently trimmed around the affected joints to make way for a pointed cautery tool or any other treatment procedure as required by the physician; then apply a bandage over it and keep it clean with frequent dressing changes.
Then place your hand over the area that has been injured or affected by swelling, making sure not to apply any sharp objects directly on it.
If the skin regrows after treatment or if the cautery does not work as expected, then reapply the treatment and repeat the procedure until the condition improves.
When pain occurs in the feet due to cold humors infiltrating each part of the body, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
When the gums around the teeth and between the gums are adjusted to be smooth and tender, they should also be covered with ointments containing lead or mercury, as these ointments have been proven to protect the teeth from decay and prevent tooth rot.
And when the patient is between your hands and you hold their head in such a way that it cannot move around any more, and cover the teeth with ointments containing lead or mercury to prevent any more decay or cause of which are visible on them, as well as other diseases mentioned before that may have been mitigated.
Therefore, if you are starting from the beginning of this reason, good. And otherwise, repeat the procedure on those in a day and two days later as well, until you reach the end statement of which you wish to begin.
You should know that the teeth may require various treatments and different figures depending on when your operation is prepared. So that when the reason for which a tooth is removed from the parts of the teeth may be another cause, and these different forms should also have been prepared so that you can see them as well.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
The removal or cauterization
You will cure the pain by removing or cauterizing the cause of it, so that when removed there is no substance left to cause further pain, which is the underlying cause for removal.
When the hernia is being removed (hysterectomy), it must be ensured that the healthy intestine or hernia has been reinserted into its proper cavity, and then the pain will stop as long as the defective hernia or ulcer is removed from where it had caused the pain, which we have seen in previous surgeries.
In order to be sure it is the defective hernia or ulcer that has caused the pain, you should ensure that the sore tooth that caused it was first treated and removed completely from its place in the mouth tissue, after which you should carefully remove any remaining parts of it by progressively cutting away at them.
After the large tooth extraction or perforation is done, you must place a finger over the mouth of the patient to prevent any other teeth from being broken or pulled out, and hold their head steady while they are placed back into alignment in order to avoid that one or both will cause more pain when it is put back.
When there is no relief, the doctor takes one of these instruments and places it on the foot, applying it in such a way that it helps relieve the pain as soon as possible.
If the tooth is decayed or burned, the doctor covers it with cloth and applies it to the affected part gently such that it does not burn in the area where your fingers are.
The doctor covers the entire circumference of your gums with a bandage and ensures that it does not touch you, leaving room for forceps to pass through and ensuring its removal is easy.
The doctor advises that you do not let ignorant barbers perform the removal of your tooth with their hands and audacity, as it is recommended they use something else; furthermore, bandages are placed over the wounds of the great patients who cannot be removed without causing damage to their gums or causing them to heal slowly.
The tooth removal should either be done with a cold water spray, or a warm salt solution.
If the bleeding continues despite your efforts to control it, then the doctor applies a cautery.
The form of the forceps and hold them gently as it is recommended to start with a gentle touch outside the first part, short but firm and thick to prevent any harm when working with these.
They should be especially careful when starting as they can cause damage if used carelessly.
They should be carefully used to prevent any injury and are recommended for those who have problems with the joints as they provide gentle support that is not too soft or hard but just right.
The next sentence in this text seems incomplete, could you please complete it?
To remove the dents and cracks from the bones of the broken jaw.
When you need to remove a dent that is caused by trauma and has no other cause, it is customary for doctors to wait one or two days in order for the area to become softened; then apply a pointed cautery.
The forceps should be gently used, and if necessary, use them delicately.
And if you do not comply with what is written here about the forceps or hold them back, then doctors will tell you to place your hand over the area and carefully remove all of the flesh surrounding the instrument known as a spatula.
This part of the text is referring to applying something to a patient's body. The sentence means that the patient should not be left unattended or neglected during this process.
If the remedy is to be applied through this method, then do so; but if not, assist with another instrument of which these are forms. The form of the first instrument is a triangular surface in which there is no excess size:
The second form is that it should be triangular and very subtle.
And already assist with this instrument having two ramps of which the following form is appropriate: And with another instrument that you need for shaving the teeth, which is assembled once large and has this form:
The third sentence means that a small triangular surface with no excess size should be used for shaving the teeth.
And another thing to note is that these tooth-shaving instruments are similar to other instruments.
In the art of medicine and surgery, take great care to ensure that you are performing the correct operation for various ailments. For these are different from the ancient remedies which were not known or recommended by their own instruments due to diverse forms.
If the bone of the mandible or any other bones in the mouth are fractured, and if you should do this operation by grasping it with these instruments and the graspers which were described during the extraction from the roots of the teeth, then assist me as follows.
When joints are affected by cold humors that infiltrate the body and cause pain in the feet, it is customary to call this gout. And if it is necessary to make points on the foot surface, then do so with a pointed cautery. And when returning the intestine or hernia to its cavity, place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them. Another servant puts his hands on their legs and another one on their chest, holding their hands.
If the space in the anus is small and painful, then treat that part of it as you would treat hemorrhoids or a fistula (a medical condition characterized by abnormal communication between an organ and its covering), treating it so that it becomes healthy again.
Capitulum
The cure for the teeth is most important above all else.
When teeth are prominent and do not follow their natural course in this way the treatment is to carve them off, preferably when they affect the lips or upper gums: if there's no other tooth to replace it, then remove it; however, unless there is another suitable tooth, then remove that one as well. It should be done with a sharp instrument from India and should not be done in haste.
And if you wish to remove it from the mouth as quickly as possible due to the sharpness of the tooth and because there are no other teeth available for replacement.
When the cause of joint pain has been found to be cold humors that have infiltrated into every part of the body, and when pains occur in the feet.
And when the pain in one joint is severe and persistent, it is customary to use a pointed cautery to make punctures on its surface And then, apply leeches after that, and place them around the patient's body.
And if the tongue is split and exposed to air for too long without being moistened or covered, pain occurs in both the tongue and lips, causing them not to move or speak properly.
Chapter 33.
To restore a tooth that has been knocked out by gold or silver.
When a tooth is knocked out by concussion or fall, and the patient cannot hold it in place, you should seek medical attention immediately to prevent the tooth from being lost, unless gold or silver are used as replacements, for if they break or fail, they will not work again after being reattached.
The way to restore them is by taking the two healthy teeth and pressing one's finger between both of them, or if only one part is affected then place it on the other side; otherwise you must wrap it around the healthy tooth from the opposite side. When you begin to enter into that part of which you start, stretch your hand gently and easily so as not to cause harm.
Stretch your fingers tightly at the places where they have entered but do not pierce them through.
When the extra-mucous tubes of the fingers reach the teeth or tongue, and place them in each location gently, and close them between the healthy tooth and diseased tooth to prevent injury to the tongue. Stretch it out like this (stretching out your hand).
If it is swollen or inflamed, stretch that or those fingers gently and evenly in every way at all times.
This is the shape of both healthy teeth and diseased teeth in this manner (stretching out your hand).
When it is necessary to retract a tooth or several teeth from that location in the following way, and stretch as recommended, and tighten up again.
This does not mean a good thing and wise.
Some vegetables are not suitable for cow bones, and it is necessary to prepare them in the form of teeth, and put a cushion on that place where they can fall out, and stretch as recommended, then after stretching up again you can use it for a long time.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
The incision of the ligament which makes him speak should be prohibited.
The ligament that causes the tongue to become swollen or is naturally so, or accidentally and happens when it has already healed up.
The operation on him is to break open his mouth, the end of it being that there are stitches inside, and raising its tongue, and then cut off that nervous ligament as far down as the length of its recess will allow.
If there is no pain or discomfort, then the incision should be made to prevent any complications arising from it, and afterwards cut off that ligament as far down as you had already incised its length of suture
Keep in mind to not make a tear on the front part of his flesh and that you should remove anything else as well as the stitches.
And afterwards wash the remnants of the incision, whether you are using water or vinegar, and hold the tongue down to prevent it from swelling up any more
If there is bleeding from the stitches, then clean over the sore place with a poultice of something bitter that agrees with this. And place a cushion beneath them, another on their legs, and yet another on their chest, holding their hands.
Chapter fifty-five of the Capitularies of Justice by King John
Extracting a tooth
The tongue is held in place with a small gag to prevent it from falling back into its normal position during the extraction procedure, and kept very still for fear of disturbing the mouth.
The operation is carried out in a way that holds the patient's mouth open downwards towards the floor, and considers an assistant.
If a vein becomes black or dark red, which the patient does not feel pain from, then do not cut it.
If it turns white and becomes moist, then apply ointment to it, and incise it with a fine knife, and incise the whole part; if at any time during your operation you notice that your veins are bursting, then stop immediately, for this is dangerous.
After doing that treatment as mentioned above, take care of any other wounds or injuries you may have in the same manner, and seek medical help if necessary.
Chapter sixty of the Capitularies of Justice by King John
Extracting two gold teeth and one silver tooth.
When the glandula arrives at the goal, its function is to assemble everything in order and coordinate it with the passage you have just recited; and if this assembly cannot be done without causing pain or injury to any of these glands, then consider whether your statement should be rejected because of a lack of accuracy or clarity.
If the reason for rejection is because of a lack of color or clarity, then do not reject it when you have already said that you will consider rejecting it if necessary; otherwise proceed as planned.
If the reason for rejection is because of a lack of brightness or subtlety, then that glandula should be rejected.
After considering the patient's operation, if the bandage has been removed completely or if it is not necessary to remove it further, then do what follows. Place your hand on his chest and hold open his mouth, take care of the body from below as well; in other words, serve them according to their rank.
Give it either silver or gold, but be subtle with your manner.
Then place your hand over his face and hold it in the air, saying 'you are mine' as you point at him with your finger; when he falls to the ground, take him by the collar and lead him away from danger, carrying him as far as possible. "Another thing that you have to do for the tunics, then proceed by cutting off this device from which it is the form:
"Another thing that you have to do for the tunics, then proceed by cutting off this device from which it is the form: "And assemble the forceps, but do not remove its sheath from it, so that one of those [forceps] in hand is ready to use immediately.
"If that device is not available to you, then go on to remove the sheath from it and put aside one of those [forceps] for use in this manner: And take one from each part.
"Then if you have removed one pair of forceps, proceed to use the other as follows: And place them on each side, so that they can hold up and cover the wound from water.
"If it is a deep wound that cannot be covered with anything else, then place them on both sides to cover the wound and keep it clean.
"Then place the second pair [of forceps] on both sides, so that you can use them together in covering both wounds.
"The woman who was the patient had no longer been in the care of that doctor because she had already closed her wound and did not breathe well, nor had she been allowed to eat or drink water for several days before she became ill.
When the abscess had been opened too much so that it became infected by two arrows
Then you should gently wash your fist with water and clean it carefully, remove the arrow that entered there and at this point disinfect the wound thoroughly.
Then take off a large piece of cloth from him, do not cover him completely but leave some space for cleaning purposes. Then absolutely cover the face and start to pour water gently onto it, after that you should not miss a single drop of blood from the wound in order to avoid making matters worse for a long time.
Then you should gently remove the cloth from his back and clean it as well, after that you should bandage him properly without getting too close to the wounds.
Chapter XXXVII
When an abscess is opened.
When the catarrh is open and long, the pains are called paroxysmal; if it's in a large and rounded part, they are called bubonic.
Then when the abscess is cured as mentioned in the division and you do not worry too much about your care, but sometimes an arrow may have entered him and be very subtle; so if it's into a round part or long and bloody, with a red color or black one that does not cover the entire length of them, then pains arise from the abscess itself which is feared by the patient.
"When you have entered the second stage of the procedure where one must remove his or her gag reflex and extend their tongue as far back as possible, then fix it in place with a clamp on each side to hold it securely in position for the following steps.
"Once inserted and adjusted to its proper position at the back of the throat, you should then proceed with speaking as usual.
"Once inserted and adjusted to its proper position at the back of the throat, use that which we recommended in the previous step, and check it for any damage.
"If the patient is panicking during the insertion of the tube, use caution in the cauterization process and make sure to keep their head still while performing the procedure. Before inserting it into place, ensure that you have warmed up water as recommended from the previous step, and then gently insert the tube back into their mouth with a gentle touch, making sure not to cause any bleeding or discomfort.
"In the meantime of their airway being obstructed by their swelling or a foreign object, pause medical treatment over their throat and place the tube on top of their vocal cords to ensure that any saliva or mucus from their mouth will not enter through this intrinsic medicine, so as to prevent any choking hazard for them.
"You should apply your hand to the patient's mouth and hold it open for some time so that saliva is not allowed inside, in order to prevent infection by medicine cuts.
"If you wish to prevent bleeding from the catheter, take a cotton swab and apply it on the extremity of the vein, immerse it in medicine, insert it into the catheter as mentioned above so that it adheres to the catheter, and then proceed with cauterization of the vein. This will help prevent the clot from becoming dry and may last for three or four days.
"If you need to administer medicine, apply it and then proceed with the cauterization of the vein on top of the catheter in order for it to go into the circuit of your body's medicine, and make sure that you wash thoroughly after administering the medicine, as well as cleaning the wounds if necessary.
"This special cure is very dangerous and should be avoided at all costs.
"One cure that is applied in a very subtle way and prevents infection: apply calmly, slowly, gently, cautiously, cautiously, and gradually, smoothly, steadily, steadily, with all herbs mentioned above, adjust their causes, some of which are taken together into one mixture, and submerge them in the wind; then place it in the middle of the mixture, over which a pointed instrument is placed to prevent it from falling off. Then put either silver or gold on top.
The patient's neck is swelling up as the air enters through his/her larynx and into their voice box, making it difficult to open their mouth due to the swelling.
To prevent the tongue from becoming swollen and dry when swallowing, it is recommended to avoid making excessive pressure on the larynx during swallowing, as this could cause it to swell further, so please refrain from doing this unless you need to perform a laryngoscopy.
If you do not have this tool, the doctor will place a piece of cloth in the patient's mouth to prevent their breath from entering through their throat and causing further discomfort.
This procedure is good for health.
The end.
Extracting spines and such things that stick in the throat, like hairs or objects.
Swollen mucous membranes sticking to the throat due to phlegm, mucus, or other causes.
If you are extracting from the latter mentioned part and it appears as if this is in the larynx, please insert your tongue into the instrument just before removal to ensure that this is indeed in the glottis.
If this is the case and you suspect it may have been swallowed into the stomach, please make the patient vomit to induce vomiting in order to remove whatever has caused the obstruction from their esophagus; or alternatively, offer them a piece of bread soaked in salt water if they are able to eat normally, as this will help alleviate the discomfort while gently clearing any obstructions that could be causing it. Or you may prepare a solution of warm saline and give them a sip, ensuring they drink slowly so as not to provoke further coughing or retching; then observe their response closely as the substance is extracted through the opening in which it was removed from, observing for signs of aspiration and ensuring nothing has been missed. When you have opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, place another servant on their legs and another on their chest, holding their hands to prevent the patient from moving around.
It is customary for the physician to use a second tool made of lead in order to perform this way
If it is too large, or if the extra space around that area becomes too cramped to allow for easy entrance into its cavity.
The physician will lift the patient's head and place their hand over the patient's mouth to prevent them from biting or choking on it, or that they put a finger in their nose
It is possible that the patient will enter with their own hand in order to avoid touching or inserting anything into it, depending on how much space around its opening has been prepared.

To remove the sacubiguitas from the gullet.
When administering an enema without interference from the medicine, consider placing it in the gullet of the patient and use the tool recommended by your doctor to remove any obstructions that may be present.
When gout pain occurs due to cold humors infiltrating each part of the body, particularly in the feet, it is traditionally referred to as "gout" by physicians.
If it is not possible to extract the gout from that location due to certain circumstances, such as if the gout attack has already ended or there are no more of them, then the physician will insert a small and thin needle into the concave area around the patient's urethra (the opening in males), light a fire under its base, and prevent water ingress until the gout attack has passed.
Then the physician will take a full bowl of water and pour it into that area, rinsing out their mouth in that way; then rinse your own mouth with that same amount of water as well.
If the physician believes it to be a good idea, they will swab or apply something cold and damp from what was used in that procedure onto the patient's tongue or the tip of their tongue.
And then you are done with this matter.
Another way to perform this procedure is by using an olive oil soaked cloth that covers the tip of the instrument used for this purpose; place it over such a patch on the patient's lips and wrap their mouth around it so as not to miss any part of the procedure, except perhaps where you feel that the sub-freezing has caused or been caused by gout.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and the feet are affected, doctors call it gout.
This is the form of an instrument that is used to straighten out any crooked things when it is seen. It's similar to forceps in some ways, but unlike them in their shape. That is the form of an instrument that goes to the crooked thing and its extremity is similar to the beak of a stork which grasps it, in such a way that when any cause is found, they grab it.
May I know what does this mean?
The sum of the words in the beginning and end of the sentence.
The commas are special letters that mean a pause or a brief rest when you remember their positions in this free text.
They are different in the positions of opening and closing them through two ways: one is to mark a special kind of letter within it for that purpose, another by using commas. And because we want to make sure they're clear.
The second way is to place them in the places where you might get hurt, so an accidental one on top may be different from the one at the bottom, and the one that occurs at the knee will be different than the one at the joint. And each of these must be performed separately by operation.
The first sentence translates to: "To make sure all holes are closed, except those that were opened.
The first sentence is describing the steps taken to treat a hernia that has already been opened (the "first" part of the sentence refers to this). It includes several clauses about closing other holes and making sure they are not accidentally reopened during the treatment process, especially if it's in the abdominal area. The second sentence translates to: "You know the time when you have opened up the hole [or 'the aperture'], and that's when it is mature.
The third sentence translates to: "You know when it is mature that the pain and fever have subsided, and you apply the reduction of swelling and pulse, the sharpness of the aperture, and other nerves.
The fourth sentence translates to: "You know when to perform an incision at this place [in the abdomen], and how to act in case of emergencies.
The fifth sentence translates to: "The incision should be made at the level of the skin or chest if it is in the areas near the most [or 'nearby'] major organs and nerves, and any other location where reflection occurs; but when they are not reflective, use the incision for that member.
"When the anus is opened in a place where it cannot be confirmed that digestion of it has been completed, as we have said; if you perforate it during this time, it will prolong the suffering and cause severe pain to both the buttocks and the depth.
"When you open an anus in a place where this is necessary or if it is of the member that matters.
"When administering a small incision, in large incisions or wide ones depending on the diversity of their size.
"Then the abscesses in which the cavity has been opened and closed when it is done in that way as it was said; but also when you happen to come across a lot of bubbles.
"Of those in which the abscess has three corners; of those it is done like a funnel or the corners.
"Then there are ones where round and crescent incisions are administered; as well as these.
"Then one like that which is not so with superficial abscesses, if you make a perforation of it by making a superficial incision or flat only.
"And when the abscess is large and has collected a lot of pus, do not try to extract it all at once; have patience and wait for one day, then take it out in two parts, and afterwards, if necessary, you can remove another part gradually as well.
When a patient is experiencing gout caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet or toes, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Please be cautious when making a hole in which you want to insert the needles, and consider whether or not the seal of the needle is tight, as well as if there are any fractures from the puncture itself; and if the seal is large enough and the wounds from the puncture are minimal, then proceed.
If the seal of the needle is broken or bent in some way that causes a circuit to be created inside it, then you should fill and wrap the thread around it as soon as possible; and after wrapping around three times, tie it tightly at its center. Then place it on where you want to sew so that no harm comes from entering there.
If there is bleeding during your operation, you should apply cold water and press on the cloth where it was applied to stop the bleeding; then place a bandage over the area of the bleed as soon as possible.
If bleeding persists after applying cold water and pressure on the cloth, you should apply ointments and care as recommended in different locations throughout this book of ours.
When it's winter time and the place of the stomach is a location for nerves, then pain occurs when you infiltrate dust with moisture and apply it to the area
When it's summer time and the places are hot, then pain occurs when you sprinkle dust with water or oil, and do so until that place is cool
That is to say that generally it's necessary to have a general understanding of how to perform the treatment on all sores universally, but secondly for distinguishing between different types of sores individually.
The 51st Capitular
Section of sores that occur on the head
On the head there are sores and specific types of sores that contain garments that should be removed; such as boils or carbuncles
And for those ones containing moisture similar to lime. For sores that contain humidity similar to soot and are rough; and for sores that resemble blisters, tough.
In the section of all and in the extraction from those there is no fear; as long as you do not cause harm to them.
The operation is divided into two parts as you have learned how to use the instrument that you are using now, which is called an embolectomy, in order to know
After this operation on the second section, doctors will perform a further subdivision into two parts. The first part is to cut through the humidity of the joint, and then move laterally along the surface for that division
After the humidity has been removed from section B to section G of that joint, they then remove the part which contained that humidity and do not consider it as a cause for anything else, unless Roman is in that part.
Then take it into the water and salt if that is available, otherwise just use water alone. And after doing this on every other day as well to prevent the corrosive damage of that film.
Then they will apply it to the part of that joint second and third times as needed, making sure there is no other cause for that film. And after doing this on every other day as well in order to cure the skin from that film.
If you want to know if there is fat content, then doctors will insert it into that part of the body following this procedure After sectioning through the fascia and extracting it from both sections of that joint and removing its skin, they will stretch out your body to extract that tissue.
When one's arm is contrary to nature (meaning that the person has arthritis), doctors call this gout.
Similarly, if the appendix is afflicted with secretion and infection following what has been said (meaning that someone has appendicitis), doctors call this gout.
Some veins are affected by this condition in the head of some men whose veins have never been wet; it causes that when a vein is struck there, it will cause pain and be unable to be tied up tightly, unless immediately treated with vinegar or white vinegar
The other veins that are affected in the head will not be this severe like those that come to heads of children and adults alike; it is a superficial secretion.
Stop the puncture below which will be relieved as the body's balance is restored to its normal state at these lower levels.
Then apply treatment here that addresses both conditions.
The end of the text.
Secretion from the bowels which causes irritation in the belly
These veins are affected by this condition in the colon and elsewhere, affecting other parts of the body as well.
When the pain occurs in the belly, and it is accompanied by a swelling of the parts between its sides, and every part of that has that affliction is to blame for his own clothing being torn, then you must come forward with your remedies
The particular symptoms of these sores are swollen lumps that contain moisture and are malignant in nature
In that particular case where you are disposed to touch it with the proper touch, as its color indicates, and is extremely harmful in any part of the body, do not attach yourself to any surface inside or outside, unless absolutely necessary; but if you need to make those points on the chest, then proceed.
You must be very careful not to damage the vein or nerve.
You must not be too rough when touching the patient and should not adjust your touch or apply any medicine unless it is necessary; if you hurt a vein or artery, then stop immediately from doing so; for these reasons, paste on cloth some corrosive substances that will flow out of the abscess after being applied to heal quickly and soften the abscess. When joint pain occurs
And then return to your operation after you have completed it.
Then check if there are any other causes of the pains that may be related to these small lumps.
If it is in a large vein's area, then you should not have checked that particular lump of the body part. Make sure to push it gently and test if any bleeding occurs before closing it.
Then apply a plaster that you have already used on the patient's chest and care for it.
If you find all the lumps then apply two plasters on each of the wounds and ensure there is no extra gauze required.
If you have found too many lumps due to the size of the lump itself then consider inspecting that area and treating it separately while also addressing the other wounds.
The lumps that contain moisture should be pricked with a superficial needle in the area where it appears to you and pause puncturing of this for as long as there is no further bleeding from the body, like I said before.
Then apply puncturing, checking and attending to those wounds until it is determined that the source of bleeding has been found. When you have opened a wound that has already been infected, then treat it as soon as possible before the infection is cured
Chapter thirty-three
From the section of the apostle's wound, drain off the pus
Drain out all the pus from that section and do not show it to anyone in our land
This is an excerpt from the sermon of those.
In the houses of those who are poor, it is customary to avoid showing them anything from the wound, unless you want to show only veins and major arteries here.
In those who have apostles' wounds in the mouth or ear, when illness is not in the neck, do not apply the section of the wound to prevent infection.
Therefore, when we want to do this, put the wound into three or four sections of the wound, or divide it into small pieces along lines that are halfway between two circles in length and width; place each section on a separate dressing so as not to damage it and ensure privacy is maintained.
If the doctor is fearful that exposing the wound to air will worsen it, cover the wound and prevent any other cause of infection.
"The first step is to cleanse the affected area as recommended, meaning wash it with water
"Once you have applied the poultice, leave it undisturbed for some time.
"After the poultice has been applied and left undisturbed for a while, add two sheets of cloth soaked in water to it.
"Then administer medicines that help the flesh recover from being burned.
"Then apply the poultice to the affected area as recommended by doctors and try to prevent further infection of the wound, because if left untreated it may lead to death.
"After that, apply the poultice to prevent the spread of infection and leave it on for three days.
"Once you have taken care of the other things (as recommended), ask a servant to cut open his chest and make an incision in his lung, then ask another servant to apply medicine over it as he is coughing heavily.
When you first confessed that there was no vein or guide-vein found, he advised you to apply a warm compress
And if the servant did not agree in returning the favor, and it was necessary for you to go first.
Now I tell you that there is no fear in the section of the episode.
At this point, it seems that the author has reached the end of their text and wishes to conclude with a phrase or statement about the subject matter they have discussed.
At this point in the discussion, it seems that the author has reached their conclusion and wishes to conclude with a phrase or statement about the subject matter they have discussed.
The final statement is that gout pain occurs in both men and women, but more commonly in men.
And it is the second time of life when it is natural or accidental.
In the natural there is no cure for gout.
The accidental second attack is similar to a heart attack, and in that case there is fear. Do not assume that it will happen unless the time comes when it happens. If you find it similar to a heart attack and no veins are blocked, then you should apply heat immediately to the area of the leg or foot; otherwise, note down what happened in that particular case and call on your doctor for treatment as soon as possible.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity
Then, you shall take all the parts of the body and divide them
You must make a distinction between nodes and hernias as well as consider their causes.
So you are saying that an exiture is caused by cold, fever and severe pain brought on by the excess of phlegm; it also involves decay which stops the fever, pain, and heat.
A node does not have coldness or fever nor any pain, but rather has a quality which is like the seed of the devil itself.
It is the second color of the body and its onset feels like a sting or itchiness which then spreads to be either more or less severe depending on how much moisture it contains; and in terms of division, humidity refers to this color as well.
When you encounter an issue with nodes, check to see if it is also accompanied by the onset of a certain condition called introitus which in time develops into the capital lesion which is known as hemorrhoids.
You should investigate the cause of nodes and check if it is accompanied by another condition called introitus which in time develops into hemorrhoids; as you cleanse that area with water, ensure to gently pull out any foreign bodies one at a time until you know for certain that the lesion has penetrated deep enough.
When you have completed filling in all the lines with their respective translations, reply with "Complete.
If there is a current humidity that may vary in color, then you will apply the incision on the surface of the skin as I mentioned earlier for other spots.
If there is no current humidity at the entrance, then doctors will know it was a mistake.
Then place the incision in such a way that it does not cross Then hold the incision closed, and keep it open at its base if possible to facilitate drainage of the entire area; otherwise, just leave it open and cover it with a pad.
If it was removed during the operation and cannot be reattached because of some cause, then doctors will treat it as a non-recoverable case.
If there is any reason, small or large, the site will reopen in time.
If there is any reason that the site reopens in small parts, doctors will apply corrosive substances and stretch it open, and place a pointed cautery over it to cure this other ailment while treating for health.
If there is no reason the site reopens on its own and doctors will apply two fingers to it and treat that part as well.
When the pulse is slow or absent, you will take and apply it to the place where the veins are twisted so that it may loosen up and relieve the pain; and when applied, return it to the incision made
Chapter 64
In section and perforation forms
These are the different forms of openings, three in number, great ones being large and small ones being smaller ones, and tiny ones being the smallest ones.
The opening form that is big is this one:
The opening form that is small is this one.
To make it clear
These are the different forms of experiences and their names are added, and one of these is called "beard.
There are three kinds of openings: one big, one smaller, and one small.
The opening form that is great one is this one:
The opening form which is smaller is this one:
The opening form that is small is this one.
This way the openings and ulcers, fistulas and abscesses will be between bones and tendons as causes.
When the doctor approaches a patient with gout, and places them on their back, he first strikes his bell to announce that there is someone in need of his help.
The doctor then makes a small incision in the patient's abdomen to access the gallbladder and bile duct, reflecting that they are reflected back into his body at these points.
The first servant cuts open the space between the ribs and makes a small incision in each of them to access the gallbladder and bile duct, reflecting that he measures according to the amount of length of the fistula opening and the stricture of it.
The doctor prepares for the operation by making an incision along his chest from side to side.
The second servant makes a smaller incision in each of them, reflecting that they make smaller incisions according to their skill and experience.
The third servant cuts into the abdomen and inserts his tools through the small incisions made by the first two servants, reflecting that he is the least skilled among the three of them.
The shapes of these incisions are determined by the servants, with some being simple and only having a curve, while others have three servants: large, small, and medium.
And the incision is made as deep as possible to reach all of these organs.
The incisions having curves are cut into by one servant only, and others have three servants: large, small, and medium.
Three curves
It was necessary in their location
The less complicated, the better
With two curves A less complicated form with two curves The simpler the better with two curves
With three curves
A less complicated form with three curves
These are the forms of scalpels that will cut and remove the nodes and stakes, and come with three sizes, one large, medium, and small.
Scalpel form
Scalpel form of less complexity
Scalpel form of the simplest
The outside edges of these scalpels have sharp points and the others have blunt tips, but not all are equally sharp, because it is necessary for youth to exercise caution when excising nodes near veins or nerves, as well as for those who may want to avoid causing damage to the patient's skin.
The first sentence translates to "These are the shapes of the liver, and three qualities: great, middle, and small.
These are the shapes from which you can tell that it is alcohol-induced,
It's in the extraperitoneal cavity and at the level of the hidden perforations and far from those that are open when you want to
The shapes of the spleens that are between the ones you have to make a perforation and not those that are closed, and three qualities: large, middle, and small. These are the shapes of those
The shapes of the spleen that is separated from the flow of blood, and three qualities: large, medium, and small.
These are the shapes of the liver with a rounded shape at any length, and subtle ones.
The qualities of the spleen are to be great, medium-sized and small, in order that when there is an obstruction in the flow of blood at speed necessity arises, and doctors call it urgent care when this first occurrence isn't medicine
Do not obstruct blood flow in any part of the body except for the veins, arteries, breasts, abdomen and buttocks, and to them belong the knots of the bowels, and are also those of the nipples, the stomach and the groin.
When certain veins become inflamed from this procedure called phlebotomy, or when a vein is opened due to a wound, the abscess will be discharged.
The specific veins referred to here are round veins of the body.
Chapter 77.
For curing the breasts of men that resemble those of women.
When certain veins become inflamed in the breasts of some men who resemble women, it is customary to apply a compress and let them remain thus inflamed until they fall off.
For that who applies this method of phlebotomy, when you have reached the line B and then go to line G, fill your veins completely with a heated ointment applied from both ends, put on the bandage covering the whole area, and adjust the two bandages over the bandaged part of the body.
If the breast has become inflamed and enlarged like that of women, then cut it off at the end of each part separately, until both are equal in size from line B to line G. Then apply a bandage between these two parts, and place a dressing on top, and administer as prescribed by the surgeon with the powder and sutures necessary for healing until health is restored.
"When the patient is frightened or anxious due to pain from gout, and because of the flow of phlegm, it is customary for the doctor to cover his chest with a damp cloth, so that this cold and wet spot does not cause harm.
The text seems to be describing medical procedures or treatments for a patient experiencing pain related to gout. It appears as if the physician is trying to alleviate their discomfort through various methods such as covering them with a damp cloth, placing cushions under their legs and chest, and having someone else hold their hands. Additionally, there's mention of using a pointed cautery on specific body parts for unknown reasons. The overall tone seems urgent or critical due to the patient's pain and anxiety.
"The opening of apertures through which come from the intestines.
These openings that come from the bowels are called sphincters, and they play a crucial role in holding back waste matter.
"Some of them contain moisture; others are dry and can be opened up under the influence of the full moon, like this: from .G to .B. And after everything has passed through that sphincter which is called the anus, then close it tightly and open it again tomorrow.
"When you want to cover or protect something with a cloth, make sure it's dry before applying it for safety.
"If the openings in the rectum and sphincters are closed, then you should also close them at this point as mentioned earlier about sphincters.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet
You are correct! The translation for this sentence is: "When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet.
This sentence translates to: "From the section where it happens through artery or vein.
When the artery is ruptured and the seal has been removed from it, the veins become inflamed where they are located either through an artery or a vein: when the vein is through the artery it causes damage to the inner part of the body; and if you try to remove the vein by pressing on them with your hands, you will feel pain in that area.
This sentence translates to: "The one through the vein is revealed at the breast.
If there is a mistake in the vein, and especially if it's in the arms or legs, or in the belly, or any other place on the body; and if it is large, then you should avoid its treatment, unless it is external to the head.
If it is through inflammation of the artery seal, then cut off the seal and remove the artery itself; be careful to not cut into any other part of the body as you may have discovered.
"Then place the needle over there and let it pierce through to the other leg, and secure it with double thread in two places, - which causes you to lose both needles at once.
"Then place it in the area between two fingers so that everything is done as it should be, and dissolve the needle.
"Then administer a remedy which causes pain to cease between the fingers, and treat that with gentle care so that it becomes well.
"If it is an embolism of the vein, you must have your hand on that very spot where the needle was inserted, and make the needle pierce through to the other leg, and bind it with double thread between both ends so as to extract it from two parts of the two legs.
"If you want to extract the thread, remove your hand from that needle and bind it with a four-thread knot.
"Then fasten the needle in that place where you feel it is so, and let this be done as it should be.
When you have moistened it with water and oil, apply a medication that soothes the cold and enters in such a way as to promote health.
The artery of which part is affected due to tension on nerves?
Both the artery in the arm and vein are affected when pressure is applied to them or by a nearby strike that is too strong; similarly, both the artery in the nerves and the nerve itself may be affected when it is struck or struck with excessive force.
It should be done at the joints of the assistants or on the feet, or anywhere that makes them ache from the joints.
It is very difficult to do so; it also involves placing the hand on another part of the body and when it is done violently with great force, there's a numbing effect on the patient that makes them numb.
Do not put it on the front of the body; to do this is to put your hand under them, and it will cause pain throughout all of its parts and there won't be any openings in front or behind.
Therefore, if it is done to the joints themselves, they will contract very hard and cause pain.
Do this on the head or forehead so that it goes through the opening of their mouth. When joints are affected by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call gout for doctors.
And if the abscess comes about a finger or thumb, it is customary to squeeze and drain it, apply an ointment on top of that, and treat it as soon as possible for healing.
There
The abscess occurs in the belly.
The abscess occurs in the belly and is generally small compared to other abscesses on those parts of the body where they are often found, the head of which is large; and as for those that are very small, it's from those who are considered magnificent.
You have already opened it and in its belly were two parts which are similar in appearance, there was no difference between them of small size.
The abscesses' membranes became inflamed and tore away from each other, humidity spread to all parts.
Therefore you should squeeze them both on the bottom of the foot that is eighteen inches away, and the other one that is twelve inches away.
The operation on the abscess is to consider whether it is caused by a wet and white sore of subtle size; squeeze them with a pointed tool at the tip of your finger, and when they come out in front of you cauterize that. If there was no such pain, cauterize that too.
When the patient is afraid and trembling, guard your hand to prevent injury from cutting; may the sores heal quickly by frequent application of fresh ointment, and strain the hand vigorously, let it be that which was mentioned before; and lay on for two days
Then tighten the skin fold of the palm; however, do not squeeze too tightly with a great force in it, as that may cause separation and tearing away from itself.
If it is a large size, then the wounds on the body are not cause of fear and panic, but rather those that occur in the abdomen
Perhaps you should make an incision through it, then cauterize to prevent its return.
Then cure that by healing the wound
And remember to not cut into it which is already scarred and damaged, as that would cause additional harm.
You will later regret cutting the wrong part
Goodbye.
From the care of the navel's prominence
Navel prominence is caused by various reasons; from tears in the diaphragm over the belly that are also found on it, to the hernia which protrudes out through a tear, or the varicose vein that may occur as well, or from narrowing of the aorta (aorta) which may cause swelling in the body.
When the pain arises from a rupture of the diaphragm and by inflammation of the skin surrounding it, then the appearance of the pain is similar to that on the chest; and he knows its cause, so as soon as possible to treat this situation If it arises from the exit of the intestine, then he understands the situation and knows that one must be careful to prevent this recurrence, with utmost urgency; for when it is very severe, it is a magnificent movement which drives out the entrails violently.
When humidity arises, he knows and does not occur when you press on your hand; it is neither constrained nor believed.
If it occurs from the abscess, then the appearance of the abdomen turns black and becomes gradually less intense.
When pain arises from flesh itself, the abdomen is heavy, large and tough, it appears after a certain period.
If it occurs by coldness, then the touch of it feels like ice.
The operation in it is considered necessary if the pain arises from a rupture of the epiglottis or vein, or by coldness; and when he sees that doing so would bring fear to someone, then he does not do this, as such an action would be feared.
"If the elevation of the umbilicus is caused by the intestine or the membrane, it should be instructed to hold tightly as long as possible and extend its support. The servant should then proceed around the perimeter of the umbilicus, directing the patient's hand towards their own back between their two thighs, making a loop over the location where they have placed their cushion, after which the servant should extend the patient's arm out to one side, guiding it with the other hand. And lastly, the servant should carefully remove any loose clothing or garments that may interfere with the movement of the patient.
"The servant should hold the patient's arm extended in front of them and guide it towards their own back between their two thighs as indicated by the previous instruction. If the servant finds that they cannot grasp the membrane, they should remove the excess flesh from around the intestine and gently lead it out through an opening to the abdomen.
"If the servant finds that they have grasped the membrane, they should then remove any excess flesh from around it.
"If it is contrary to your instructions or vein, the servant should turn around and return to their previous task. Then remove two needles and insert them into the holes on either side of the patient's hand as indicated by crossing with one needle through each hole in a pattern that penetrates towards you (i.e., in opposite directions). Then stretch the intestine four times over the needles.
When you want to do a venipuncture on the extended arm or hand, stick that place where blood will run freely and drip off; or insert it into something when it is small and seeps through, and apply pressure there for as long as possible until bleeding stops.
If the prominence of the umbilicus is in flesh or by moisture, then pain occurs when you press it or through wetness, which spreads to that place and causes pressure there. And apply pressure there until bleeding stops.
Three
Of care for the ear.
It has been said that in the division of care for ears and which manner is the way to provide this care by medicine, it being a surgeon in doing so that it won't be ulcerated; and have been mentioned the generation of an ear infection due to careless handling of it.
It would be advisable to remove the infected ear if it were possible in that location where eradication of it is possible, as well as removing those which are located at the bottom of the ears or in the crease between the thighs and buttocks, all of whom should be treated equally but more so when starting small.
If it is ancient and heavy, do not try to remove it unless you are certain that you will heal the wound or prevent infection at that location; otherwise, seek medical attention instead of attempting to remove it by yourself.
The operation is performed when you are positioned in such a way as described, and you will apply the black bile purge to the patient's veins with small stones, and if the result is positive.
Prepare the patient for surgery in which location you are to prepare, and prevent any cuts on the path of that incision; and make a thorough examination into each cause of the disease that may not come up with nothing. Lay the patient flat on their back and do not remove it from there, take care of all wounds and sterilize any tools you might use for the operation.
If the incision is large enough to enter a vein or artery, after closing it, apply another cure on which the flow of blood has stopped and attend to that with another treatment until the bleeding ceases.
The end
Treatment for diarrhea
We have recommended in the division of remedies for diarrhea from water, and the symptoms from each remedy, to seek medical treatment.
That which is treated to become nothing but the remedy for madness alone, and is not suitable for the remedy of deafness or the remedy of insomnia, as that one is fatal.
When you have already treated this special medication without any side effects or complications in the treatment, the doctors consider that the patient's ailment has been resolved, or it is another malady of similar nature to gouty dropsy; if so, then go on to treat the belly and such things.
If the patient's belly is prone to abundant flow and it is neither another malady nor gouty dropsy alone; but just gouty dropsy without excess or pain, then let doctors perform the operation on their abdomen.
The operation will be performed in two parts: the part that is closest to the tip of both sides and this side as well; but may still come from little by little, for fear of entering into the abdomen itself.
The doctors consider that the generation of gout is from between the bowels; so they advise you to cut off only part of the abdomen for three parts as mentioned earlier on the belly itself.
The doctors consider that the generation of gout is due to a kidney ailment; so they advise you to cut off only part of the abdomen on the left side for three parts.
When delivery occurs through the lowest part of the body, then the pain should be treated by applying cold compresses to that area.
Do not place the cushion on the side where you want to deliver the patient in order to prevent any unnecessary injury at that location.
Apply the instrument thoroughly all around it, and enter into that area, lifting your hand between the incision site and the flap, you will remove this one; if there is more than one, do so as well.
Apply it into the flap where you want to drain fluid from, and this is a good location. Extract that one out with an instrument of which kind? It is similar to a fine silver needle. It can be made of steel or iron, with the point small enough in its original form that it could fit through one part of the body's opening three times, two on each side and another in the center; as for its extremity, it should be sharp enough such that when inserted into the hand would allow fine feathering.
In the extremity of that which was inserted into water, doctors should ensure to remove it promptly from the instrument as quickly as possible in order to drain all excess liquid; if you fail to do so then very bad things can happen to the patient and may lead to their death.
When there is excessive heat in or around the body, and pain occurs in the fingers, it is commonly called sciatica by doctors.
Remove the tool and apply cold water, which will help to relieve the swelling that is causing it on your wrist or ankle, recommended by doctors for such cases.
Use the tool on alternating days if you are able to tolerate it, and apply a small amount of cold water every day for fear that it may not be strong enough.
If you are afraid of the patient, and fear getting bitten or scratched by them as they move around, have them buried in a container filled with sand to prevent escape attempts while they dry out under the sun, and provide them with medical dehydration solutions to ensure their survival.
Cauterize over the stomach and apply a small amount of cold water on top to seal it off, as you would in the previous example.
I am sorry, but that text does not appear to be a coherent sentence or question in English. It appears to contain non-English characters which might affect its readability and meaning. Could you please rephrase your request?
To prevent urine leakage from the children, make sure they are trained properly to control their bladder.
Are any of the children's belly buttons pierced or not, as it could lead to urinary tract infections.
Therefore, a sharp incision must be made as soon as possible, in this manner:
Then place it gently against the wound and tie it with three stitches or so
When urine is excreted, and return to the patient
If you do not put it against the wound, then urine may leak onto that area.
The cloth used to bandage the wound should be soaked in warm water and then tied around the patient with three stitches or so.
If the cloth used to bandage the wound is not in place, then it should be changed by washing another one and soaking it in warm water, tying it around the patient with three stitches or so, and putting your hand over the area where urine will come out between the buttocks, until you elevate the buttocks to the level of the waist.
The purpose of the operation is to have the patient lie on their back and push down on their buttocks with your left hand, while holding onto the head of their penis tightly with the right hand, so that any ejaculation will occur similarly to ejaculating into a cup.
"In the process of bleeding, where clots may arise, pause it to avoid the clot, and cure the wound when it is healed.
In Book 6, Chapter LVI
To remove the clot from the forehead and the top of the head, and to be removed from redness and adherence to the forehead of the head
The clots that arise in the veins may cause this clot in the head to harden.
Whether it is malignant or benign.
If it is benign, you must act with great subtlety and prevent it from escaping at all costs; then pause over the area to prevent its escape through the Egyptian channel; finally, cure the wound when it heals.
If the clot is malignant, then you must administer a pointed cautery to its site and reason for it.
If the clot is not removed from around the forehead of the head and instead it is only divided at its beginning as it solidifies, then you must wait until that division is complete; otherwise, when you cure that wound on the prepuce, there is no guarantee that it will be healed.
The first sentence translates to: "The first servant should open the intestines and prepare them for receiving the purge.
And then have another attendant who will be ready
If the second servant is not available at that moment, the first one should administer the purging with a pointed cautery.
A young cauterizer has two tools: a knife and a purge when it is corrupted.
If the top of the vein is damaged and destroyed at that moment, then place a plum plug into its opening to prevent urine from coming out through it.
In the attachment of the vein (and this attachment does not occur unless it is in a suitable place, and over it there is no requirement for circumcision; when the attachment occurs due to injury or abrasion), you should excoriate the skin inside so that it is dissolved from all sides and deliver the top of the vein completely.
If it is difficult to desire those things very much, the doctor should excoriate any cause of the top of the vein and the prepuce, so that it is as if the vein has been perforated through its own subtlety.
"The doctor is placing a cushion between the patient's thighs and their chest to support them while giving them medical care.
"After positioning, continue providing supportive care.
Capitulum.
"To circumcise the children and to provide aftercare for those who have undergone circumcision.
"Circumcision is not the solution to continuity as other problems may arise from it: however, if performed in accordance with our operation and will, and for the sake of those who undergo circumcision, we need to assign this procedure as necessary for their health.
"If the old ones would not have circumcision in the free children, who do not use it according to their laws and custom: but for having gained this experiment that we have come upon the greater part of the vexations and troubles using circumcision and mutilation at once; and they use a faithful one and one from the oath.
"You have already prohibited these manners and no longer seek the greatest mutilation at once with the oath: faithful to the oath that in mutilation with the flesh, which goes away from what is said, and the oath of the testicles divided into two tunics, and read the tunic pushing him out, and it feels good as other injuries and sure pain. "The cautery is applied to the affected area with a pointed instrument.
During the operation, be careful not to burn or damage the skin of your hands. The child's cry is short by nature, and sometimes it may be that there is not need for cauterization, and you will see that one day.
Cauterization should be done slowly and carefully as it is a painful process, the benefit of which will gradually increase your sense of touch proportional to its intensity, so that when you premeasure your hand with suitable force, you can prevent errors in every way.
The first thing to do in the operation is that you should keep your child still if it is small, and only gently touch its hand with it alone, otherwise make sure it stays in place tomorrow as well.
After doing the operation you should rejoice at all that comes from your power to receive intelligence. Then make sure that the cautery is placed between your fingers and does not touch them or any other part of the hand, so that the child will not see those things nor any others of the instruments.
Between the patient's thighs you place your hand and blow into it gently, pulling it out as if to remove a head from a crowd, and make sure that is inside the vagina, and remove the one added for silence
The manner of giving birth is by the name "delivery", this is the term for it.
The first servant's fingers should not be tightly pressed together and the second servant's fingers should also not be tightly pressed together, so that there may no come out of the passage any semen, but its length is equal to two fists' length.
The mistake in childbirth occurs when the internal head of the vagina comes out entirely, or is torn away from its place.
"When you stretch that out of your body, put it into a straight line.
"If you can't hold onto it with one hand, stretch it and then grab it.
"If three days have passed and you've noticed swelling around the joint, then stretch it gently until any pain subsides, and after that apply some ointment.
"Put your hand on top of the swelling to prevent it from coming off.
"Then apply some powder compress as recommended in the book on powders.
"If it's applied too much and causes itching, just remove it.
"Then apply something that is said to be good for the healing process.
The end of the medical treatise.
"Urinary retention in the bladder.
"Urinary retention can be caused by oppression, fever or cold, injury to the bladder, burns, or skin disease and such.
"If the cause of gout is not dissolved by this treatment as you have mentioned earlier, then apply a syringue, which has silver and subtle iron tips; like the needle used in acupuncture but much more slender.
"The urethra must be closely and carefully held during urination; if a fistula develops outside the canal or within it then insert the needle forcefully to prevent any harm.
"Remove gout from the heel, and bind its vessel up with olive oil; then spread it evenly.
"Insert the needle gently into its cause through the vein; then bind it up to your elbow and tie it securely there; then fasten it down with something like cord or rope so that it cannot move around inside.
"As you please extend gently the little finger one at a time, as urine should be the same.
"As you please extend that finger to gently remove the urine and use a ringlet, do not stop doing this unless it is evacuated from the bladder and the patient's buttocks.
14
"Quality of the circumcision procedure done with a clamp and instruments that are consistent with this.
"When the bladder ulcer occurs or perforation, or gangrene occurs in that area, it is customary to treat with these remedies and medicines. The remedy is called a clamp because of its shape.
"If there are no other parts affected besides the bladder, they should be closed. "And in that area three cuts were made; two from one part and once more.
"In the beginning there is a space that is filled up to this amount and another quantity added on top of it; as you add more water until no longer any cause to continue pouring, then stop adding, when expelled from above, do what's mentioned below.
"Then once you want to pour water into the bladder, enter one of the fingers of the clamp in the water and remove what was poured out from above.
"When performing the operation on the thighs of a patient who has requested it in our chamber; apply oil to where you wipe away moisture with your hand as well.
The form of the subtle stretcher is such that the bladder will be stretched.
And if it's made of gold or silver, then its top part is either similar to an eagle's beak or small in size, and that which you may call the handle by name.
Then put the bladder on fire with this heated oil and hold it between two strong cords tightly bound together in such a way that they are held firmly; then let the heat spread over its surface.
Put the stretcher into place on the patient's body part.
Apply your hand to stretch and spread the moisture evenly onto the bladder, making sure it doesn't spread over other parts of the body.
If the bladder is not present you take a piece of iron and put it there around its circumference tightly; make sure that all of its surface is covered with the heated oil as well, making sure to spread evenly.
Then you put it in the device and apply your hand to it just as if you are applying to the bladder itself; make sure that no moisture spreads outside of it.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And do you perform the operation on which part of the body first?
The gout caused by cold humors in the bladder is called "gout of the bladder.
And you make a more detailed and brief explanation?
You mean to say that gout caused by cold humors in the bladder is more severe and painful compared to other types of gout, due to the acidity of urine coming out from it being similar to water's subtle nature?
And you are asking about the treatment for children who have had gout attacks for more than 14 years, which is difficult to cure? For younger people it may be easier because they often do not develop this type of gout
Of the one where the pain is severe and the treatment is more difficult?
When you've arrived at this, the first thing to do is cut open that of which the patient has complained, and extract the hole that caused it in his bowels; for that hole is causing some inflammation somewhere else on him.
After that, take the patient's legs and press them together tightly to prevent his stomach from falling out; or if it goes somewhere else, tie a bandage over that place as well.
After you've done that with the patient's legs and pressed them together tightly to prevent his stomach from falling out, then tie your own hands behind her back to free up one of your arms for other tasks; or if it still goes somewhere else, wrap another bandage around whatever is left.
After that you've done everything as described, gently lay the patient down on their stomach to ensure they won't vomit up any more food.
If you feel a hole in his body, gently pull him into as much of the sitting position as possible over him.
If you don't get him completely up on his hands and knees yet, gently pull his right hand to the left side of his chest if he is a child or to the middle of his body if he is fully grown, and guide that arm into his buttocks. When you've done everything as described earlier, ensure that you have pulled him up completely on his hands and knees; then gently pull his right hand to the left side of his chest if he is a child or to the middle of his body if he is fully grown, and guide it into his buttocks. Gently insert it gradually into the hole of the bladder.
Place pressure on that area and expel it from the opening in which you want to urinate.
Order the minister to press on the bladder with his left hand; and order another minister to extend his right arm so that it will stretch out the legs towards the opening in which urination occurs, and then withdraw the other arm at the point where the urethra enters.
Gently insert a pointed instrument into this opening, as follows: Insert it gently into the area between the buttocks and thighs; do not go inside the anus or urethra; make a transverse cut on that side of the penis to allow urination out, making sure it is wide enough so urine can flow freely without difficulty, but no wider than necessary, as cutting too deeply may cause damage.
You know that from the tip of the penis to where it is angled and curved (the foreskin), urination can be difficult for this reason.
It is similar to a ball, round, and feels soft from the outside.
If it's that one at which angles are curved, insert into the opening.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
If you cannot find relief with heat, the doctor may recommend applying a small amount of vinegar to the affected area and massaging it gently if there is any discharge or redness present.
If the bladder is tight and painful to start with, you should gently apply your finger inside it, and then press on it a little bit there; as well if any movement is more difficult or painful.
If the bladder is large and painful to begin with, you should avoid inserting anything inside of it because that could lead to further complications such as blockages or problems in maintaining its consistency.
If the expulsion is blocked and cannot be forced out or if there are fissures in it that you can't extract from it, you should avoid straining or forcing it out and seek medical attention instead.
Once your task is completed, the doctor should clean up all of the waste and secretions from the patient's body, and then apply heat to the affected area gently. And if you are worried that the application of oil or fat may cause burns or burns from excessive heat, then apply a pointed cautery instead to provide relief.
The servant should put the patient on their back, without allowing any part of them to touch the third side.
When that happens, apply water and oil simultaneously, and then apply a mixture of vinegar and lime to it; after that, put on something like sulfur or lime lotion to protect it from further damage.
If the bladder is scalded, and if it has been burned or otherwise damaged, do not enter that area; if you have to enter through urine, then extract the bladder, because if one of these occurs with urination (and this can be indicated by urine escaping), a doctor should open up the bladder and look for the cause of vesicular injury.
After washing the bladder with water and salt, apply something very special to protect it against future injuries; that is how you take care of your bladder so that it stays healthy.
Throughout the treatment process, make sure to alternate between massaging the thighs and adjusting the medications that have been placed on them.
If the urethra is small and located in the male genitalia, it has been blocked up, and urination becomes prohibited. The doctors then treat that as a blockage; you should be careful to not force urine out, because those who have undergone this treatment may become infected with the disease; so do your best to prevent such complications by preventing excessive friction. And if you do need one, there's a special kind of tool used for it:
The first part of this text seems to describe a medical procedure involving an examination between the patient's thighs (extramitat), followed by some kind of treatment using cushions on their legs and chest while holding their hands (agut, ficat en fust).
The second part seems to involve the application of something on the patient's perineum in order to prevent it from returning to its original position (pyeura).
The second part seems to indicate that a tool is inserted into the patient's perineum in order to ensure that the applicator penetrates all the way to the pyeura and does not come out during insertion (ferr en la virgua). The second sentence seems to describe the process of inserting the tool into the patient's perineum in small steps while ensuring that it penetrates all the way until it reaches a certain point on the other side, at which point urination will be complete (revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquella virgua petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta).
The final part of the text seems to describe the relief experienced by the patient after the procedure is completed and their bladder has been emptied, as indicated by the phrase "que aquella es trinquada" (meaning that it was relaxed)
If this procedure is not to be performed due to any cause that prohibits it, then the text suggests that doctors should use a second applicator for penetration and insertion (mais si aquesta curacio no es a tua aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de quella, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra). And return the intestine or hernia to its cavity Then place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out And return the intestine or hernia to its cavity.
And do not need to return the intestine or hernia if you want it to stay in place instead of returning to its cavity, and another servant should also be done so that when you put your hand over the area near the urethra, the penis returns to its place and covers the hole.
And because of this it is necessary when you put the servant down to remove the bandage and cover the hole so that nothing falls out.
This completes the medical treatise.
And return the intestine or hernia to its cavity.
The vagina in women is usually not caused by it.
If you see the intestine anywhere but its cavity, then pain occurs and it is forbidden to touch it with your hands.
One of their symptoms is that a woman feels cold in her vagina.
The second symptom is when you do not find any discharge from the vagina when examined by a doctor or if it has been a long time since there was discharge.
The third symptom is that you do not feel any discharge from the vagina when you urinate and this makes it hard to find a doctor's appointment.
"The fourth thing is that the location of the section on the thigh in the legs is longer than the location of the section at the front, for which it is customary to press with force.
"If you need this, then pain may occur in the foot; it is customary to try and apply a woman's heel.
"If you are private about that, then call upon a woman and gently place it on the foot or present to a lady's hand if she is not available in front of the feet; another who does this well.
"Then bring it forward and instruct him to do everything you instructed him earlier from asking about the location of the section to the beginning; for that is what custom dictates when a woman is very small, that she should put her finger in his anus and try to push out the hernia.
"If you are unable to do it as described above, place your hand over it instead.
"If not very small, tell the lady to enter her finger into the anus of the patient and inquire about the hernia; place your left hand on his bladder instead.
"If unable to do it as described above, gently place your left hand on his bladder opening, and gradually move it down towards the scrotum until it comes between the two parts of the hernia.
When the pain in the joints is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
The passage suggests that the procedure should be started slowly and gently at first, with a small incision being made over this area, feeling for pain afterwards as you adjust the size of the opening according to how much further penetration is needed in order to achieve the desired effect.
The types of instruments used for penetration are varied; some small and large, one sharp and blunt, one smooth and rounded, with or without a shaft.
You know how many instruments there will be for this purpose according to what you want to signify by doing it.
If you see blood, immediately apply the location marked with vinegar and wait for half an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your operation as soon as the pain has subsided.
Ensure that you have all the instruments mentioned in the extraction of the penis at home for your use during this operation.
If you see blood and know that the expulsion of the penis is through a narrow opening which is marked out, the doctor stops pouring vinegar on this area, wipes away any surplus fluid or constriction caused by it gently without applying pressure there; leaves the penis and does not squeeze or pull it back as otherwise severe harm could occur to the patient. To begin treatment of a patient
Once the acuity level is obtained and the location is known, you return to your operation within 24 hours.
The twelfth chapter
It discusses hernia surgery
A hernia is not merely an accumulation of fluids in the white sac that encloses the bowels but it's more specifically called a hydrocele.
Some vegetables are prepared in a pouch made of the animal's skin that is sewn into place at the beginning of the bowel, after which it may be used for another bowel; and this pouch was called the genetium between the white sac from which we have spoken, and it is not this but rather a gastrostomy.
The cause of this hernia is a weakness that occurs in the bowels and because of it, some vegetables may become entangled around the bowels.
This fluid may have different colors: the color of it can change from light to dark brown or red, or it can be black and foul smelling, or white and cloudy, depending on its nature.
The signs that indicate this accumulation of water are: when it is in the white sac which we have spoken about, the pain returns and appears around the bowel, or hernia, because there is fluid all over the pouch.
When the humidity is in the property of pain, the doctor's prescription is to rub it away with warm water and apply oil on top of it.
If the humidity is between the heel and the calf skin, the doctor suggests rubbing it with warm water to remove it.
To know the color of the humidity, the doctor suggests to smear it with a colored dye before applying it and then wash off the excess dye after applying on a test area that has already been prepared in advance.
When you come to the care of someone who is sick, the doctor commands that if there are such medicines available for them, they should be used instead of others.
Then apply something slippery to prevent the sheets from sticking, and place a pillow under their head.
Then place it on the left side of their body and order the servant to follow with the right one as well, extending his hand towards the calf muscles and the navel area.
Then apply a smooth strip that extends from the heel to the calf, cutting through between the legs towards the back of the thigh.
Then make sure to pass over both sides equally far from the line you should follow for shaving the calves until reaching the calf skin completely.
"You shall cut away that which you observe and save it for future use, so that the cutting will not cause pain; your task is to make an incision according to the amount possible.
"Then you shall perform a small incision in the vein and remove all the blood.
"Then you shall make two incisions on each side of the section and extend them to their maximum length; do not touch the nerves that comprehend it, and cut until the size is as much as is possible. "Then cut it entirely or almost so, and mostly the small parts that are subtle; if you do not very carefully make the incision of it, then it is necessary to ensure that the blood does not return.
"If the incision is made at that place of your operation, then after you have completed the section of the vein return it; and also adjust the two parts on either side of the vein with sutures, and also care for it similarly as you did before, until everything is in order.
"If another injury occurs to the vein itself, then you shall lie on any vessel that supports it, and remove the part of what we said.
When the body is divided into two parts and one of them is opened, then you know that these are the wounds; afterwards proceed to open the other part in the same way
Afterwards, place a cushion under the womb that you have submerged in oil or fat liquid and spread it over two legs of the belly. After spreading it, dry off with towels and powder it as if it were this form
Afterwards, put two cloths on the back and soak them in wet wool as with this shape; tie them around both thighs tightly so that they do not come loose, and place one of the cloths over the buttocks opening to the other. Do the same for the front part of the belly.
Afterwards, the artificial hernia is treated with cautery in a part of the body that has been opened; and it is necessary to use a subtle cautery and cut off its blood vessels. You have correctly translated "Es como assemblar una letra griega.
When you have prepared this way (meaning unclear), ignite it in order to remove all humidity.
When you have extended it this way (meaning unclear), ignite it in order to remove all moisture, and afterwards go inside of the cavity and gently scratch with a pointed cautery tool as well, then wait until it is possible to remove everything; and keep from touching flame.
You know that this operation is very long in terms of blood circulation, and the most recommended operation for this would be a section
If you feel pain when applying the cautery tool during or after sectioning, or blood circulation is affected, then it would be advisable to consult with your doctor for advice on how to handle this, considering what was advised earlier.
If the patient is anxious and does not want a second operation due to its horror, then it would be advised to administer a perforation instead of another operation; and it will happen when you are certified by this, which means that the hernia has been diagnosed.
It is advisable to make the patient lie down with his head slightly elevated, apply a pointed cautery tool on the lowest part of their chest, and wait for perforation after measuring its length.
The opening must be wide enough to allow all water through.
The first sentence translates to "Then place a cushion under them Then cure it until the wound is healed
"Then, if there is a hole in the vein of that hour, you perforate it with this: and thus prevent leakage or discharge of water, because you put on the wound a cloth soaked in vinegar.
"You know that water returns and is cleansed through these ways: if it is cleaned in weeks or months, then you will have perforated the vein accordingly to prevent the passage of the patient's days.
This is a closing statement indicating the end of this section/chapter.
"Now about the treatment for a hernia and how to cure it.
"Now, in the section about this hernia there is fear of losing use or being injured by them if not treated properly. For my part I see discharge as an option and to be saved through that remedy.
"Remember the operation and the specifics of the stitches.
"And then say that the stitches are in the places where the veins are connected and it is customary to break them for the following reasons: or due to an acute excess of fluid which is drained from the veins, or due to injury.
The second part of it says that if you want to prevent pain from spreading to other parts of the body after treating one painful area, put a cushion under their thighs, another on their legs and another on their chest while holding their hands
If you want to prevent pain from spreading by covering it with a dark-colored cushion
Some vessels may be blocked because of damage to the arteries or veins.
It means that if it is caused by the overflow of blood into a blocked artery, when you press on those points as directed, the pain will be relieved and not felt anywhere else.
It means that if it is caused by the overflow of blood into a blocked vein, applying pressure to those points will not relieve the pain and should be avoided
It is possible that the special treatment may be applied to other areas as well; and you should apply pressure on the calf muscles, and press down on your chest, squeeze out a white phlegm from your throat, relieve tension in the veins, lie flat, and take notes of the specific points where you feel pain.
Therefore, if all other areas have been treated successfully, after treating those painful areas, proceed to extract the phlegm from your throat and take notes of the specific points where you feel pain.
"If there is a cause of inflammation within the veins or between the thighs, then tell him to treat that inflammation with hot baths.
"If the inflammation is in a part of the body that was recently injured and is behind it, then tell him to treat that inflammation with hot applications.
"After your operation is complete, tell him to make a poultice of fresh, moistened cloth and apply it directly to the wound with warmed oil. And also instruct him on how to carry out any other recommended treatment.
This appears to be the end of the medical treatise.
"Regarding the treatment for hernia.
The scrotum is being squeezed through some sort of constricting sheath resembling a boot and it makes movements, exercise, and walking difficult for the patient.
"Regarding treatment of this illness that is preceded by fear.
However, tell him to perform the operation in the same way as they did for the first time.
"Tell him to cut off the leg of the patient on an elevated board, and place a cushion under their testicles. And also instruct them how to stretch the thigh muscles as described in previous instructions.
"The first servant should place a cushion below their buttocks, while another servant is placed on the patient's legs, and yet another on their chest with both hands.
"The first servant should also lift up everything that was mentioned in the previous sentence, namely the sheets covering their temples.
"Place a double-edged knife that is loyal to the patient in such a way that it can pierce through the first of many layers in which pain occurs, and another sharp blade should be placed on the last layer. "The first servant should place these in a cavity on the right side of the body for piercing second by second from the length of the body, and extract that which is added to the poisonous and corrupted fluids.
"The first servant should cure the sores on the buttocks with ointments that can be applied in such a way as to make sure they are not broken during childbirth, which is necessary.
"If all the veins are affected by gout, then make sure that their extremities do not receive any nourishment from these veins, and they should be starved or prevented from consuming them.
The end of this treatise.
On to the cure for intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is caused by a cut made through the diaphragm on the belly's side from the bottom to the top, so that both intestines may escape in its entirety
This rupture may be caused by a cut through the diaphragm or an excision of it, and thus these two factors cause the following symptoms in different ways depending on the nature of the causes: cutting, crushing, roaring, or elevation from heavy weight.
When an excision of the diaphragm occurs, it is that the pain comes in short periods over time and does not cease completely, with every breath entering through a small hole for the intestine to escape.
It is when there is a cut through the diaphragm where initially severe pain occurs immediately; and it seems different from this, because it's an escape of the bowels, which makes them very soft around the incision site.
Some vegetables are forbidden to eat for those with this intestinal hernia.
Some vegetables are forbidden to eat during pregnancy and some vegetables cause pain when eaten near the intestine; thus it is necessary to abstain from them because of this significant burden on the patient, and some vegetables can worsen the bad and stronger pain when consumed.
In the examination of this ailment, it is customary to fear that it will occur during intercourse.
The procedure for this ailment is that you should command the patient to lower their intestine into their palm when they are done returning it, and then place a cushion between your thighs, raise their legs.
Cut the cords of the testicles at the points where they divide, and cut them entirely through in length; then sew up two stitches at the bottom to seal it.
If you think that cutting it open is not possible,
Cut through the cords of the testicles as if you were cutting open a white bandage from each part.
The pains of the testicles are felt when cutting through them as if you were cutting open a white bandage between which there is a cord, and after that, remove from it the adherence on the back of the scrotum.
Cut the cords of the testicles at both sides of the scrotum, and then extend the white bandage over your left hand without touching it with your right hand, raise it to its position in the cut, and command the minister to stretch out his penis into you as you dissolve the adherence that is behind him.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then, once you have removed the gallbladder's code from its cavity as recommended above, proceed with your treatment of choice.
When the patient is lying on their back with a cushion under them and another servant on their legs, you should spread out one end of the linen sheet that has been marked for use over the area below the patient's ribs to prevent it from coming up into their face if they move suddenly; fasten this down securely.
If the patient is late in coming and has already had water applied to their forehead, then place this strip over where it was about to go down so that if they move quickly, it will prevent it from falling into their face.
And apply further treatment to the other cushions as necessary.
Chapter 66
Of inguinal hernia
In this type of hernia, there is not much that can be done to cure it.
The first servant should spread out the linen sheet marked for use between their thighs so that it covers the weakness of the hernia as much as possible; and fasten this down securely at its lower end to prevent it from coming loose when they move.
Apply further treatment after saying it is cured.
Chapter 67
Of the dislocation that occurs in the shoulders.
Some servants end up causing rupture of the shoulder joints when treating dislocations as I've told you earlier and make sure to avoid such actions.
When joints are painful due to cold humors spreading throughout the body, or if pains occur in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this gout.
If the pain from gout lasts for a long time, make an incision in the septum between the bladder and the urethra. And apply this to the outside of the opening as mentioned before; it will cause the bladder to empty out, easing the pain.
The cure for it is with a pointed cautery in the same way as described above.
If the gout is accompanied by swelling in the joints, cure it with this method: place a cushion between your thighs, and apply pressure to the area of rupture at the height described above for three times.
Push gently on the bladder opening until it is completely opened up so that you may discover what lies inside.
Then press lightly on this point over the location of the urethra and press gently against your abdomen.
Then apply pressure to both prominent points on the edge of the bladder opening, and sew one of these over the other.
Then extend the edge of the bladder, but do not cut into it or expand it in any way as you would have to learn how to treat a hernia in that manner.
Restore the fistula and restore its lumen after it has been closed, ensuring that any stricture is not present or adjusted at the moment of closure
Cautery should be preferred in this location because it promotes healing.
Chapter fifty-eight
De mollification of the testes' semen.
The sperm is cooled in these vessels for the purpose of maintaining freshness while it remains stored.
When necessary it is to be preformed in the cure of the intestine after passing through its own lumen, and cool all the sperm which has been cooled on the natural semen vessel; then place two sutures on each opening.
If you wish, cut off three or four of the cooled sperm vessels and make a firm suture.
After cutting between the sutures, restore the fistula care to ensure that it is healed and the lumen is clear.
Chapter fifty-nine
Castration.
You should know that castration is banned in our law but for two reasons: first so the doctor knows how to perform surgery on animals when he has to; and second because it's necessary for castrating young animals so they can be used as food, or for breeding, and butchering, and for hunting.
Castration can be performed in two ways: either through traction or through section of the glans penis.
In the case of castration by traction, the method used for the operation is to squeeze the testicles into a water bag until they become softened and limp, then hang them down And once you have done that, don't let go of your hand so as to prevent the operation from being detected.
In the case of castration through section and tear (cutting off), hold onto the penis with your left hand while you press down on the testicles with your right hand.
After tightening it up and securing both ends together, insert into the anus to allow for double penetration.
Insert that part of you that is used during intercourse. Do not apply it to the pharynx unless otherwise indicated by a doctor as being necessary for breathing.
The method of castration by traction is considered superior because it does not cause any pain to the testicles as the penis desires to release.
Take care that the bandage remains in place until healed.
The end of the text
Farewell, farewell
"Joint inflammation in the thighs is a second type of pain: one where swelling occurs at the groin area between two testicles, and another where there's pain from semen passing through.
"Some veins in that area become inflamed due to urine leakage which is found at the groin area between two testicles.
"In women, there is another special type: it's when semen becomes too viscous due to the presence of two testicles in close proximity and a small amount of ejaculation occurs at that time with the ejaculation of one man and two testicles.
"The cure is threefold: for two men, or for one woman. "It's necessary to tighten the joints so that they don't move or become loose due to friction in those areas, and to cure any pain caused by inflammation.
"In the second type of joint pain in men that occurs at the groin area between two testicles, there is neither treatment nor relief.
"The end of Chapter 21.
"Itching and inflammation due to female causes.
"Itching is controlled by tightening the joints and making them stiff, but swelling may be intensified in some women as it occurs more frequently in men during intercourse.
When you have removed the excess of lint from your hand or arm and bandaged it,
Finally, insert a bandage on top to prevent further bleeding.
Now apply proper care to the wounds until they heal.
Newly born flesh is flesh that needs care to prevent the worst from happening inside it (and therefore the first-aid provider uses "freshly lacerated" as a term; so, in order to treat this, we bandage it and continue treatment until it heals.)
This is chapter 22 of a larger medical text.
In the course of care
The female urethra should not be perforated or injured during treatment. It can be either accidental or deliberate.
Accidental means due to a previous injury (such as an unhealed cut), or through inappropriate care with inadequate equipment or tools.
It's used for injuries to the head (such as a concussion), or wounds on top of the body, underarm, armpit, buttocks, and groin; it is forbidden during pregnancy due to its potential harmful effects on the fetus.
The judgment of this is made based on observation if the pain is obvious, but otherwise they seek further diagnosis or treatment.
When the opening is made skillfully, it will cause pain in both of their thighs, causing them to collapse and fall back.
It is customary that someone be present on the flanks in order to make sure everything goes smoothly and without issues.
The woman should be on the other side of both thighs, with their extended legs, and she is there to ensure that the skillful opening goes as planned without any issues.
And after performing this, you should apply ointment and bandage over the area to prevent any further damage or injury in case it is not properly closed (collapsed).
If the opening is large and swollen, make sure to use a soft spatula or gauze pad instead of your hand.
If it's an abdominal opening, put a pad under them and apply pressure to stop the bleeding.
These are the medicines that will stop the flow of blood and pain associated with childbirth, as well as cuts on the head and hands.
And after applying a wide gauze pad to ensure it is not compressed in any way.
Keep them clean for some time and apply lotion to keep the skin soft.
And afterwards, be sure to make another cut to ensure it is closed properly (collapsed).
When certain veins are affected by greater natural coldness in other limbs, it is customary to apply these remedies thereafter. If so, do not use sharp instruments to pierce the swelling, as this is against custom in any vein
Chapter LXXXIII
Of the cure for hemorrhoids and boils that occur in the groin of women.
Hemorrhoids are appreciated for their openings into veins, which can become infected continuously; and since ancient times hemorrhoids have been treated with these remedies.
I also divide those whose symptoms are being treated and those who are not receiving treatment.
Therefore, hemorrhoids and boils when appearing on the lower half of the body are not treated with these remedies.
Those that occur in the opening higher up and those whose symptoms indicate it, these are treated
Do not cover the woman in a very tight way and extend it to her elbows or back, leaving those on her stomach uncovered.
Then sprinkle with powders that contain strong corrosive substances such as acids or alkalis, just like those used for certain poisons.
When you have opened space between patient's thighs, place a cushion under them, another on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And if the flow of illness persists, the doctors will prescribe a diet of fruits and vegetables rich in potassium, magnesium, sulfur, and iron.
Then spread the meal on cloth or linen, place it on a plate next to them.
If the illness has been cured, good! Otherwise, stick with two remedies and breast compressions.
Then spread the cream on cloth or linen, put it in water with chamomile or lavender tea and let it sit for a while; then apply to the affected area and pat until dry.
Cure that so that it is healed.
The twenty-fourth chapter of the Capitol.
The perforation in the ear causes pain and discomfort.
Special circumstances of apostemes cause pain in the ear as well as cramps and ulcers on fingers, fistulas, abscesses, and others. And you have already inserted the malevolent spirits and their qualities in those parts of that person's body, into the divisions.
You are to read in this treatise about the exorcism candles that is performed on a greater scale when compared to the other types of candles mentioned here, and if you want to know how it is done, perform the operation yourself.
When the pain of the exorcism occurs suddenly and is accompanied by striking, trembling, and fever, you are to consider it a severe attack and if so then proceed with treatment immediately in order to decrease the severity of any accidents that may occur due to this condition.
Then place the woman on a couch with two cushions; recline her on her back and adjust her legs to a position as close as possible to the belly, spread out her thighs, and put cushions under her breasts so that they are elevated, and lie down on top of them in order to perform this operation.
Then guide the lady towards the tool by which the greater orifice will be opened, and follow the form of it that is to come from these causes that are to be applied.
When you want to use this tool for the larger orifice of the woman, and when it is inserted into the greater one then ensure that its width is not more than half as much as the greater opening, lest damage occur from the tool. When the tool is greater than that of the master, then pain occurs as you cover it with powders on its surface to prevent any other tool from entering into it
And you cover the channel of the tool with powder, so that the minister has it and turns it around to ensure it is straight
And when the excision occurs in the middle of them and their head has been removed, then you cover it with a damp cloth to prevent any dirt from entering
And when the vein is evacuated, then you cover it with a soaked cloth or one that is wet and filled with oil to prevent any stagnation; and place a gauze on top in the area of the chest.
And you cover the breast with a damp cloth, so that any foul smell is prevented; and place a pad on top of it in the area of the chest.
Then apply two days later to where it was applied, so that it may be healed.
And the wounds are washed with water and vinegar until they become free of dirt or lint; then you apply with water that has a solution of balsam of gold or arnica oil, and place it back into its position.
When the gout occurs in the great toe, it is customary that you should not allow any care to be given on it as well, and instead cure what has been mentioned in this division.
Chapter 75 of The Capitularies
To put on the girdles when there is no natural second figure (i.e., a second visible breast).
It is necessary that the girdle knows at first sight what the normal figure of her breasts should be by looking at them from the front and side. If she wants to wear this belt while lying down or standing, it is customary for a servant to undo and remove both belts, leaving one on each side under her belly button, and fasten it in place over her head as well.
So when you see her breasts, it is customary for the belt to be tightened up so that there will be less of an impression on her belly and she may enjoy more comfort in this way.
If that part is another natural figure and not visible, when the belt is removed from her body, both legs and arms of hers will be exposed to view as well, either on top or below (i.e., between her belly button and navel).
The first sentence to translate means: "It's necessary for her [the midwife] to be wise and subtle in all of those cases, so that she may avoid error and disappointment.
It is important for you to show a complete picture of those things, and what should be done in those cases that it means here and should be on this
When the blood is spilled onto his head through a natural accident and it's very painful for him to have that part of his body touched, the doctors avoid touching her in those cases or any other women who has experienced something similar, as women are often more sensitive in this regard.
The midwife should place the second between her breasts and gently touch it there while she holds onto that part of his body to prevent moisture from coming out. Put a cushion on her belly in order for the baby to come out.
If this is not necessary, it's customary that the woman has become infected with pus in her breast and pus from the nipple as well.
The midwife should command the woman to lie down, remove her clothing and let them be torn apart as needed; place a pillow under her head for comfort, feed her breast milk by mouth and with a straw every hour until it is born as much as possible.
When the two feet are first separated at the beginning of treatment, it is customary for you to gently reduce those flexible parts little by little If they are not obese from the outset, you should place a cushion under them and support their feet with your arms, and ensure that the female is positioned so as to prevent any injury
If the legs cannot be turned or if they are too weak to support themselves from their back and chest respectively, you should gently lift them towards your chest and equalize that part of their body by placing an equal cushion on both sides
When the body lies on their legs, it is customary to gradually pull them up towards you and gently support their back with one hand, while holding onto another part of their leg or chest with your other hand and stretch that part little by little.
If the belly protrudes into their thighs, you should gently pull it out and hold that part down while ensuring they remain flat on their back if possible, as this will help prevent any injury
If you find that their body is not flat on the ground as recommended by your doctor, continue gently pulling them towards you and gradually return to supporting their back with one hand while holding onto another part of their leg or chest with the other hand, so that they remain flat wherever possible, which will help prevent any injury.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet as well, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it's necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
And if it is necessary to lubricate the passages of urine and feces as well, doctors suggest doing this with a pointed cautery. After a half hour of lubrication, doctors suggest putting the pointed cautery on your finger and gently press it against the mouth to prevent vomiting and hold it there while applying gentle compression over that part to prevent the vomit from coming out too forcefully.
Stretch out the lower part of the body gently for a while. Reduce the pain in her hand if you can't reduce that leg.
If not possible, lay the gauze on its side and quickly apply a compress with warm damp cloths to relieve it.
If it is hurt and cannot move, lay that limb flat on the ground and encourage it to relax naturally as much as possible, then force its opposite side again to make it free so that it can move independently again.
Stretch out the upper part of the body gently for a while. Have her hold on to the foot of the patient and slowly revolve it little by little in order to facilitate its movement.
When you do this as directed and pause over the head of him at that point we recommend applying oil and cloths for lubrication.
"Apply the ointment gradually and when you've finished applying it, instruct them to lie down on their right side. A child is being born
When it comes to the second of the three tasks that are part of this procedure, consider that and instruct your assistant to remove any excess saliva from your tongue
If the task is suspended over their face and neck, instruct them to remove any excess mucus so it does not stick or drip.
Then instruct the assistant to perform the next task when you've given them permission and ask the woman to check if there are any vegetables or herbs in it, otherwise proceed with the remaining tasks as planned.
Either of twins or multiple births Do you mean that multiple births are caused by nature or life itself?
Do you mean that either twins or a second child are separated at birth because of an umbilical ligament?
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when the feet are affected, it is customarily called gout by doctors
And if the mistress is subtle and capable of doing it in a simple and delicate way, without delay, and has ingenuity beyond any other figure when preparing for health
To remember that they are formed from the embryo and will be aborted.
The ovaries are formed in the first month, and also in the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth months; and from them it is necessary to check that a woman who has aborted once will abort again, and another one may be formed which causes this affliction through measurement of the glory holes.
Therefore, it is in the science of the mistress that she may be very light and similar to this, but also pause herself from doing so as much as possible.
The sixty-sixth chapter
About the extraction of the fetus when it is dead
When you cure the dead fetus as stated in the division of medicine and it is not forbidden by law or custom, use your best judgment to determine whether the woman is a healthy one without being subject to accidents for which she was warned could result in loss.
The woman lies on her back over a table or bed with her feet elevated and the head of the patient is tilted to their chest while cushions are placed between her thighs
The minister has that of the two parts laid on a table to prevent the body from extending towards the exit of the anus.
And you should lubricate the mouth of the larger patient with saliva, and mucus from other places as well.
And you should lubricate the arm of the woman with her own saliva and mucus, and put a finger into her vagina to feel for any semen inside it.
The place you should choose when: after considering that the body is ready to ejaculate over its head, the semen will stay in its hands or between them and testicles or on its beard or in its throat or on its palate or on the places of the shoulders, or on the back of his neck.
The ejaculation may occur in the feet, and then they will feel it, or between their shoulders.
And you should lubricate the right arm with your own saliva and place it in between the fingers of the left hand, to insert it into those places where we have mentioned them, until ejaculation occurs.
When you have already placed the cushion between their thighs, another on each leg, or if it is necessary for that third one, to ensure they stay attached and not be pulled out only by the doctor's touch.
Once all is ready for the operation to begin, you must make sure that the patient's intestine is fully out and ready for removal.
Once all is ready for the operation to begin, make sure that the attachment of the intestine has been loosened; and if any part of it remains attached, then inform a nurse who will undo her stitches and enter through these slits to reach and remove this object as soon as possible.
Once the part of the patient's body has been cut open, then proceed to remove everything from that location as quickly as possible; and make sure all parts of the body are removed in order.
If it is not possible to reduce this object with the other hand due to its size or any other reason, then wrap a bandage around that part and proceed in removing everything from there; and ensure that it has been completely removed either at the joint of the arm or on the side where the body was cut open.
Proceed with both hands.
If the head of the patient is large or if there are any difficulties in removing it, then enter between the two slits and cut off the head with a tool called "alundat", which has the form that will come to match the forms of other instruments located at the place where it should be.
When the patient's head is large in nature, and the gout has attacked that part of it, or if it attacks someone on top of their body, do so by cutting off the extremity with a pair of scissors.
If the head is small and the attack has reached its surface, it is customary to remove that area with tweezers.
If not complicated or excessive, then proceed and make an incision on the head as long as it is feasible to do so.
If the belly button has been removed or perforated, proceed and cut through that area as long as there is moisture present in it.
If the body part is below your waist, the cutting shall be made lower and directed towards the mouth of that leg as lower in level.
If the attack has reached or is near to your stomach and chest area, proceed by removing that extremity and placing it over your hand so that you can cut through your abdomen into that area as directed.
If the other limbs are affected and returning to the head is necessary, proceed by cutting off one arm from your shoulder up to the elbow if it is possible, or two arms if needed, and direct that extremity towards the mouth of the larger limb as directed.
When the mouth of the woman is closed by a pointed object that hits her, pain occurs to him/her; so doctors say it should not be treated with dry remedies but with humid ones instead Use plasters and continue to treat the patient by soothing and moisturizing means
If that part is on his side then doctors should try to treat it; otherwise continue as previously advised.
If this isn't possible, the doctor will prescribe pessaries and remove them.
Nothing that could cause the second one.
Once you've finished all your work, the doctor will treat this by following what we advised in the previous procedure for dealing with the pain of the woman.
If it occurs suddenly, the doctor will use sharp remedies and proceed to another treatment.
You saw a woman in her belly who was dead and you covered that area with another bandage, and when the corpse moved, it is necessary to cover it again with another bandage. The pointed object hit her in the belly and went inside where she had a stomach ulcer; as soon as it moved out of place, begin to bandage
'You have called for healing of him, and treated him for a long time, but the swelling has not subsided.'
'You have already placed a cushion under his feet, and made him rest on another leg or chest, and you were amazed that the swelling did not subside in the belly.'
'And since then, you realize that it is from the bones of a dead man.'
'Then you tried to heal the swelling but only found that his bones were breaking up, and there was a fluid present in both of your lungs, which had been causing you pain for a long time.'
'You were not able to stop being strange but realized that this is known and helps the doctor treat.'
'The forms of the instruments necessary to remove the body.'
'A form of truth that is greatest:'
'This is the form of strength in which two virtues are equalized at each extremity of two forces.' 'However this virtue may be most subtle and precise, or it may also be rough and fast moving.'
'The length of each fist is one palm and a little less than that, and the breadth at which two fists touch or come together is like the width of a small finger.'
When the two openings enter into the mouth of the woman, so that she is taken in by these prescribed virtues
Another way like this one is very subtle and light
The procedure to be done with a pair of pliers or a similar tool after the manner of a scalpel. The two openings may be placed at the extremity of them as often as you wish, and their length is to have a palm's breadth, each one being twice that width.
When you want to move the woman onto her back with her feet bent, hold that which is between her thighs. Then place your hand on the tool similarly as when you grasp a fork, and in accordance with how much of the opening to the woman's mouth you wish for it to measure
The manner which they used to do formerly.
The method by which the matter was done.
Form of doing with what is put on her head
The instrument is placed in the extremity and then with pliers like this one similarly often times, and some guards are put on it similarly to that of forceps similarly often times, where the instrument is inserted and held. First
To apply a poultice
To apply a plaster
To apply a poultice to the part where the head is detached.
Two flat plates
When these instruments are used, and if many of the same species exist in different sizes, then they must be prepared with equal care to achieve their purpose, as is required by its nature or for the benefit of its users.
You should not use these instruments if they are not available when it is necessary to do so, because their absence cannot be excused.
Second part of the text.
When the second part is removed you should command to close the mouth of the patient and if necessary spread your hand on his chest and nose, because as long as he can stay still it's all right.
Otherwise you will put a poultice in the cloth over his throat and keep it there until the herbs become hot enough to burn off the mucus from his mouth, as calmly and gently as possible without burning him or causing any harm. When these herbs or some of them are submerged in water on the ground, place that over fire.
Then place a drain tube in the mouth of the patient and keep it inside so that any vomit enters into their throat.
Then say these words quickly: "Give me a moment.
Then take this action and do not miss it: place the left hand into olive oil massage or micellar water, and arrange that into her palm, waiting for its arrival, then immediately extract it gently one by one until you reach the second one, after which quickly remove them gently from their chest to prevent strong contractions. Then take a small amount of medication in your left hand and place it on both sides of the right and left nostrils, making breathing easier.
If the patient's mouth is closed, then recommend a tube for feeding and medication of their herbals to assist in recovery.
Then keep in mind that if it is not possible to put anything into their mouth due to injury, place a spoon filled with food or medication next to them and wait for their next meal to be dissolved and ready.
When you are about to begin, elevate the patient's head and stomach, and place a pillow under them; then proceed with care as needed.
It is customary to use cold compresses on the nose and cheeks to help with joint pain caused by cold humors that have infiltrated into each part of the body, including the feet.
To perform a cautery procedure on an area where you would apply a cold compress, first make sure to tighten the muscles and secondarily press down.
The text is incomplete without more context or information about what 'veira' or 'eram' refers to in this sentence.
Place a cold compress on the delicate area of the chin and cover it with a larger one over the eyebrows; also place another cold compress under the hands by the fire.
You must then apply this cold compress, and after that proceed to apply another.
The procedure should be avoided for the anus of a child.
Do not touch or rub the ears of children; they are very soft and sensitive. Also make sure to avoid touching the nostrils of the patient if you do not want to touch the throat as well, and be careful that you don't touch his/her ear canal.
Then place a cold compress on the inflamed part of the eye and eyelid, and care for it as needed to prevent infection.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery
If hemorrhoids occur from straining during defecation or stool passage, and if such consolidation is suspected, then apply a remedy to cure it by moistening the area with water and linen.
From curing of the fistula that ended up in you.
Fistulas that originated in the anus, protruded through it or into another part of the body.
It is a fistula or abscess.
If such a nodule has become old and eroded from dampness or pressure, some vessels may be affected by it, causing penetration.
Such penetrations cause the exit or flow of mucus to be obstructed, and some vessels may be affected by it, leading to erosion.
Such fistulas may enter the bladder or urethra, and into the vagina of the vulva; and such penetrations may enter the junction of the scrotum or into the testicles.
When a fistulas that are penetrative enter the anus but not penetrative ones do so gently or may be inserted into the fistula if it is not closed up.
When the gouty pain is already in that part of the body, there will be a subtle infiltration of phlegm or hair from the horse to come down your arm and touch you on the chest
If you don't feel that part of your body or there is no reason for vomiting and diarrhea, as mentioned above, the pain should go away and the doctor will check on you
If the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the rectum of urine, then the meaning of it is to be found in urine and it will prevent you from getting out medicine that way.
If it penetrates into the joint of the finger or into the ear and causes pain in the circulation, then its meaning is that there is a swelling inside here if this swelling is not present at the site, and causes pain in the circuit from where it came; and that this medicine should be avoided temporarily; and that no use can be made of this treatment until it is consolidated.
In all these fistulas that are penetrating nothing can be done and the treatment of those is only recommended by some doctors who have their opinions firm up to there.
If it is not penetrating and does not exist, then the healing should be sought after consulting with your doctor and doing what you have already been told to do.
"The patient is positioned between two legs with their buttocks towards the chest and a cushion placed under them. The cushions are then tilted towards the abdomen of the patient.
"And if it comes to an incision in the bowel, the doctor will open this area.
"And if you suspect an opening in the bowel or between the scrotum and anus, it is customary to confirm whether this is a penetrating injury by feeling for any protrusion of the intestine; and if there is none, as long as no other serious injuries are present, then proceed with closure.
"If it was possible to remove the stone, they would have removed it from his body.
"From the medical procedure for removing the stone, they made a small incision in order to enter into it with an instrument, as previously mentioned; and then closed that opening after taking out any stones or tissues from inside of it.
"Then they treated the ulcer with a dressing to protect it and prevent infection while healing took place, as before mentioned; and if healed then good, but otherwise not healthy for another treatment.
"If the attempt enters but does not penetrate into that place where semen comes out and between which and the attempt is only a skin wound or phlegm abscess, then seal up the fistula at its beginning with the cautery and you will cut it off so that when released from there, it goes to the location in which the extremity of the attempt falls on, and for the attempt being freed and dead.
"You will then insert into those inflamed fistulae that resemble a cannula of the cause of which nothing comes out and are not caused by any other thing.
"If at any time you feel inflamed between your hand and arm when cleansing those fistulae, the doctor will apply cautery to either spot or an acute medicine if necessary; for which spot is preferred depends on good habits: so it's custom to make these fistulae closed off, and to remove the inflammatory discharge from the humidity.
"Then you will cure that which is swollen in the body or between the fingers such that it becomes firm and solid.
"Then you will use medicines for those who are stiff and dry, when the cure is restored they are cured without recurrence.
"Then you will introduce it into that place of the anus and hold it there.
If you notice any itching or tingling sensation between your finger and her elbow, proceed with caution as it may indicate an abscess
You may administer one of the following three ways: cauterize that area to stop any further irritation and ensure proper healing; proceed with great caution as it may indicate an abscess or sore; or remove that part through which you inserted it in order for it to be possible to enter the anus later on, by using enemas and cleaning procedures. If the fistula has been completely closed through one of these ways, proceed by puncturing that area (like using a needle).
If you notice any itching or tingling sensation around the vagina, proceed cautiously as it may indicate an abscess.
If you notice any itching or tingling sensation around the anus, proceed cautiously as it may indicate an abscess.
Cut off the abscess that has been consolidated and healed
If the abscess is impenetrable, do not try to insert anything there, but rather clean it thoroughly and leave it as it is.
The shape of the septum is that which opens the fistula; its curvature must be acute and the other part is non-acute, in order to avoid inserting anything unnecessary, as you have mentioned.
Suture cuts in those which are running across the incision of these ones.
Epididymitis is usually encountered after two weeks, which means that the epididymis swells with pus or inflammation. These are small and large, and the pain occurs in steps or in a continuous manner, on all parts of the body, including the buttocks and extremities.
The epididymis may swell with citrinous water or a small continuous pain because of increased humidity around the scrotum and the color change.
The treatment of that which is being drained from the urethra is to command it to relax and empty itself before examining the epididymides. When you put it on your hand or the thumb of your finger, and if they get into that part of your palm, then immediately apply something to stop them from spreading further.
If the humors don't fit into that area or are too cold and soft there, then apply it to the rough part of the arm, the elbow, or a folded cloth from wool, and extirpate them on their eyelids, put powder on top of them to stop spreading further. And then apply it with another cure once they are healed up.
If the intestine does not exit on its own accord, then apply a cure which will cause the patient's abdomen to contract and squeeze out the intestine when it tries to come out.
If the hemorrhoids are in front of the anus, it is said to be caused by urine and should you apply them to your hand or finger, or if applied to one's thumb, and you place them there, then immediately cure them with what was mentioned earlier that they were healed up with.
If you are inserting them, then apply sutures of theirs after that fashion: take a faithful follower and entwine it around the needle and place the hemorrhoids on top thereof; and let him penetrate with the needle into another part, and involve his two extra mitts in intertwining in the part near to the point at which the needle penetrates, so latitudinally. And stretch out the hemorrhoids with great force, and put a halt to the faithful follower and withdraw the needle.
This sentence translates to "Do all this, without those who are not necessary, in order that the excess of blood may run from there.
This sentence translates to "Then place a cushion over the buttocks, spread it with oil or lard, and put one on top of the chest while commanding the patient that they should stop. This sentence translates to "Then place it in a box, and when it is full of water, cure those which are empty or others according to the need.
This sentence translates to "Even if they are old and no longer useful in this medicine, the doctors say that you should remove them at a certain spot or under your arm so that they may be soaked with moist and prepared for use by those who need them, which is forbidden those of consolidation; and place them where they are solid.
This sentence translates to "Take those away in a rush, as the first ones which have been affected and are being burned with sores, and place them where they are healed.
This sentence translates to "You know that the heart is crucial here and not if you do not notice any redness on the chest resembling a fingernail, it is placed throughout the body, especially in the parts of the feet and hands, and it is necessary for these pains.
When a gout is inflicted on the finger or toe, and it spreads to the joints of that limb, then treat that patient
If you want to cauterize the previously mentioned space in the patient's head
A rash that appears suddenly on a surface of the body is commonly called measles by doctors.
Care must be taken to prevent it from spreading further or returning as soon as possible, or cauterize the lesion if it is on the face or hands. If you want to cauterize this one mentioned earlier at the forehead or at a sudden wound.
A flea bite that appears suddenly on the body is commonly called chickenpox by doctors, and once it begins to spread or itch, it spreads throughout the body.
Care must be taken to prevent it from spreading further or coming out of the needle hole, and cauterize once you find it on the skin near the cannula circle by placing your hand over it and cutting off circulation to that area; and remove the bite from its cavity.
When you want
If you wish to use a catheter of this kind (if it is not perforated) wrapped around in such a way that the tip touches her vagina and allows for easy insertion, as well as movement inside
If you want to cauterize the vein (meaning artery) in the process of cautery at that point, do so using cautery
Using instruments as described below.
Some cauteries are small or large depending on the ones used, for example, a cautery given to children is small; and for those who have cruel or painful bites from them, their cauteries should be smaller.
The form of a small one
The tip of the catheter is positioned in such a way that it lies flat against her body, and at each turn.
The end of the catheter is placed inside her vagina, which should not be inserted in any other opening; it is wrapped around gently, with two twists on one side and one twist on the other, and its width is adjusted according to the size of the body and is smaller for a small one.
When the bladder or bowel of a beast is to be opened up, put one hand inside it
When the opening is made through the mouth of an animal and you are ready to roll, then place that space between the tracks where the passage goes through.
When it is necessary to enter into those closely adjacent tracks where there are two fine spaces or openings between them, and adjust the opening so that it fits properly in one of those entrances: when you have done this for a beast, then stretch out your arm to the tip of its head between two strong cords tightly spaced apart from each other. Stretch out your hand into the opening of the medicine pouch with both hands; when you are finished stretching and ready to roll, guard it so that there is no excess or waste.
When the beast is mounted on its back, elevate its two legs and place one hand over it to which already has men or any other object: and arrange that opening in such a way so that you may roll easily into the intestine. After that, take out the intestine from the medicine pouch and stretch it gently but firmly across your arms towards the side where evacuation must be done; then remove the intestines and place both legs on the wall.
When someone has fever due to illness, it is customary that he get as much rest as possible; and if someone falls ill in the entire body, this may lead to death at a young age.
If you are applying heat on the abdominal muscles and the illness of him is improving, then the sores will be treated with a cautery so that he recovers.
If the tail is swollen or inflamed, doctors will prescribe gentle creams and lotions, using creams that children use as guidelines.
For the treatment of bruises.
And you have already said that the division of care for bruises should be given freely, and also tell them about the care to give those who are injured as well as medical treatment in accordance with your advice.
Therefore, tell them that bruises vary depending on the part of the body they occur in and where they are located.
The causes that cause bruises are as follows: sprains or strain of the muscles, friction burns on rough surfaces, blunt force trauma, frostbite, or heat stroke, all of which may be signs of bruising.
Bruises that occur on the parts of the body include those on the head, neck, chest, abdomen, back, and legs, as well as other members.
You are advised to make a careful examination of all these wounds, so that you can reason out their cause and apply remedies accordingly.
You should examine the head wounds one by one, recalling the composition that will come into play at the beginning of this third chapter.
When you encounter a simple head wound that is not broken, the doctor should consider: if it's from trauma or impact, and there was an immediate cauterization of the wound only to stop bleeding, but otherwise do nothing; and remove any stitches second by second, checking for each stitch whether it needs removal due to lack of cause.
And be aware of the possibility that the bleeding might stop on its own, and make sure to check for any major or large veins in proximity as well.
If there is not an immediate cause, the doctor should apply pressure to stop bleeding and avoid puncturing skin or veins.
Pause over the wound if it is suspected that an immediate cauterization was required; and inspect for any signs of burning flesh or injury in the area where sutures were applied.
If you are sure an immediate cauterization was needed, the doctor should pause over the wound and inspect it if there is any indication of bleeding or injury in the area where sutures were applied recently; but otherwise do nothing more.
When the arrow has entered that space, pain will cease as soon as it is cured.
If the arrow is large or has a long shaft and does not penetrate through the lips without piercing them, then adjust that opening when you recommend adjusting their clothing.
If the arrow has been discovered in their anus and penetrates, not stopping inside them without making a small cut, then doctors will cut off that opening and cure the skin properly at its location by removing it with scissors, ordering them to eat from the parts they have become accustomed to: head and face.
If the arrow gets rotten in their anus without adhering to it and they cannot remove it, then doctors will cut off everything around that area completely and get rid of it, treating it properly.
If these arrows are arteries or veins through which blood can flow and they cannot be closed by medicine, then ask about the artery, if it is not closed, then cut off that opening too, either from the back of your hand or from the other side; and if you need to prevent any bleeding, cauterize when the arrow has been removed.
If these arrows are simple and small, the cause of them is light; but if you powder those arrows to this powder, they will become consolidated when the arrow moves against that place.
"The physician's task is to open the space between the thighs and place a cushion underneath them for comfort; then have another servant on their legs, one on their chest, holding their hands; it will prevent them from moving around.
"And the physician must gently place a cushion below and above them; if they are already sitting comfortably without slipping or falling, do not interfere with that as it would be harmful to their health.
"There is no need for cautery alone when there are already servants and staff taking care of the patient's comfort.
"The surgeon performs an operation on large wounds when it is convenient to place a cushion over them and have the legs stretched out; these cushions will be placed below their abdomen as well.
"If the wounds have healed but it's still summer, they are not accustomed to that position so you should gently place them on their side while holding hands or placing their arms around your neck and chest to prevent drowning; and tend to those at another station where they will be treated.
"If the broken bone is in your hand or foot, then you should apply some of this ointment to it gently.
"You shall perform surgery on the skull in order for it to become swollen.
The hemorrhoids of the buttocks
If a hemorrhoid occurs in the anus, it is not different from that in surgery, and between the hemorrhoids of the head when simple.
If the nerves of the anus are cut or artery, it is nerve, not the vein that needs to be treated with strong constriction, as well as indicating and saying that it is poison like the others, which are against those nerves and contrary to that one. It does not matter which cause of the hemorrhoids causes their substance to be disturbed and the continuation is in order for it to be a problem that affects all members.
If it is necessary to cure the disease with leeches, as well as causing a bad taste in the mouth, regardless of whether it is wet or dry, and thinking when treating it with water and its own juices that follow this method, and count the humidities.
If a hemorrhoid is big, it will be treated with sutures, or cut off the lips of that person, and the cure for powder between which should be restored to health.
If a hemorrhoid is deep or occurs in the lower part of the body, it will be treated by cutting that place open.
When the artery is inscribed with a seal that seals off the flow of blood, doctors cut or burn it off as necessary
When the bowels of the groin or all parts are sealed off by a seal, and you save the veins of the colon, doctors adjust them with sutures over the side of the groin and do not touch it; burn off this one and reduce it to its natural form, and place it on the stretch so that it is well-stretched.
When the seal is placed on or near your finger, doctors will treat it as a burn and separate its edges to reduce swelling and pain.
If the seal has recently been applied, you should dust over that powder which your doctor recommends. When a fistula forms in the seal area, doctors treat it as they would any other wound and remember to take care of that part accordingly.
If it is a tearing of the flesh or very deep, doctors consider that the seal may cause death to the patient; they understand that the seal is fatal.
When the abscess is not very deep and comes up recently from within the body, then you should apply pressure on it at its first appearance, without forcing it into returning to the heart, but allowing it to come out of the body in a few days.
If the abscess is not currently present, then apply pressure at its origin to prevent it from spreading further and make sure that the patient keeps their hand on the abscess as long as they can tolerate it
If the abscess has lasted for three days or more without any complications such as chest pain, heart palpitations, or constriction of breathing, and if you find that the patient is otherwise healthy, then it is safe to allow the abscess to be drained naturally (without using a needle) over the next few days.
If the cure is satisfactory and has lasted for a long time, then you should know that it has healed properly.
If the abscess is caused by a small fold of skin or by a little cyst on the chest or arm (or in any other part) and it is simple to find at the surface, then cure that with what was previously described as sutures; if it's large, apply pressure instead
When you have heated up the oil, add a small amount of olive oil slowly and steadily to lubricate the skin while massaging it gently in circular motions with your fingertips. If they are not separated, the process will be eased as you press on them to extract them out gently and slowly.
And in cases where one of the blisters appears on another part of the body at a later stage, it is customarily said to be a late occurrence of that which we mentioned earlier.
The belly ones.
The disorder that occurs in the belly is either small or large, or mild to severe.
And a small disruption is difficult for one more person, and if the reduction of them is very difficult, unless you prevent the intrusion into their place so soon that they swell up and become hard because the process inside becomes difficult.
And in this case the great disruption is mild, whereas if that reduction of the bowels were difficult then these two species mentioned are as well.
And you know that the sutures of the belly are second to four stitches, whereas two of these sutures are commonly used in suturing of blisters on the body.
The first sentence translates to: "Two plews are joined together in places where they should not be.
You recommend that each of them gives an account and makes a declaration.
It means that when the plew is small and has no cause for the intestine to come through it, then it is a matter of two ways: either by reducing disruption as we have said, or when the intestine is inflamed due to coldness in the air
When this happens, the doctor covers it with a damp sponge that is soaked in water and waits alone or by immersing it in water, stirring, and massaging until the inflammation has been resolved.
Some vegetables are good for it in terms of relieving inflammation and are more effective than water alone to resolve the inflammation.
When the inflammation is resolved, doctors soak the intestine in a solution that contains salt and water, which helps to quickly heal it after minor causes.
If the intestine is completely healed from this treatment, doctors suggest performing a small examination with a specific instrument to check for any remaining issues.
The first task seems to be making preparations for the procedure that will follow. It appears necessary not only that it should not become dry, but also that there is no need for anything else other than what follows next in terms of care and nourishment.
From the instrument, arrange its form as follows:
The first part sharp and the second non-sharp, and the subtlest extremity, but not to be like the subtlety of a spur; rather make it blunt by about one inch.
And then after amplifying the vein, you should reduce its size to match the form of the body part in question, in its own place if possible, as best it may be.
If the rupture is wide and in the lower part of the belly, then you should make the patient lie on their back, and hold their legs; if it's in the upper part of the belly, then place your head below his chest and press his thighs to keep them together.
Similarly if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the belly, then pause your entry and your consideration temporarily so that the part where the vein is shall be higher than the other.
And so you should administer this in large veins and medium-sized ones.
When very small blisters appear on the feet, pause so that it is prepared; and place a minister between your big toes, which will have all the disruption at its right and left sides adjust the lips of the patient in this manner, then cut away from such an incision another
This is the common method of suturing: one who takes a needle or counts how many needles to use based on the size of the blister; and stretches it out until you reach both sides of the disruption, from the thumb side inward, so that no more than four stitches are used
Stretch tightly around the needle's circuit, sew together two parts of the patient's lips, and place a new needle in there too; stretch out until it reaches another, as closely as possible while still keeping all four stitches intact; do not stop unless you need to complete sewing up the whole edge of the blister.
Needles should vary in both coarseness and subtlety, which makes them less sensitive to skin and more manageable on the foot; the coarse ones are easier but harder on the nail, so that they may be used with differing levels of finesse and roughness.
When the needle is placed in both of the patient's arms, to prevent the flesh from being injured and that the bandage remains firmly attached to its fixation
Sutures should not be prolonged so that the bandage does not become forbidden for fixation.
Insert needles in both the patient's arms to ensure they do not touch the mattress and place a bandage over the suture after it has been expanded completely, covering the needle sites on either arm. The bandage is placed so that you know the patch has already been fixed
This special type of suture is best done with small needles, as it may be difficult to pass through the sutures if too large a needle is used, one or two or around those areas.
The second suture is like this: you administer the four sutures, one from each of the thighs and two from the buttocks in a zigzag pattern, with a needle that has been carefully wrapped tightly and evenly so it can be easily removed in subtlety and size.
Once the needle has entered these four areas, reduce it to that segment of the bandage from which this starts, to ensure the faithful wrap tightly around the patch as it is now the second layer of cloth over which the cloths should be tight
The space between each of the patient's thighs should be measured by the thickness of a finger.
This measurement will help determine...
This measurement will help determine...
The wound had healed within 15 days or so, and it was cured; afterwards, the patient felt better as a result of this treatment.
The other doctors had tried unsuccessfully to cure it; however, by miracle, when you didn't try that treatment, which was in a place where no remedy could be found either, they placed wet cloths on the wound two or three times a day and rubbed them with melted honey until it healed.
Do you want to know about another incision procedure called Parala?
The incision is made starting from the tip of the finger towards the tip of the thumb
The needle is inserted into the finger and progresses towards the thumb, then to both sides of the body, ending by inserting it into the other extremity from the tip of the thumb to the tip of the finger on that side.
"The passage refers to the procedure of using a pointed instrument or tool (such as an awl) to penetrate into certain parts of the body and hold them in place, typically for surgical purposes.
"The sentence suggests that the pointed instrument is used to penetrate into a specific area of the body, such as the groin or armpit, and hold it in place before proceeding with further procedures.
"The sentence refers to the procedure of first making an incision on one side, and then placing a pointed instrument in that area before performing further steps on the other side.
"The sentence suggests that after performing a procedure on one side, you should perform the same or similar procedures on the other side as well.
"The sentence refers to the procedure of making a cut through the skin and then performing further cuts on different parts of the body.
"The sentence suggests that after performing the first surgery (which is described as 'cutting through skin and then making further cuts on different parts of the body'), you should perform another minor surgery in an area where doctors usually cut, while also cutting across to the other side, such as from one arm to the other.
"Insert the needle in your hand's palm at the start of this treatment and proceed to penetrate it into the opening, then take two steps back from there on both sides.
"Then place them [the cushions] and penetrate each one of the openings into both sides of the palm, as if you are facing towards the other.
"This method is superior to the common stitches used in surgery and follows a specific procedure.
This is the story of Gaul.
After the belly incision is correctly made with two needles at its start, place them on each one of these in such a way that they align perfectly and begin to sew into this one which you must do first, then sew into the other sutures as well.
You know that when the incision is in the belly area, sewing there becomes more difficult than at other places of the belly.
The game of healing comes from the art of treating wounds.
When you have recently treated a wound with the same means as before and it does not heal completely after that, then pause over this inflammatory sore.
When the vein has been altered and pain occurs where you press into it, then hold tightly while pressing down on it to prevent bleeding or effusion
If you are not present when the medicines pause over that place, put them on and start taking the pill, then cover it with gauze to prevent further complications if the problems are simple
If you fear that the vein might communicate an injury to main body parts like the legs or the head, then hold it tightly while pressing down on it in a relaxed manner, and place it within the area of veins between the elbows and the wrists.
If you feel pain or putrefaction in the bowels, then seek a doctor immediately because that could be a burst vein which has entered into its cavity.
You know that the one who is from the large intestine needs medical attention, but the one from the small intestines does not.
It is difficult to treat when the vein that is called "gugunu" does not receive treatment from within it at all; and this is because of the great number of veins in it and its size, as well as being in those nearby areas, and for their subtlety, closeness to nerves, and for proximity to the nature of veins.
When you cleanse the bladder is to the skin, it must be done quickly and gently, so as not to tear or damage the surrounding skin
The bladder is to be cleansed with warm water or a mixture of hot and cold water, in order that it may pass cleanly through the urethra without causing any pain from the urethra passing through the skin, as there are blood vessels and arteries there
After cleansing the bladder as described above, gently spread open both sides of the urethra to allow for its passage out of the body without tearing any skin or causing damage to the urethra
Remember that these pains occur in gouty arthritis
When there is disruption in the bladder and it is small, doctors may suspect that a ureteral stent was previously placed or that there has been a fistula caused by long-term bladder problems, which would cause urinary incontinence.
If you are unsure about whether the pain is due to a bladder issue or not and it has settled into a solid location, stop using sharp instruments when examining that area to prevent further injury.
If you have determined that the pain is due to a bladder issue and it has settled into one location, focus on treating the problem in question while avoiding any further injuries or complications; instead, take care of your other duties and obligations.
When the pain occurs in a small intestine, it is customary to cover it with a cloth second layer: and then put your hand over the two lips of the opening and when you press on them and stretch your mouth open, close off its top so that it doesn't come out.
And when you are covering the opening with another cloth, do not stop doing that to make sure it is well covered throughout its entirety.
Then, return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity and make sure it is safe for use without further incident.
And when it is possible to put the intestine back into its cavity smoothly as you would remove it from a beast's body, but with more precision; and then take hold of its extremities tightly, not loose or unclean, and place them firmly over that part of the intestine, covered up, preventing it from coming out.
This method of closing is nothing more than a second way of trust and hope
If the opening is large or wide, particularly if it's in one of the smaller intestines where closing is delicate and not a complete healing process.
With great haste go forth from her
When a boil and abscess occurs when they harden over time and do not heal completely and the arm remains swollen despite all efforts to heal it, this is called an abscess in general terms
The abscess is second nature to be painful and has a white color that doesn't hurt and into which the pain of inflammation also enters; therefore it is called fistula
It is in an abscess home to the humidity that causes swelling on the arm; and as a result of high humidity, it is absorbed in certain hours. Certain vegetables lower this humidity, which is dry, and coarse, and subtle.
When causes are shown to him/her, he/she will investigate those causes and consider medical care in the division.
And then you should learn about the surgery that is used to treat this fistula, as it may be through an operation.
These fistulas may occur in any part of the body: they can be located on large blood vessels or arteries, nerves, veins, bowels, bladder, and/or the kidneys of one side or both sides; and these fistulas are such that they are next to (adjacent) the main part of the body.
Therefore, if you encounter these fistulas with this condition, it is customary to seek medical care and avoid recovery attempts, as it may be difficult or impossible for the patient to recover from them due to their severity.
If the depth of these fistulas is such that it cannot spread to those parts which are mentioned earlier and you feel anxious about the treatment process, want to prevent awareness of them or wish to become aware of them again, doctors should attempt to remove them or perform surgery if necessary for this fistula.
If the fistula is very complex and convoluted, doctors should try a subtle approach because if using force to reach it may be difficult due to its complexity or curvature.
When the fistula occurs horrifically, it's not advisable to apply pressure on it.
To control the spread of infection from one affected area to another, you need to keep the moisture content high in all areas where sores are present and apply a protective dressing over each affected area.
Carefully examine the area where the fistula is located or suspected to determine whether it's a long distance fistula or an ectopic fistula. If you suspect an ectopic fistula, then make sure that your compression is keeping all tissues in place and applying pressure over the area as much as possible with your strength, endurance, and your ability to withstand pain from the patient, while also noting any significant causes or accidents that occurred at this time.
When you've gathered all these causes from your examination, the next step is to seek treatment: if it appears to be a nearby fistula or located near an artery, vein, nerve, or another affected area of the body.
After determining this by examining it and noting its cause of contamination from outside the body, you should look for treatment that includes cleaning any wounds as well as healing those affected areas.
When the fistula is deep and secondarily affected, the doctors have to insert it into the previous hole as much as possible, and then fill it with rotten meat; and then administer wrapped sharp waters within medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula which has been understood to be done
And do this by introducing sharp medicine into the cavity of the rotten meat in the fistula which has been corrupted
And then restore that with healthy flesh, so it will be healed
If not cured by this, the doctors recommend to cauterize that part again.
If the cause of the fistula is due to veins or nerves or a main member, you should examine that and seal it if recommended by the doctors, unless there are no causes from other parts as we mentioned before.
If the vein is open and there is no corruption or bleeding in it, then seal that off to prevent any more damage; and apply a remedy to it as we mentioned before to make it heal.
If it is not healed and the vein has not been properly taken care of as we mentioned before, you should make sure that you did not miss out on the complete removal of corruption; if you discover another part or reason for its damage later on, do thoroughly examine it and make a thorough decision to fix it as well. Then restore that.
If the body is healthy and so it should be, if not, then you know that this corruption is in a deep cavity of the heart, which has been unsuccessful, and therefore you are going to have to do it differently.
If the corruption is small, or if it's possible to extract it, then you are going to use fine tweezers that fit this purpose.
If the patient's body is exhausted and they cannot endure any more pain from this process, you must stop doing it.
If there is not any cause of dampness or dryness in their skin and they have no fear nor error, then let them lie down if necessary, but do not bother with ointments or creams unless absolutely needed.
If you do not want to wash the patient's body at that time, then let them lie down on a cloth that will soak in water and remove it after use. Also, keep the cloth unwrinkled and tightly wound so as not to restrict the circulation of blood or lymph, and protect from drying out by maintaining a certain level of humidity during your operation.
If you fear, let the towel soak in hot or cold water as needed, or put it in a warm bath for relaxation before removing them from your hands and washing them separately.
"When the space between a patient's thighs is opened and placed with cushions on their legs and chest, holding their hands to prevent it from coming out.
"If the corruption of the organ is great and has reached its medulla, then closing off that area and the next one to prevent it from spreading is a necessary treatment.
"I recommend you to open up the space in their thigh so that it is simple and easy for your operation.
"Consider someone young around 30 years old who suffers from joint pain in their legs and whose body is showing signs of gout, as the disease has been spreading to his leg.
"To extend the time for the doctors to correct any mistakes that may have been made and then apply necessary treatments as soon as possible while keeping a close eye on their condition due to the high risk of recurrence and the humidity in the body.
"To treat them for two years with multiple doctors' care without focusing on those specific treatments mentioned earlier.
"I saw his abdomen, covered with those sores that were on the great chest; and I found that he was suffering from jaundice.
"Then you inserted a finger into one of those sores, probing it with the finger.
"Then you examined them all carefully and searched for their origin in the abdomen.
"Then you inquired and found that the sore into which you had inserted your finger was corrupt, corrupted, and stained with excrement; and it turned out to be corrupt from within.
"Then you examined the physician who was present and consulted him for advice.
"You found that it wasn't in his abdomen but rather from a corruption of the finger itself.
"Then you placed the poultice back on with conservative medical treatment for an extended period and it was not cured.
"Then you further examined the second finger into which it had spread, and found continuous corruption within.
"Then you advised him to seek out the cause of that corruption and place it under treatment, but it was not cured.
"When you have opened the abdomen and do not stop inserting it slowly but precisely to perform its restoration, and never restore until you insert a finger in it, extract the brain matter, and after restoring it doctors will consolidate and heal.
"It is not necessary to repeat the operation or section of it, but only for disposing of its filth and scarcity of tolerance and fear of death, as he will endure all hours due to the lack of a proper evacuation.
"And so health is obtained, and nothing is found in hard matter; it is good to dispose of him in his place and return the virtue of him; and he is conversed with his disposition and does not cause him any harm or illness for any reason.
"If the stomach is in a state of pain or disease already, then you should proceed with caution and strength to that limb; and command someone to extend it over their chest; pause for a moment while taking off some of its first part; and place it on the skin where it will be applied to cut out flesh. And stretch the extremity away so that flesh is not torn from the part where you want to cut.
And pause over the table of theirs to prevent it from being cut up when you do this is not forbidden for someone to cut up spoiled meat
And cover the small area of the corrupted part gradually, so that if it is in the concave part of the corrupted organ and not visible in its visibility to feeling, then proceed with cutting off this other extremity.
If the organ is corrupted and not eminent, then continue with a continuous incision along it, and corruption will be at the edge of that part or in multiple parts, so you reveal all the skin from each part; then pause over to prevent, and proceed to cut off that first part where corruption has begun continuously.
And cover with a small incision in the place of corruption as you mentioned earlier.
If corruption is in the joint, then make an incision through that corrupted joint and proceed to the part where it has been continued from the other side.
If corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then you are not to blame but to respond.
If corruption is in the chest of the hand or foot, it can be difficult; but if you want to find out where corruption appears on your part, and open that one, then cover it with another available part which you have, so as to correct that, when it does not align with your opposite vein or nerve.
The first sentence translates to: "You know which are the bones and what they mean in this situation.
The second sentence translates to: "You know that this operation means through the particular instrument you use; when you are an expert and knowledgeable in phlebotomy, and witness of malpractice cases, then you will have it in your mind as appropriate for any malpractice situation.
The third sentence translates to: "You will count the instruments that you use simply, and those that you process in your prohibition as part of your trial. It means "Form of inquiry":
I'm sorry, but the phrase you provided does not have a direct translation to English. Could you please provide another sentence?
It means "other form" or "another type", referring to various forms or types in general.
The phrase "forma de ray" is not a valid medical term and does not have any specific meaning related to medicine, anatomy, or physiology. Could you please provide another sentence? The phrase "siais le cap de este ray segundo la forma de cap de claves estrellados, y los puntos sean segundo la forma de puntos del estel" refers to a process where the shape of a keyhole is used as an indicator for the location of a hole in a structure.
When joints swell up due to corrupted humors or are open wide
Another form of relief is...
The most extreme remedy for relieving joint pain is...
The alternative way to alleviate the pain is through the use of sharp objects such as knives or pins and to gently pull away each member from one another. The last remedy for relieving joint pain is...
One form of relief that involves a cavity in the body is...
Another subtle way to alleviate pain is through...
The alternative remedy for relieving joint pain that involves stretching an extremity is...
One form of relief that requires small objects like needles or pins is...
Another less extreme form of incision is...
One alternative form of cutting involves the use of sharp objects such as knives or pins and to gently pull away each bone from one another.
The incision that is customary for relief when bones are perforated is...
And the extremity of the patient becomes triangular and sharp.
It is customary to use remedies from other categories such as incisions, burns, and abrasions.
Opening of limbs and bones' joints
The pain in the limbs may be caused by intrinsic or extrinsic causes; and if you suspect any corruption (illness) of this kind, treat it with these medicines to cure it, provided that the treatment does not interfere, or sometimes because of some cause, when the limb is corrupted, you should insert it into this hole to drain out the corruption, lest the patient die from this illness, which is greater damage than any member.
When the patient dies, it is necessary to insert a black member into the hole which burned him or her until all the fire has been extinguished, and then sew it tightly onto that part.
And similarly if the corruption is caused by venomous causes such as scorpion stings, or viper bites, or rattlesnake bites and similar ones.
And if the corruption or injury is in the hand, you should insert it and not give space for the corruption to enter into the mouth.
And similarly if it is in the mouth, you should insert that from the fire of the finger and not give space for the corruption to enter into the finger's flame.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate into each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet.
If another corruption or disease occurs in the cavity, then gout is called the death of the patient; and to administer another remedy for it may take a long time.
Similarly, when corruption occurs in the foot, then the physician should place it into one of the holes.
If you remove the foot from a bed or a chair, then the physician should cut off all the toes. If the abscess occurs in the belly, then you place the abscess into the opening of the belly.
If the corruption is widespread in the belly, then it is not curable and doctors should declare the patient dead.
The method of cutting the member or removing it is that you should stretch out your garment and choose where to cut, and then another one on its place; and extend a minister into both parts, and extend an extra minister in them too; and separate the skin which is between two cuts from top to bottom, so that all the skin may be opened up.
Cover his body with clothing so that he does not touch any of the parts, and let him adjust a treatment to soothe his pain
When the swelling occurs when working, you cauterize the affected area promptly or apply powder to restrain it; and return your medical attention as soon as possible
Apply a bandage to the infected member in an appropriate manner, cure it when healthy
Recommend to the patient that they avoid being in an area with a fire, and recommend caution when applying adhesive bandages
The corruption occurs first at the foot, spreading towards the rest of the body.
When the patient becomes very sick due to pain and burns, prepare for them going to have medical care at their member as soon as possible.
The long time of corruption in this specific area begins
Do not let the excess spread to other parts of the body, and do not allow it to come out through another hole if you want to avoid coming back in at that same place.
The physician cautions you to avoid spreading the excess on your body parts and does not allow you to do it hoping for no effect from this excessive, fearing that if allowed to spread then the hole in your body will be filled with more infection, as the patient had already become sicker and was dying.
When someone has been freed from my grip, they are returned to their land and brought back to me for further treatment
I am not sure about the meaning of this sentence as it seems to be gibberish or just a random collection of words without any clear context or meaning.
"With medical treatment, cure their ailments and improve their quality.
"When the abscess comes to attack any of your members and extends into the surrounding tissue, it is first drained and perforated. The discharge from the abscess will be a clear fluid that may contain pus or other debris. You are advised not to touch this fluid directly with rough handling, as this can lead to contamination.
"If the abscess space extends into any other member, it is called a fistula and not allowed to heal.
"The cure for it is to administer that medication as soon as you turn it over and mainly when it's applied gently while keeping your hand away from the location of contamination.
"If you feel that the abscess is sticking and cannot be extracted through conventional means alone, then treat it with a pointed cautery.
When joint pain is severe and widespread, the arm that you hold should have a fetid odor, then apply an Egyptian medicine with oil of vitriol and zinc sulfate to adjust it into one substance, and wash it over the focus until the medication is applied gently without causing harm or speculum damage.
Then take the amount of water and vinegar needed to make a poultice from it, then apply it to the affected area, strengthening its soothing properties, and spread the medicine over it for two hours.
Then remove that poultice after a certain number of days until the pain has been made mild and the odor has been removed.
When you don't have access to that poultice, then prepare a new one by mixing water and vinegar, place it on the affected area, and apply it until your fingers are burned.
If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or vinegar to be burned, then apply a mixture of oil and vinegar as well, mixing them thoroughly, so that the oil adheres to the skin, while still allowing it to wash off.
With you doing this, make sure the sinew has been relaxed so that it does not pull or draw the flesh in there.
It is important to prevent any further inflammation and dissolve any accumulated phlegm, mucus or other substances that may have been present in the treatise on veins; it also involves using poultices (poulticing), which are compress dressings soaked in hot water and vinegar.
If the veins in question are swollen and not receiving a tourniquet, then you should gradually inflate it with air from an ambu bag, pausing as it inflates to prevent further swelling or bursting.
Similarly if the veins are already dilated (expanded), you should increase their diameter by stitching in additional layers of skin until there is enough excess tissue around them to cover a tourniquet.
If the veins of which arm are elevated at the top of its range (as shown in your diagram), then you should cut it off so that the arm cannot be further raised; when the arm is too close to your face, make sure there will not be any injury to the skin caused by it.
If you want to remove it without the use of forceps in an environment where further use may be necessary, then please ensure that the arm is prepared for handling and will not cause any injury to the arm itself; this should be ensured by checking beforehand if there are any factors causing the need to hold onto or pull from the arm.
"That which is over the orifice of the throat should be gently pulled at all times to ensure that it is in place and does not cause any discomfort. "To determine if this which covers the arm has medicinal properties or just serves to cover it up, or is it digestive or not digestive.
"Do you consider that location in the patient's body, whether there is pain when it comes out of them or not and if it is used to release the pain.
"As your medication lasts for such a long time and the material that covers the orifice of the throat is adhered to or has adhesive properties, you may want to change it frequently, every day, or three times in a day, depending on how quickly it loses its adherence.
When you have made the space for a subtle virus to enter it will not make you lose consciousness of what is happening there as long as the healing process takes place and your body is in balance with its natural energy flow, which can bring about regeneration from the damage caused by those viruses.
If the virus has entered your body and is causing a prolonged adhesion of your joints, doctors will advise you to apply excipients with medical grade dry ice in order to correct this condition.
The remedy for the condition is to prevent it from happening and stop any excessive inflammation in its substance, and use something that can help with that.
The treatment is to make an incision when the arm is not available and get it out of there if it becomes swollen, and use a towel over that area, and sprinkle some powder on top as well; or take care with mirrors and others, and try to break everything up into dust covering your hands when you have cut them off, and put that down.
Some vegetables are recommended for arthritis and joint pain of the celestial lilies (and celestial lilies) and flour of ergot and centaur's bark, and use those simple ones or adjust them as necessary, break them up and sprinkle them on top of the powder that I have advised you to take.
When the vein is prolonged and not cured by this means, you know that there is corruption in it, so seek a fistula inquiry in bones or other hard parts, for doctors to cure as they say
To correct the veins and fingers, make incisions on both sides of the veins and on each finger separately.
To correct the veins and fingers, you should make cuts on both sides of the veins, making a cut under each finger as well. If prolonged and its cure is considered impossible or corrupted, it's advisable to open a fistula inquiry in bones or other hard parts, for doctors to deal with appropriately. The color of the vein may turn black due to this injury.
If you find out about it at the beginning of division and cannot perform your cure as described, then proceed to cauterize the affected area properly here.
If the eye and finger are healthy, then cut off all superfluous parts of the finger and cauterize it immediately to prevent further damage, for cautery is corrosive by nature unless completely burned away; cure this with medicine as soon as possible.
When the corruption has entered into one's body, then the pains are caused from this intrusion and the extracted poison, for there is never a time that it will be safe in his corrupted bowels
If times of corruption and contamination occur within the same part, then pains are caused from this intrusion and care must be taken to remove it in one of the bowels as is prescribed by memory, and apply a cure for him so that he may recover his health.
If an internal ulcer or abscess occurs and is accompanied by intense pain, then first treat the external ulcers as prescribed earlier with the transverse cuts in order to remove them from their source of pus, and ensure that these cuts do not penetrate into the flesh that surrounds it lest they cause further harm; afterwards apply care to this place where pain still occurs.
It is written that a person of these qualities will be most blessed among all men; he is as light in heart and mind as well as body, or very light-hearted and gentle natured.
The cause of the joint pain could be due to the nature or quality of one's bowels; it could also be attributed to defects in the bowels themselves. The person who has a light and gentle nature is most blessed among all men; he is particularly blessed with the joints being very light-hearted.
"Between those who are suffering from gout, the physician should open up a space on their thighs and place cushions underneath them; another servant to be placed on their legs as well, and another on their chest. The hands of these servants will hold onto them.
"For those who are not suffering from the pain caused by a joint, care should be taken to prevent its recurrence.
"For those who are not in the grip of gout pain, you should first open up your arm as if to make a fist; then put it around their neck and hold onto them.
"In consolidation of those places between their fingers that have been burned or through the nature of the man who has never had gout, by consolidating plaga [plague] or by fire, by association, such consolidation must be made so as to bring back them to their normal shape.
"Then place a subtle piece of cloth between them to prevent sticking together; separate the two, or pause between the two with a thin piece of cloth that has been consolidated so.
"And similarly if consolidation is done on the palm of their hand, then afterwards you should straighten out this consolidation so that it fits in with the shape of the body part.
"If there are two servants involved, they serve as footmen.
When veins are twisted and full of melancholy phlegm, which occurs in the members of the body and most often on the calves, but also on the legs of laborers or porters
When you administer purgative medicine to remove black bile from a patient's liver, you should also help the patient drain blood from their basilica vein
The first treatment is to cleanse it of the black bile and stop its flow; the second method is to elevate it (the vein) and extract all of it
The second treatment method is to first drain the large vein of the patient with water until it becomes full and inflamed from being clogged; then gently squeeze the vein at its source as much as possible in order to extract all of it, preferably into a separate container or onto a table, depending on your preferred location. Repeat this process as many times as you need for the quantity of black bile that is desired and how many times it will take to eliminate it from the patient.
And then, command them to abstain from any foods or beverages that contain black bile.
Then the treatment continues with phlebotomy when the veins are full and causing harm to the patient.
When the opening of the patient's legs is done in this manner: if there is pain in doing so, apply some ointment on the groin and cover it with a bandage to keep from being rubbed; or if exercise is painful because you are out of breath, do exercise very lightly until your member becomes scuffed.
You should apply it on the right side of the vein or at its tip or bottom depending where you want to put it.
You should apply the ointment all over the vein, except at its tip or bottom where it can be applied to feel for warmth.
Then you will spread and apply the ointment as much as possible without making it too thick.
Apply the ointment in a manner so that its top is elevated and its bottom is flat, avoiding having any lumps.
You should apply it in another section of the vein and then go to its start from the opposite end towards where you want to apply it.
You should lift it up and insert into the bottom section of your veins, then place it under another section towards where you want to put it, and finally move it from that second section over this one.
When joints are inflamed by phlegm that invades each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout among doctors
If the pain is severe and unbearable, it may be advisable to insert an extremely fine needle into that part of the body which is causing the pain, or place your hand over all parts involved in such a way as if you were giving yourself a shot. Remember to do not cause harm or injury, as if it were broken, you may find it difficult to raise that part and feel pain in the patient from that moment.
When all swelling has been alleviated and pain is no longer present in that location submerged by water or covered with oil, and the wound has been treated, you can move on to the next step.
If the vein is twisted and knotted in such a way that you cannot see its opening or the location of it on your body, do not force yourself to try to locate it further; instead, go directly to step 7.
Remember that you must not cause any harm or injury to the vein and may be difficult for you to elevate it; use your discretion in this matter.
Form a connection as follows:
The vein is large and flexible enough that if it were small or thin, it would pierce the vein with its subtlety; but if we add some excess fat to it as they say
To extract a vein from the calf.
This vein is generated in the calves and thighs, as well as the legs of some other peoples who are used to having little vegetation or grass.
It is also generated at the elbows, but not always on the calves.
The gesture of it is to apply a poultice, which will cause the veins and serpents and worms to come out between the flesh and the bone.
The occasion of its occurrence is when the vein becomes inflamed in the calf, and then the place is cauterized; and afterwards it closes up like a plant seed hole that has been burned.
When you notice it, the doctor will apply pressure over that part of the body, which weighs as much as one dragon's weight, and they lift away from there and let loose the powder from the calf.
And whenever you see that it has occurred at other places, apply pressure over this one as well and take away from there. When the pain extends too much, doctors remove a part of it and cover it with gauze; they do not cut off that which is superfluous inside, so as to prevent any further damage or infection.
The treatment is being applied gradually and is gradually becoming smaller day by day, until it has been completely removed from the right side of his body without falling off in any part of the body.
The vein is being held by some sort of clamp or vise-like device, and I believe it's the right one because its length matches your palm size and texture.
If the treatment is being performed during surgery, doctors remove it from his chest and perforate that part of the body, until it has been completely removed from this material, and administer putrefaction to the area for a few days after the operation; they also provide care for the wounds.
The veins in question have been damaged and are most often located at the junction of the foot or leg, as they come out through the skin when ruptured; it is difficult to determine which of them burst first.
Therefore, they cut that off with a division and place it where you said so.
The bovine gland is located in the groin area, also known as the scrotum.
This malady is called bovine mastitis because it occurs when the veins become engorged and the tissue becomes inflamed between the skin and flesh, spreading throughout the body, and causing pain in each member one by one as they rupture
The generation of it is through the putrefaction of certain humors that occur simultaneously with worms, snakes and abscesses in the belly.
It is feared by the malice of it, when it comes to the heart and rises towards the head, and penetrates the blood, causing severe pain in the body that weakens life, and this leads to certain death.
Therefore when you want to cure it and extract it, the doctors do not proceed unless they have brought out its symptoms at the earliest opportunity, and must press hard on it, and apply a cold compress over it, and extract it.
If it is found in the flesh and not taken away, the doctors must then apply a pointed cautery on that part until death occurs, which is the greatest cause of fear because corruption of it spreads throughout the body as I said before.
If it has entered the head through a vein of blood, the doctors must then press hard on the area between the skull and chest tightly, place their hand over it to prevent its escape, and extract it; also that the patient should use medications to eliminate bad humors from his bowels, and prevent new putrefaction.
In a large chamber or tent
Gout is not named in our land any more, and the pain that occurs in all members, and it is spread from member to member
You already mentioned what you're recommending You called on a female doctor to the city and discovered her breasts and saw swelling in her veins of the arm, and she said that it was swelling caused by blood clots, and that it would disappear after an hour, and when you came back to where it had occurred, there was no swelling anymore.
And as for the joint pain in that place, and after a while it settled into the muscles, so here I stay for one hour.
Then move to another part of the body towards the other arm.
Then I recommend you to rotate throughout your body the second time, and also note the change in position of them and their speed movement from one another. You already mentioned that in the best way to prevent gout attacks is to change position every 15 minutes or so from one member to another, but you have seen how difficult it can be for pain to move between members. I see that in this case the female is different.
"The woman's veins were exposed and the feeling of great warmth permeated through her body.
It is necessary to avoid reappearance after this retreat in those who are delicious and have heated veins uncovered.
If you want to cure the patient and make them feel that pain is leaving, then don't let it appear as if I said otherwise; continue to hold him gently and steadily onto that until the feeling of warmth subsides, and cauterize the area.
If you don't want to hear the cries of pain, then cure that discharge from his heart and expel those venomous snakes, as well as administer the fat pills and snake venom pills mentioned earlier.
Extraction of gallstones.
Gallstones are different depending on the location and type of bile ducts in which they occur, due to their diversity: large ones, small ones, sharp ones, flat ones, hollow ones, and sound ones (solid).
When the veins of the liver become obstructed and transgress into the heart, causing it to swell with heat, thirst, dizziness, pain in the limbs, inflammation and burning of the tongue, spasms and confusion of thought, vomiting from anger, and light-headedness is taken away by a white fluid resembling smoke, this occurs due to the location of the dry heat.
If you notice these symptoms, stop taking care and extracting the bile immediately, unless it's out of place.
The bile ducts of the liver when they reach the heart are prone to cause harm to the sternum and are accompanied by severe coldness in the extremities, weakness, dizziness, and shortness of breath. It is important to understand that death may soon follow.
When the bile ducts have passed into the lungs they emit frothy spume from the fluid, and the veins that are near to the heart become swollen, and the complexion of the patient changes color, there is great weakness, breathlessness, and great anxiety follows.
If the bile ducts enter into a cavity in the chest area and the pain occurs at the tips of the ribs, then intense pain is felt throughout the entire body, except for the muscles of the limbs.
When the cause of joint pain comes from hot humors that enter each part of the body, and when pain occurs in the foot, it is traditionally called gout by doctors
If the cause of joint pain comes from hot humors that enter each part of the body and is located in the stomach, it should be gently pressed out through its opening without making any incision or tearing the lining or intestine, so as not to allow its escape outside the stomach.
If the cause of joint pain comes from urine in the bladder and its outlet is blocked by some obstruction or disease causing frequent urination, severe pain occurs over the patient's abdomen, doctors know that it is fatal.
The other members are placed in the same way as the face, the neck, and the groin, the arms and legs, the lumbar spine, ribs, thighs, and calves, as well as on each member of the body's surface, they provide support for larger veins or arteries that do not rupture when the stomach does not leak or is not venomous.
If you would like to make notes about this procedure for yourself so that you can refer back to it later.
The cause is that there is a hole in the lacrimal duct of the eye's tear ducts at the root of the nose, and you should also extract it from another opening as well, remove the gray hairs on its outer surface and wash it gently without touching its tears.
"The first servant, who is called the nurse, will enter here and cleanse in this grey area of his hands. He will then place a finger on her forehead, making it visible to everyone but keeping it hidden from another little finger nearby that adheres to his fist, which was previously small and now great, because its owner was a Turk.
"After the first servant has completed her task, she will not speak in the man's bad accident area.
"Another servant is entering the chest area with a pointed tool. She was hidden in his abdomen and had been submerged there. Her task was to remove her, but she herself became too small.
"Another servant took the chest area and realized that she had died from it. Therefore, for some days without rest or change in anything of her disposition, she searched for the tool and was healed, but did not mention any accidents.
"A man in whom a servant was placed on his two arms, and who was very fond of her, arranged for her to be burned at the stake.
"A woman in whom a servant was placed in her abdomen, and whose body was covered with gold, did not change the disposition of her servants or reveal any natural abilities.
When another person comes to apply a mixture of wine and sulfur on the face and rubbed with salt water, causing no pain, but relieving the same
The face of someone from the prince's household who had been slapped on their nose and already declined to proceed with the right hand, was covered by a bandage
He ordered the application of the ointment inside two days
Do not apply the paste on their face directly; and when you ask for it to be applied with great caution, do not feel that one. May cause pain in the right ear, so check if this is due to an injury to the side of the head.
He ordered the application of ointment on the stomach and intestine, making sure that the place is used to prevent it from coming out this way.
He did not worry about the significant location of the abscess, continuing to apply ointment over it for several days and not causing any pain; and the bandage was applied as well between them, rubbing the patient's leg from time to time every few days until one day the abscess came out through their nose and this is what we did accordingly.
When acute corrosive medicine is applied to the ulcer quickly so that it burns immediately, and also to massage its area until, and firmly hold its tip gently, for it adheres to the skin.
Then firmly hold it in the area of the ulcer until the acute corrosive medicine is visible on its surface, and apply time for four months to heal.
And after amplifying the ulcer focus, then use tweezers to gently remove it, and do not squeeze hard or squeeze it, as pain will occur if that happens; and then restore the ulcer when you finish removing it.
Doctors judge that the nose cartilage was not restored, and you will restore it to be stable, and health is maintained through it, and do not exclude from its use for any reason.
You recommend to you the quality of extracting some stakes for pausing this rule and significance about what is not said here that I did not understand, because the divisions of this craft and its definitions are not comprehended by the narration or do not comprehend those ones free.
The artwork shows contrast with what is present, and the absence of that which is absent; and it is necessary to perform operations on strange causes when they occur.
The members in which the pain occurs are first divided into two parts, either by pulling on the part of the body where it enters, or by resisting the opposite side.
The one that is divided by the location where it enters, or should proceed to a location further away, and pulled and divided
If you cannot find a way to relieve the pain within that day, then apply some heat externally on or near the area of inflammation and wait for it to pass.
Similarly if you have it in your hands and cannot find relief immediately, apply heat externally to or near the area of inflammation every day, alternating with cold application as well, and wait for it to pass.
If you cannot find relief within a certain period of time, apply heat externally to the entire area gently, alternating with cold application as well, until the location becomes more inflamed, and then extend it.
If the abscess is already filled in that part of the body and also filled with feeling, then doctors will examine it closely, and if you feel it, they will squeeze it to drain its contents as recommended by their field.
If you cannot see it through the tightness of the skin and the length of the protrusion, and there is neither a nerve nor a vein, then doctors will examine the area closely to ensure that it has been sufficiently amplified and can be safely extracted.
If you can see all the way through to the part of the body where it was completely formed until the end of its extent that you might reach, then doctors will examine closely whether or not you can see into the area around the abscess and surrounding parts in order to squeeze it gently if necessary without causing damage.
When you administer the extractor into any location where there is, the doctors will use a pointed forceps to cut through all the surrounding tissue; and subtlety of their extraction will be such that the extractor will not break and may easily be extracted
If you can't hold the patient still during that period when pain occurs in their extremities, then the doctors will use a mild sedative to make them more relaxed If there is an opposing flow of blood, the doctors will administer clotting agents in order to control it
And when you inject into the vein or nerve, artery, and heart, and administer with all diligence to your possible prevention of the abscess; and do this in such a way as to provide ease, tranquility, and firmness, like what I recommend
Then you should arrange the abscess such that it is in line with the figure to which I direct the cutting of the abscess into it, so as to be most youthful. If this is not within your power, then you administer that which is according to my figures.
If the abscess is outside of the other side or comes out through it, then you gently extract that part away from the abscess with the help of another servant who assists in holding it down securely so as to prevent anything else coming out; and when it is extracted, do so in a way such that it is easily removed.
When the gout pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call it "gout".
Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand over that area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
If the fist is tight and you want to administer an impulse, then press into it with your finger or hand in order that between the concavity of it and the surface of the chest a servant may be placed upon it.
If the patient's chest is concave, then press that servant hard into that area, as the patient may be covered by it.
If the patient's chest is upturned or arched upwards, then you should fold all of their skin into that area as much as possible and place a servant there to prevent any disturbance.
If the chest presses onto the breast or stomach or groin or side and is close enough that you can touch it there, then put a servant on it to prevent any disturbance of vein or nerve, and return it to its place so that it may be healed.
Form of tongs are used to remove the joints
The extremities of them, when pressed with the forceps, cause pain as they grip around the joint in order to prevent it from being removed
Of these painful ones are special kinds: large and small; some moderate in size and others very small, depending on the size of the joint and its thinness or thickness, and its opening and constriction
Thus, using forceps to alleviate the distress on it and push aside the pain.
Treatment for varicose veins.
Treatment for varicose veins: use of a cautery on the affected veins, those that are at the sixth joint up towards the ear lobe, are easily touched by the fingers and are called 'little veins'; two veins that appear in the temples; prepared vein under the eyelid, and one in the nose extremity; two guide veins on the collar; two veins on the lower lip of each side; two veins on the upper lip of each side. "You have already opened up the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them.
"The first vein among them is the one that opens up curvature of the left ventricle due to wild blood flow, and the second vein opens up in the same way but for domestic blood flow.
"The veins that are close to the ears and exit from them have ancient and emaciated shapes, and ulcers of the head are also present.
"The quality of veins is to say that you recommend it: it should be placed on the head of the patient, and also on the occiput in the location where both arteries are located at the top of their heads; tighten the patient's neck with a rope inside so as to prevent them from coming out.
"Hold the cautery in your hand; it is to be applied, and prevent the vein from entering through which limb. "Lift your hand towards the vein on the arm and insert it into the incision, preventing any blood from entering through that limb. "The length of the incision should be adjusted or shortened to this amount, if necessary, and ask for the help you need.
"Hold the powder tightly and apply it in such a way that it is applied directly to where the wound is healing.
"After making an incision, proceed with the cautery of those and for them.
"The veins and arteries that accompany the beginning of phlebotomy are essential to avoid complications such as arterial bleeding, which is dangerous and can lead to severe damage.
"The quality of phlebotomy is to recommend that you: restrict the movement of the patient's arm in such a way as to prevent the two veins from protruding and showing, while at the same time allowing them to be felt with your hand.
"Lift the arm containing the vein over the incision and insert it in such a way that its veins are exposed, but not directly touching the wound itself. Then remove any excess parts of the two veins as you have already done with them.
The first sentence is: "Place a cushion under the patient's thighs and another servant on their legs.
Before remembering it (the sentence before this one), and from those who made the incision, and laying down on the table at the beginning of the free time
Then, after performing the frontal vein phlebotomy, you perform the phlebotomy of the cephalic veins in old cases and emigration; the forehead and the eyelids become red and swollen with ulcers
The quality of the phlebotomy is second to that which you recommend it, so that when the patient strains his chest towards where the vein appears, and take out the instrument called a needle, through which this operation takes place.
Pause at the point of the needle which is on top of the hole in that vein and pierce it from either side or another direction towards the patient's hand, and leave a second amount equal to what you want; then place the hole in the patient and allow them to recover for as long as you want.
Some of the dangers are increased by frontal vein phlebotomy, however it should not be as severe as other phlebotomies; from any extremity, and perform the phlebotomy across them at right angles to avoid damaging the veins when performed softly.
When the young people come with two veins that have run dry from tears of both eyes because they are in need of help and are desperate
The quality of the phlebotomy is that it should cause no pain to the patient, and be carried out with a needle
The second sentence translates to: "If the phlebotomy is performed correctly and few times in a small area where there's no skin, then it won't cause any damage; but if it's done too lightly or with excessive force on an extremity, then the extremity may be torn.
When it is necessary to run through the affected area, pause there briefly, and then proceed forward with caution, and gently approach that area.
The phlebotomy of the nasal vein causes acute fever and severe pain, especially when it occurs in the face, often being fatal.
The quality of the phlebotomy is that it should cause pain to the patient and be carried out with caution, placing the needle gently in the patient's nose and arm on their left side, being careful not to puncture the veins there lest they disappear from sight, as if a fistula were forming.
When you have finished the phlebotomy little by little and proceed from there according to your needs, gently approach that area in order to restore circulation there.
The beginning of the treatise is describing the symptoms of Leprosy, that is a skin disease characterized by sores and ulcers on various parts of the body caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of it.
The quality of Leprosy in the patient is that they are strong and persistent on each part of their body, and there is a discharge from the head towards them, and pus discharges are also present at one end.
To administer Leprosy, the vein to be treated should gradually become smaller and smaller over time until it is necessary for them to do so. And if they are doing this already, then continue as before.
By closing the veins and tightening them up so that the patient is not favored by it, you should let this continue until the wound has been healed.
The onset of Leprosy in the veins is characterized by redness, small ulcers and sores on the lips and gums, bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are present at the nostrils and throat as well.
The quality of Leprosy in the patient is that it causes them to lose their hair, and the neck skin tightens around a vein, and you should turn both labia around on either side, and check for two veins from which one is at the right side of the lips and another at the left. And demonstrating each one's presence can be done by looking at its color - those small black veins as well; and if you cannot find any incision there, that means it is present.
When you are in doubt about it, do not know what to call them, the doctors tell you to give an incision of the largest one and the most evident one among those.
And place a similar vein from those veins in their labia.
Among the large veins located in their vulva are incisions into those of the tongue, and after making them make a tracheotomy on the cricoid cartilaginous piece that they should be in front, to the vein of the auricle (ear), and the veins of the mouth.
The quality of tracheotomy is that it takes place between the patient's toes and raises their tongue, looks to prevent them from coming out with their tongue, and examines each vein separately, finding one long vein and another short vein, and the color of each changes to black.
And after tracheotomy has been performed on them: and do not forget that the final touch of tracheotomy should be made to those arteries.
The veins that were made into tracheotomies in this location are those common to all men, and the tracheotomy of theirs is done by two blows, or through a needle with olive oil at decreasing subtlety until it reaches the skin. If it does not reach it, then it should be done through cuts on the chest, holding them tight, so that they will heal well: this is their manner
The first sentence means: "Then, on the other hand, if veins are thick and contracted (meaning tortuous), it is customary to make an incision before opening them fully.
The olive phlebotomy method is for veins of less thickness and lower degree of subtlety, and it is customary to perform the procedure on veins that are subtly twisted (meaning tortuous).
The phlebotomy method of the vein called the basilica vein is one among three veins that are often used: it drains the blood from the stomach and intestines.
The phlebotomist should be careful when performing this procedure because there is an artery nearby and if he punctures it while performing the phlebotomy, he will cut off blood flow to that area so as not to perform the phlebotomy, they must hold back slightly.
If no basilica vein is visible on inspection of the arm, they should proceed to another vein or search for a third one; if performing on an arm and unable to find it, perform the phlebotomy in that part of the body instead, where it may be found (meaning if not in the arm, do it somewhere else).
When you want to perform a phlebotomy, first place the patient's arm in such a way that their elbow is towards you and your hand over it; then take the needle into position so that when you strike the artery you will hit the forearm. And remember to guard against hitting any arteries during this procedure.
When you inflate the balloon in the location where you have placed your hand on it, then remember that inflation is the inflation of an artery and so should be done carefully.
If the vein is flowing when you perform a phlebotomy that way, and it's subtle enough to be from an artery, remember that this is the sign of the artery; and then apply pressure with your finger over it if necessary in order to prevent bleeding through those fingers. And if the sign disappears entirely, make sure the artery hasn't been damaged as well.
Guard the patient from exposure to excessive heat and avoid exposing them to too much sun or rain as well.
If the sign is not removed and you suspect that something else might be wrong as well, then insert a needle into position so that when you strike it with the artery, if the extremity of the patient is injured or the vein is damaged, or if there's any pus present, do this: squeeze forcefully on the area near the elbow in order to try and force out whatever was causing the bleeding.
When the injury is healed, it is done; otherwise, apply what was previously used to prevent it from occurring again.
The removal of the wound is difficult in areas with little space and the possibility of arm movement.
The swelling of the veins is often caused by phlebotomy and can occur in the back of the head or chest area.
The phlebotomist should exercise great caution in phlebotomy to prevent complications and ensure the vein is not damaged; when puncturing the vein with a needle, it can cause numbness or paralysis of the arm if incorrect action is taken without proper experience and skill, causing difficulty in treatment and severe consequences that may result in limb loss.
If the vein lies between two nerves, you should cut it at its length.
The recent development of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it is used to treat wounds in the head area and helps alleviate symptoms from headaches.
In this case, if you want the phlebotomist to perform either superficial or deep phlebotomy, it should be carried out carefully so as not to damage any arteries or nerves.
The second sentence of the text translates to: "And if you are concerned about the phlebotomy (surgical incision made for blood letting), and it was not made by a phlebotomist in the first incision, then do not worry.
The first sentence of the text translates to: "The first thing is that phlebotomy should be performed by a medical professional in order to maintain health and prevent complications.
The second sentence of the text translates to: "After phlebotomy, it should be done within three hours after the procedure.
The last sentence of the text translates to: "Phlebotomy should be administered whenever there is a need and convenience or necessity.
When the brain is not asleep and a person is breathing in fresh air at least once every seven days (every four weeks), they are not suffering from drowsiness or fatigue but rather from the fourth month onwards to the seventh, and their sleep disturbances have already occurred for that period of time
With the aim of preventing drowsiness or fatigue from occurring in any way, when you mention the symptoms of phlebitis (inflammation of a vein), if there is evidence that it has been treated, so that blood vessels do not carry unnecessary impurities to the phlebitis of the veins, which are pure, and do not affect the main members.
With the aim of curing or preventing drowsiness, fatigue, and vomiting from occurring in any way; with it being necessary to cure or prevent phlebitis (inflammation of a vein), and not allowing the patient to be affected by other illnesses such as jaundice, dropsy, and madness; and moreover for phlebitis to be treated through cautery, and vomit, and belly exercises, and multiple kneadings of hands, feet, legs, arms, and exercise of the heart or vigils, with all causes that dissolve life, either in humans or animals.
With the aim of considering in subtlety those who have good air (pneuma), wine and food, medicine if it is possible to do so with that;
Between which causes are there no prohibitions on, or exercises that can be performed for such an exercise to maintain its subtlety
Pause the phlebotomy from this part of the body, and then move on to the third hour as we've done previously
Perform tests to check if that part of the body is being protected from all animal accidents and injuries as well, including emotional distress, anger, fear, and corporal accidents, along with excess waste, cough, cold, and similar ailments.
And the cause for which you often use in homes to have an attractive aroma and taste, as well as similar scents, will be present here according to the amount of possibility available.
Continue with the phlebotomist on a cushion that is prepared and which will be phlebotomized.
Remove your breasts and place them on the phlebotomist's lap with three support cushions, and then tighten up their limbs as we have done previously.
The temporary constriction should be used if the constriction is not permanent or it's excessive, and pain results in the area of the constriction occurs due to the excess waste. If the restriction is beneficial, then a constriction can block off the body part.
Apply the constrictive bandage so that it covers the body part to which veins become swollen and declared by the feeling.
"Place a cushion under them and another servant on their legs as well as one more on their chest with both hands, holding the patient's hand.
And then, in order to be certain that the phlebotomist is ready and solicit all these causes
And if the vein is burst in a sudden manner, then you stop and repeat this action until the location is corrected or until the phlebotomist indicates that it has been done correctly
And if the vein is burst or the patient becomes worse, then you lay it down for one day or two and don't press too hard because applying pressure could cause more harm than good
Then repeat the phlebotomy as needed
If the incision is very small and you're afraid it might not be enough or too much pressure, then repeat the phlebotomy in that vein after checking to ensure it has been done correctly, making sure only a little pressure should apply when the location is corrected, because applying too much pressure could cause harm if the location still hasn't been properly addressed.
When many times that has happened before, the pain will not cease until there is a cause to eliminate and stop it from occurring again. And you must stop any part of the opening wound in order to prevent the illness from recurring. The worst thing about this location, as well as other things.
The same treatment is applied to all wounds of any kind in the full scope of phlebotomia, that prevents the blood from flowing into the heart and makes the veins sick when stopped by pressing one of those on it, as it is delicate and may be rolled up when held in place poorly or roughly.
If at the location of phlebotomia is born great pain that comes and goes often, more than from one that does not bleed only when it bleeds, or in the presence of a thin vein, and you hold tight to the area, and pause over the place sponged with water and salt for a short while, and strain it for an hour, as it dissolves.
So that you apply this to the vein of the body or any other vein.
If there is a darkness or green appearance at the location for several days, do not apply this; and if you want to, pause over any cause of elimination or reflection dissolution, or some other causes as well.
The first sentence translates to: "The demons are vanquished by the holy water.
The second sentence translates to: "When you are about to perform an operation on the artery, make sure that it is not obstructed by any cause mentioned in what has been said.
The third sentence translates to: "And if the artery is stiff due to coldness, then apply a hot compress and another cure to make it supple.
The fourth sentence translates to: "Take the length of the artery, its thickness and its color as reference points when removing it.
The fifth sentence translates to: "If the artery is dark, it must be removed gently so that its roughness does not interfere with its smoothness. And if it is thick, it must be removed gently so as to preserve subtlety. If it is thin or has sharp edges, then care should be taken regarding its sharpness.
The sixth sentence translates to: "And if the artery is long and thick, requiring removal of it in one go, amplify both phlebotomy and phlebotomy should be carried out.
The seventh sentence translates to: "And when it is short and narrow, do the opposite of what you did before, cutting it in several pieces, and make sure that the cut is smooth.
The first sentence translates to: "The method of administering phlebotomy for bloodletting is by making a transverse incision, not puncturing.
The second sentence translates to: "This phlebotomy method is safe from the flow of blood and nerve injury, and it's pushed back so that phlebotomy can occur at the appropriate latitude and longitude.
The third sentence translates to: "And when you come upon phlebotomy, it's customary to administer it with a small vein or artery puncture and then extract the blood in three or four ways.
The fourth sentence translates to: "And if it's necessary for phlebotomy, then administer it by puncturing the vein or artery with a specific flavor like ginger, cinnamon, peppermint, and other spices, or by a flavored but non-odoriferous substance.
The fifth sentence translates to: "If phlebotomy is necessary but you don't have a specific vein or artery, then administer it with the juice of flesh and the non-odoriferous substance mentioned previously; use flavor as well in order to make the extraction subtle.
The sixth sentence translates to: "Use the reasons mentioned earlier for division into the capital of phlebotomy for evacuation.
When the first and second veins of blood are opened and dissolved, to let out the fourth vein for the purpose of discharging the blood, it is customary for him who has done this to evacuate or purge himself gradually by taking small doses over a period of time equal in quantity to the extent of the discharge.
Those who want to open the first and second veins of blood will make a big mistake if they do so without waiting for the purging or discharging of the first vein
Those who want to open up the heart's vein against what it declines or refuses will do so only on the second day or third day.
Those whose heart's vein has already been cut and is bleeding or giving feverish symptoms will have to do it in a day without delay and at the greatest quantity, so that the incision between them can be closed as quickly as possible. If not done with great caution by a skilled person who knows what they are doing, it may cause death through excessive bleeding
Do not do it when you want to open the veins and evacuate the second vein because once you have closed off the artery of the vein and it becomes difficult to extract it due to its resistance, then you must proceed with great force and make sure that the incision is wide enough, lest this be a mistake.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And if the vein has become blocked, then the doctor should apply pressure to prevent the veins from collapsing.
And if it is necessary to evacuate the intestine for a second time without excuse, then the doctor should put pressure on one location or another arm into another vein.
The blocked vein is called the "vein of the arm" if it occurs in the wrist or palm of the hand when they are not covered or protected, which consists of those veins.
The quality of the blocked vein is that it enters into contact with the patient's hand in a downward direction, causing the veins to become inflamed and visible immediately.
Then place pressure on that vein in a way such that it does not obstruct the artery or the transverse veins, but only longitudinally.
Then make an incision both wide and deep enough to make a small cut on the joint of your hand.
If the flow of blood is prohibited, then put your hand in water and apply pressure to the vein so that the vein runs in water towards where you need it.
When you are in the days of summer, pains occur from accumulation of bile in the heart, and it is customarily called "gallstones" by doctors.
The bleeding from this vein must be stopped, as all other veins are closed off that it is not pulsating or nervous.
Bleeding from the right side of the liver is considered to be a symptom of gallbladder disease.
The quality of the bleeding is that you should stretch your arm or hand towards it, pushing on it so as to make a cavity, and if the vein is swollen and can be demonstrated at once, then make a transverse incision; but if not all veins are there in this case, do nothing more.
Continue to hold tight your hand against the bleeding, as it may be necessary to remove the nerve endings from the flesh of that part.
Push your hand into the water to lead the flow away from that, as if you do not press on it in the water the flow will clot in the neck of the vein and be prohibited by flow.
As the quantity of necessity increases, pains will stop above the vein and fall off gently, so that it is not consolidated firmly; similarly you do as much in all other limbs.
May I help you with something else?
Do you mean "like in the phlebotomy of this, as we did in the other"?
The vein puncture in phlebotomy should be performed by the same person as did it for the other procedure; after that, proceed with procedures involving veins (sephena), ulcers and varicose veins of the legs, and make sure to examine the feet and ankles carefully.
The quality of phlebotomy is that the patient will feel a constriction in his or her arm as they are punctured and place their hand over it to prevent the blood from flowing out; then lay on the puncture site, causing the veins to appear more prominent; examine both feet for any signs of varicose vein formation.
Phlebotomy should take place only once in a while; after that the veins will enlarge and become more prominent over time, which is desirable.
If you perform phlebotomy on the surface of the foot, make sure to take precautions not to cause any damage to the nerves that are present there, and then stop your phlebotomy procedure until you feel comfortable performing it again.
The first sentence translates to "It is a phlebotomy.
If you are prohibited from injecting the patient, then place a finger in their mouth and make them swallow the medication to ensure that it enters into the stomach and is expelled as quickly as possible through vomiting.
If the phlebotomist is in danger of suffocation during the first attempt, then place it quickly on their chest and start chest compressions to prevent them from choking.
Similarly, do the same with the other vein as well.
For the sciatic vein, place it in the area where you would normally find the femoral artery.
The youthfulness of the phlebotomy procedure is crucial when there's a risk of bleeding during puncturing.
The quality of the phlebotomy procedure is that the patient becomes pale, faints and weakens as a result of the pressure on their arm during puncturing due to the narrow artery between the elbow and wrist which is quite evident in this case.
Then when it appears, you will phlebotomize that second vein which is easy to find and more suitable for this procedure or if the first one does not work, then go on to puncture another vein closer to your goal.
When the patient has been laid on their side, if they are not moved gently, pain will ensue in both arms and hands, and it is that which presses upon the ear and nose.
Keep your nerve tension down; do what you want to the extent of its severity.
Open up the fistula and place it gently over where the phlebotomy was made; stretch that area to prevent any discomfort or pain
From exhaustion and the quality of using those things.
The feet are in pain, or the legs, or the soles.
The two fingers are cut off; one cuts away the pain and extract it from there, while another simply causes scarring.
This type of cutting that results in scarring is second among two types; one cuts away the pain and extracts it from there, while another simply causes scarring
The areas where the ulcers are administered with incision and extraction of pain include: the forehead area, the chin, the nose, both nostrils, both cheeks (the left and right), both eyes, both ears, both elbows, both thighs, two fingers on each hand, two toes, both knees.
When the swelling of veins is seen in the skin and not through any other means, it signifies that circulation to those parts has been interrupted; therefore if you wish for them to become healthy again, immediately apply a poultice made from fresh bread soaked in honey.
If you wish to prevent swelling from continuing or recurring, we recommend applying the poultice at any time during the month and at the end of it, in all parts where it is necessary to apply it.
When swelling is caused by any of the above causes and especially if it occurs in the third or middle part of the month, doctors recommend applying heat to help relieve it quickly.
Sudden swelling of the neck is what occurs when weight is felt in the head, and this often leads to the intestine coming out through the mouth.
This is a medical procedure performed on the head region
It must not be used when it has a complication, or in those cases where it causes great harm.
Do not use these methods on the parts that are inflamed, as they cause inflammation.
Do not continue to apply it excessively without stopping, and for this reason you should command the applicator to pause his hand just slightly above the areas that are inflamed, in order to prevent the generation of blisters.
It is done on the area around the affected vein and the basilica, to treat edema, restrictions of the veins and the rupture of the walls of the veins, thrombosis, and varicose veins.
You should not apply it excessively, as if you stop doing so will cause weakness in the body and the stomach.
It treats headaches and occipitalgia (pain in the back of the head), emetophobia (fear of vomiting or throwing up), photophobia (fear of light), and dental pain, and is done on the area around the basilica (the base of the skull).
You should command the applicator not to apply excessive pressure, so that it does not cause bleeding and stops blood flow.
The first sentence is: "You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them...
The second sentence is: "The numbness that occurs at the fingertips is caused by coldness.
The second sentence is: "The numbness that occurs at the fingertips is caused by coldness and can be due to the basilica artery, facial artery, or cephalic artery.
The third sentence is: "The phlebotomist must not cause the incision to bleed, as this would damage the flesh and arteries.
The fourth sentence is: "This numbness arises from the toes to buttocks, and from hemorrhoids on the anus.
The fifth sentence is: "And command the phlebotomist to make a large incision that allows for easy movement, and fine sutures are used instead of coarse ones.
The sixth sentence is: "The numbness extends from the thighs down to the toes and also affects the anus, bladder, and both ovaries.
"The doctor begins by touching every part of the body in turn.
"The first step is to place cushions beneath both thighs, with another servant on their legs and one more on their chest.
"The position of the cushions is that you place them at the beginning and remove them quickly to prevent prolonged pressure on them, especially if pain arises from their use, stop using them immediately and remain calm. "Do not continue repeating this until you see the affected area become numb and inflamed, and appear the sign of gout.
"The pain gradually decreases and is repeated infrequently, allowing for consideration in regard to the body's position.
"If someone has a tendency towards gouty arthritis, be cautious in removing any food or drink to prevent the location from becoming ulcerated.
"The cushion maker should gradually increase the pressure and then slowly ease it off, always making sure to apply it gently.
"If the pain is severe, be cautious in removing two doses at once, as one should first ease off gradually then remove them quickly. "When applying the second dose of the gout treatment, it is important to pay close attention to the location where it is applied and how it affects the body.
When there's a foul odor coming from the bowels, do wash them thoroughly to prevent the spread of the putrefaction
And when we want to extract it little by little or just a bit, use a wash
And if we want to extract it, wash with a more vigorous wash; and if we suspect that the foul odor is large, doctors suggest washing with a stronger wash.
The term 'scarficiation' refers to the depth of cleansing only.
If that which causes the putrefaction is large and harsh, then in times of summer, it smells like rotten eggs or violets; in winter, they are more liquid-like or like damp earth; and if it's from a foul smell, you add those scents together.
If there's too much of it, add the scents mentioned above, or any other scent that smells good to you.
If the ventozador is made of tender meat, doctors advise to prohibit using oil and instead wash with cold water or water mixed with vinegar, or water mixed with a bitter herb; any of these scents are added together.
When someone has a fever from excessive moisture, place their hands in warm water and vinegar or wine and salt solution to cool down the heat.
For someone with excess fat in their urine, place their hands in warm water and vinegar or wine and salt solution to cool down the heat.
Keep their hands covered until they are given to be washed, and give them the opportunity to wash for one hour or two hours depending on how much soap is needed, and rest the hands after washing.
What should you do before washing your hands?
Before washing your hands: if you are using hand sanitizer or that has been used for phlebotomy (removal of blood from the skin) it can cause burns and inflammation; in such cases, wash your hands with warm water, alcohol wipes, aloe vera gel, and lemon juice to soothe them.
Before drying your hands: squeeze out excess liquid from the towels, rub the towels with sandpaper, and dry them on paper to avoid leaving lint marks.
For someone who has fever due to fatigue: drink warm water and vinegar or wine and salt solution; also consume aloe vera gel, lemon juice between meals and not during meals; and dry your hands with a cloth that has been rubbed on sandpaper.
On the day of vomiting and bleeding, drink more water than usual
Drink water every hour or two during vomiting and bleeding in order to keep the body well hydrated without causing discomfort
The vomitings should cease when the vomiting is frequent and stops after it has been vomited up for a while (a few minutes). Avoid the use of antacids if you have ulcers or kidney problems, in the upper part of your throat especially (the larynx), as well as the umbelic artery, in the hollows of the joints, and the pulse of the foot.
Do not use it on the member itself unless there is also pain in the ear from a blocked eustachian tube, or if there is nausea and vomiting of the stomach contents (gastric reflux). Avoid using it over the abdomen and umbilicus to prevent injury to those areas, as well as preventing the foot pulse.
Place a cushion over their head when they lie down or sit up, to prevent injury from falling back heavily and remove any vomit that has accumulated there.
Do the same as you would when lying down or sitting up, in order to prevent vomiting from accumulating in those areas.
When joints are affected by cold humors that penetrate every part of the body, pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call gout on doctors
You have already placed a cushion under them and another servant on their legs.
This is because the vein is filled and swollen, whether it's water or any other liquid that might be present in this area.
The way to administer venison through fire: the amount of the venison is that of a palm; and it should be given in the place where it is on its track, leaving it small as the quantity between one needle and this area.
It should be eaten raw or cooked, as long as it is well-cooked; otherwise the member of the body will not keep its place on it.
It can be cut across or diagonally, as long as it is kept hot over fire.
It should be that of the great one we have recommended, and less of the other for the thighs and its state when used on it.
The veins from the extremities and those from large-sized individuals are different than those from young and thin individuals.
"The quality of stopping the cautery fire over a member is to extend it with fuel gently while keeping it away from the transverse vein in the middle of the venetian slit, so that the fire may be lit without burning into the heart of the patient.
"The cautery is then placed over the patient's member and it is said to be on top of the vein mentioned earlier, so that when you have the venetian slit open and do not suggest removing the cautery or touching the vein while the steam covers the slit, the gout will be dissolved.
"Then proceed to move your hand next to his/her elbow, and make sure you are away from that.
"In the case of gout in the limbs, it is administered as mentioned earlier, except that there must be no transverse veins or slits and it should instead be filled with water.
"It is as follows: The greater the gout, the more beneficial it is to receive a large amount of water.
This is the end of the medieval medical treatise in its original language and spelling.
Gout is not administered in the members themselves but only in those limbs where it is impossible to place the venetian slit, for the sake of these limbs they may be eaten and drunk like them; or in a member of flesh, as mentioned earlier.
The quality of using those that if you have found veins that are in the vessels of blood
The servant is to remove the bowels from the beginning of a phlebotomy and vents, and to put them in order, prevent any cause in the belly of those, evacuate the body through the incision and wounds, and place them over.
And when they are full and ready
If it is possible to apply a cold compress, do so immediately.
And if not, the doctor will remove the cloth and apply warm water.
If the pain lasts too long and the patient is unable to endure it anymore, the doctor will put a cold cloth on them and remove another from over so that its heat can be removed.
If the patient's condition worsens and the pain increases, the doctor will powder over them with a solution of tartar emetic or show symptoms of specific causes inside the body, to be removed; or they should place cushions on that part so that they don't hurt themselves.
And if necessary, an application of veins when it is possible to change them.
When the blood vessels are forbidden from suspension, then the pain occurs near or at a sharp point in the place where it feels as if it were a sharp one; and when those who feel any pain stop them
When you want to reduce the pain, sprinkle on top of it a little bit of alum, salt or cinnamon powder, and cover
The beginning part of the sentence translates to "then begin the treatment for the restoration. This capital phrase is necessary in the field of medicine, and it refers to the treatment for fractures or dislocations that occur in bones.
Oh sonnet, say that the wise doctors and those skilled in their trade, who have long ago forgotten the rules of the ancients or those bound by them will not understand this sentence.
For this reason, the study of medicine in our land is private; and you should not teach it to those who are bound by their times or who have forgotten about them or those who do not know the rules of the ancients or understand them deeply, unless they study the texts of the ancients and investigate into the meaning of these.
Then apply your experiment and research in the length of your life.
Then describe in this capital everything that concerns your science and about which you have made the best experiment; put what has been added to you others, deliver it of occupation length; and bring it to an end with declaration, and form it according to forms used for administration as is done by addition of declaration just like two previous capitals.
The First Physician
Our task is to understand the meaning of this text and translate it line by line into English, starting from here: Now, let us proceed to the beginning of this chapter and translate it carefully.
If a fracture, dislocation or sprain occurs to any member of the body and you suspect an artery, vein or nerve, then it must be treated by phlebotomy or leech cupping; if not, as with a broken bone, or when affected by time, coldness, heat, humidity, or if there is evidence of gout.
And in addition to the previously mentioned things we must also be careful with herbs and plants that fill or block the veins of the affected person, so as not to cause any leakage from the vein; if you are afraid of the discharge of matter into the member itself.
And the physician returns the patient to their first course, which is customarily prescribed by them.
And when the bone is broken it begins to be restored, and a nourishing diet rich in fat must also begin which will have the following properties: moisture, fire, coldness, weightiness of animals (meat), air, warmth, grease, fresh vegetables and suchlike are all beneficial for this regimen; and along with coagulation at fracture prevention there is also a rule that it should be given to people who have gout.
When bones are broken when they occur in the first place and later on, it is not possible for them to continue or consolidate themselves secondarily due to the drying out of their members' parts.
Nature adjusts and repairs the broken bone with great difficulty in a way that they bind together tightly once again, even if it takes a long time to heal and strengthen them, until finally at the end of strength and firmness, just like when it first happens, except for any cause not forbidden by doctors.
In order to prevent the swelling of a patient, bandages in which there is great thickness and viscosity as well as bulkiness are necessary, just as I've said.
Various types of fractures depending on the diversity of members, where a fracture in one arm is different from a fracture in the head; and the fracture in the foot is different from the fracture in both legs; and similarly all the other members are different among themselves.
"The patient shall remember to take a specific type of fracture, which has been explained in its own chapter.
Different types of fractures here There are different kinds of fractures categorized into their own sections: arched fractures, those that occur in the heel; and certain jagged ones due to length; there are also saddle-shaped and compound fractures which proceed and do not proceed; and last but not least, small transverse fractures
In all kinds of restoration, it is necessary to remember the specific instructions separately in those places.
Sentence about fracture bone The sentence describes a twisted bone with significant tenderness and pain when touched at the site of injury.
If there is no visible deformity and it does not feel broken when touched at the site of injury, then the pain you are experiencing is not due to a fracture.
It is possible that you have a sprain or a small fracture, and the pain can be lessened by gently touching it at your touch point while compressing everything around it; take care to strain no further, pause on the medical instructions for this moment when they suggest treatment in that place; and it should proceed carefully.
When the body bends and does not divide into two or more pieces (that is, when it is curved), then pain occurs in that part of the body, so doctors call it colic.
If the pointed cautery is applied to that part of the body, then doctors will apply it every few days until the pain subsides and the abscess heals.
The restoration or excision of that part, depending on which is more suitable, can be done less invasively in the area where the pain occurs.
Then place another servant to assist with the memory.
If that body part is torn in two, then the doctors will be necessary to extract it completely from both sides, if it's the arm or leg; otherwise place your hand on one side and hold it tightly.
Position yourself as if you were holding the body part in its natural position while stretching it out, and make sure that all the parts of the body are extended from that limb.
Make sure you do not touch the patient's abdomen during your operation or injury, and ensure that both of your hands are placed next to each other in order to perform these tasks.
When it is convenient to touch your hand on top of that, and if there are no other causes for pain, adjust the treatment as needed based on how much you feel.
Violent stretching and compression are performed with sharp instruments to perform the operation, or they can also apply a counterpressure technique on that part of the body where the treatment was applied for the previous injuries.
The quality of the member's stricture should be such that you know how different members can vary in their size, shape, and form depending on these qualities.
The people who are small should have the same type of bandage as they do on their arms and face.
When large masses occur in the thigh or leg, such that they enclose and harden all around, causing the joint to be stiffened from every direction, then it is called "thrombophlebitis" by doctors
With the fracture in place and after making it convenient to apply the cautery here, on that area with three or four folds of cloth for the member will be stretched out a little bit more.
With that area of the fracture now set to its proper position and having stretched out as much as you can without burning yourself while holding the place where the fracture is, it's time for the cautery. With that area of the fracture enclosed with a few folds and having loosened it a little at a time until you can release all of its tension, it is finally time for cautery.
With one more fold and wrap it tightly around the fractured area, then remove all but a few of the folds from the fracture; and your operation will be in tightening up that area while loosening the others as you described earlier for this particular area.
With the folds between the two ends or strips around that area being as tightly wound as possible while ensuring it is smooth and without any wrinkles, if there are any; otherwise, you should not pause in applying pressure to this particular area.
When you have already placed a cushion under the patient's thighs, another one on their legs and another on their chest while holding their hands, now comes the first sentence to translate: And place the second cushion gently above these blankets so that it covers both ends of them if there is no swelling or discharge in this area.
The cushions of the mattress are to be made so that they have a certain thickness. Alternatively, you can form them out of felt or cloth. Or, if preferred, from palm leaves; and each cushion is to have its own width in proportion to this shape and size
However, the cushion placed on that fracture should be thicker and smaller than those of the others, as well as proportional in length to the size and width of the member being treated. And place them evenly over each other according to your first suggestion, keeping it firm as you've suggested; and let it remain firmly pressed against whatever is there at the time when treating that particular fracture, with its pressure gradually reduced along the way as the treatment progresses.
And the wires should be thinner and more delicate in both thickness and subtlety; as well as lighter if they are too heavy, so that during the operation of placing them over any tendons or ligaments it is necessary to gently stretch these strings separately from those of the hand, which can cause mistakes and incorrect positioning.
When very small, they are not very comfortable to wear because you cannot tightly tighten them and there will be a space between one finger
If the patient is being treated in their extremities of the legs and arms, do not loosen the restraints too much because it could cause injury to them.
Some breaks may be fractured and cause disruption in the dialogue, and you will remember it as a single entity.
If a member is broken and the cause is known, it should not be dressed with stitches from day one; rather, as it grows, you can remove them gradually over time or weeks depending on your safety concern for avoiding infection of wounds.
This refers to the plaster cast that ancient physicians used when fractures and dislocations occurred; they would be placed over a break or dislocation and twisted.
The cast for fracture restoration is designed to be both rigid and flexible; it's more suitable for the hands, feet, and extremities because it does not cause heat or sweat, while allowing freedom of motion in the joints.
When you use it this way, do not loosen its grip or flexibility, and leave the adjustable part unchanged to maintain its effectiveness.
Another method for broken bones and dislocations is to use acid or alkaline substances such as lapdunum (a type of linden fruit), acacia, enula, migrach, and more: these are remedies that help heal the wounds quickly. It should be applied immediately after the injury occurs; and in case the completeness of the patient's wound has been broken apart, it is appropriate to use this method because it provides a good composition with healing properties and restores the bones torn apart by accident.
Another method to use when fractures and dislocations occur is a mixture of migrach and white alum (potassium aluminum sulfate) applied with a pointed cautery, such as: apply the mixture to the fracture or dislocation by pressing gently on it using the pointed cautery; perform this action after applying the remedy immediately following the injury occurs.
In case of wounds that are infected or have become contaminated with dirt and filth: wash the wound thoroughly by pouring water over it; after doing so, treat the wound using a remedy containing alum (potassium aluminum sulfate).
A method to separate the joints and bones from one another is by using sutures or by submerging them in warm oil; also place a cushion over the area where it has occurred.
In this location, it is necessary to make a restoration of the incision, carefully stitching up and removing pains immediately.
Another way to restore the incision which has been made: use fig leaves and wild poppy seeds; cover it all over, sealing up the incision
Another way to restore an incision that has broken open: take a piece of thread from another person and sew it up while covering with camomile flowers, violet flowers, and flour of iris, carefully making sure the member is not cut
If you have been cut, then soak that with cold water or any other liquid
Another way to restore the member when pain occurs after the first incision: use iris flowers and violet flowers, as well as poppy seeds, flax seed flour, and all the parts cut up; sew it together tightly and then cover with cold water or any other liquid, making sure that the quality of the member is not damaged
Another way to restore the member when pain occurs after the first incision: you should leave a cushion over it, and not allow anything else to touch or press against it, except for oil, so that it is gentle between thickness and subtlety.
"The bone is broken; its restoration and the causes that led to it drying out are being attended to by our experts.
"The measures for the injury and pain: rest, cold compresses or ice packs to reduce swelling or discomfort, elevate the affected limb and cushion it with a pillow.
"If the wound has not caused pain or swelling and it is unlikely that any of your bones have been broken, then you do not need to rest for more than a day. "If there is severe pain or swelling at the site of injury, then you should seek medical attention immediately and apply a compress.
"Soak a sponge in saltwater and place it on the inflamed area to reduce swelling; rest the affected limb for an hour; soak the bandage soaked with vinegar into water or oil and apply it to prevent further swelling, ensuring that you do not burn yourself.
"Then gently and carefully apply a small bandage to the affected area without causing undue stress on your first aid kit; subtly adjust it so that it is comfortable.
When the swelling and pain become too severe to bear, and all other symptoms are gone, then your treatment should be a sharp incision.
If no cause is found for the swelling and pain mentioned above, then in three days or four you will not use that treatment anymore; but if fractures occur, you should approach coagulation of the flesh over that area.
The doctor adjusts the incision in order to make it as large as possible, and also to increase the swelling of the patient's body after its first stricture has been done.
The nutrition is prohibited to prevent further fracture occurrences, and you must wrap the area tightly with tape until healing occurs in three days.
The restoration of the fractured member must be done by restorers after another treatment if it is not restored at first attempt, and should continue until all tortuosities are dealt with; there will be error in healing second time through surgery, and great pain, as those who have undergone this procedure before can attest.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
If a fracture happens to the head
Absolute fracture
The severity of these two fractures can be great or small, and the fracture that is crooked or twisted; and their cause is a blow to the bone or its vicinity, in accordance with tradition.
This fracture may be a penetrating one near the nasal cavity where it is lodged in the bone; or it may be on the surface of the bone itself, and the severity of these two fractures can vary greatly.
The fracture that is accompanied by a small needle in the bone is called capillary fracture.
The fracture that is caused by blow or pressure to the bone and its vicinity, which causes a thin lamina of tissue around it to tear off, so that it enters the cavity as when impact occurs and is torn out from the site
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, then seek medical help
And if there are fractures in any of these parts, they should be separated with care. You must make the necessary arrangements for everything here
All the fractures of these parts should be examined and tested to determine their cause, as well as searching for any evidence of corrupted flesh that may cover them.
One specific capillary is used to find out what the cause of it was and remove any evidence of attempted healing where the fracture has already healed.
In the treatment of fractures, consider first the injuries that accompanied it, such as bruises or cuts, and any other symptoms like vomiting or loss of consciousness, as well as sudden illness and dizziness from them, and numbness in certain areas, as well as any other accidents occurring simultaneously with it, and look for these symptoms together.
If there are no injuries or cuts that accompany the fracture, you should start treating the injury right away.
The cause is what if you find the injury in its first days and this happens during winter months, then consider studying it from morning to evening on that day and every other day for a total of 14 days.
When it is hot outside and the pain strikes one day after eating oily food, you must ensure that its cause has been cured completely and look for any accidents which may have occurred during this time
If the fracture has been caused by the gallbladder entering through the colon, and is accompanied by small and frequent bowel movements, doctors advise to examine thoroughly and find any accidents that may have occurred during this time.
If you suspect the gallbladder is causing problems and examine the abdomen thoroughly as well as look for any ulcers or other signs of an ulcer on the body, it would be wise to consult with doctors about this matter.
If you suspect appendicitis may be causing the symptoms or pain, take a rest and look for signs of fluid accumulation in the abdomen and around the gallbladder, also make sure to prevent fluid from coming out while the gallbladder is swelling down by taking rest as well as ensuring that the pain has been reduced enough.
This would be one of two options for surgery.
The first option is to cut into the abdomen and perform a laparoscopic cholecystectomy, which includes making a small incision below it. Another way is to make an incision above it as well.
The servant brings a second cushion
The servant will take you to various cushions of different hardness, which are placed at the edge of your bed, and they must be soft enough for others who may sleep there as well
The servant will use a pillow made of soft fabric to prevent the head from touching or being injured by the cushion.
If the cushion is too firm or tough to administer in a manner that does not allow for administering of other cushions during your stay, then they are called shallow cushions.
The cushions are not called shallow but rather those that do not allow for the insertion of one's foot into their cavity or margin in such a way as to prevent it from passing through them and being swallowed up by the bowels.
It is advisable to choose from a large number of cushions that cater to the size and shape of each individual anus, so if you are in front of a testicle with an acutely pointed tip, the length and width should be adjusted based on its level of spiciness.
The three types of cushions are: Perforating the broken anus is to place a cushion over it and press down firmly until you know that the anus has been penetrated; in addition, allow another location for when needed, between which all of its bulk will be inserted.
When the opening between a patient's thighs is complete and you have made them comfortable with cushions, place your hand over their abdomen to prevent any spillage, or if there are any other causes for concern that require attention near here, use fine tweezers.
Be very careful not to touch anything that could cause harm.
When you have completed the incision and it is separated from the cavity if there was any, you will remove that, be careful not to touch anything else similar in shape or size near the opening of the abdomen area as well.
If you encounter no difficulty in removing the bones or ribs and they are easily taken, then place them gently on a cloth as directed.
The other procedure is easier and less frightening. It consists of making a small incision in the location where you suspect the fracture to be, and then when it has been opened and closed, place your hand gently over their limb as directed.
If the small incision is successful and no complications occur, and if you suspect that it was at the top of the limb as directed, then adjust your smaller incision to match the one made in the abdomen area.
When you have opened up the space between the thighs of a patient and placed a cushion underneath them, another attendant is positioned on their legs, and another is located on their chest holding their hands, ready to assist in any way necessary as they wake up from being sedated.
There should be no additional causes for the pain in the limbs, except for that of an inguinal hernia near the femoral region, or any other location on one of the legs, which would cause pain from the relief and warmth applied to facilitate movement and circulation.
If the pain is not caused by an inguinal hernia near the femoral region, then this may be a result of that which has been removed or replaced with artificial substitutes in its place, and these are applied gently and discreetly to facilitate movement and circulation.
When administering the medication to begin with the most gradual phase of these medications, and be sure to use the least subtle part first, ensuring that you do not cease doing so until all phases are complete.
With any of the other small capillary fractures or subtle fractures, you should administer the treatment as soon as possible after the correction has been made.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body And it is customary to show fractures in large breaks.
If the patient has a hernia, it is customary to place another bandage over the area and hold their hand over the abdomen to prevent the intestine from coming out.
Do this cure for a day or two until you are sure to prevent pain; and then remove it and give them the necessary medicines such as those made from flaxseed and barley flour, along with mustard oil, and all these and their kind, in order that they may help heal.
Do you want the medicine to be sprinkled on the wound as well?
Be sure to keep the wound clean during your care for it; and do not add any harmful substances or viruses; nor should you be adding more virulence into it; when adjusted over the hernia of the belly, cover it with a bandage that is good enough and prevent it from falling out, and apply on top a bad malicious illness.
When the abscess of the head appears, if its symptoms are felt and experienced by the treatment given to it, it is darker in color than any other spot; therefore consider that these pains are very dangerous.
If the abscess does not become darker or if its treatment is interrupted and it returns to being lighter in color, consider that you must apply heat regularly every three hours, and cover with a cloth over the abscess; and maintain care for the specific area of treatment until he becomes healthy
And so on
When the nose is broken
If it is not broken in the nose but rather happens twice, and one of them may be caused by something stuck inside (such as a piece of food), for which you need to remove both the obstruction and prevent further complications such as pain, difficulty breathing, and vomiting.
If one of the two parts is broken and you manage to insert a small object into the nose, so that it touches the bone inside (such as a toothpick), and hold this position until the nose returns to its normal shape. Do this for your own convenience, but remember not to touch it while performing an operation on a patient.
When a fracture is at the top of the nose and it goes down to that point, then doctors call it a greenstick fracture.
If it's a double fracture, they say something like this:
After the first day of a fracture if it is possible to do so:
If the fracture is in one part of the nose or if it's a double fracture and large enough to block the nasal passage.
The ancient restorers say that the bandages should be soaked in water, and changed every day if they are swollen, but you can also keep them moist with a compress of cotton wool.
Some gauze should be inserted into the nose in place of a bandage to prevent any loose cloth from being stuffed up there, and it is also recommended that you not inspire deeply while having a broken nose as this could make breathing difficult.
However, if necessary, have them anyway and if desired, use gauze.
If any other kind of bandage is required to be inserted into the nasal cavity, it can either be inserted through a nostril or by having an incision made and oil poured in, depending on preference.
When a patient's bowels stop working properly and the body is covered in excrement, it is customary to apply oil made from sesame seeds and pepper to prevent such cases of inflammation on the outside of the anus, and not let the nose be affected by any cause.
If the bones of the nose are broken or there is a small fracture, doctors will cut them and extract what they contain, using an instrument for that purpose; then close it with oil to bind up the wound
If a patient has a bleeding nose, doctors will treat that by applying cold water and using tubes of lead to stop the bleeding.
This sentence does not make sense in English because "capital" is an adjective meaning important or significant, but there are no nouns following it that would provide further context for its use as a noun.
When the lower jaw is broken
When the lower jaw is broken and the fracture is not too severe, doctors will have it fixed as soon as possible, without splitting it in half and straightening its ends.
In both cases, if the fracture is on the right side of the mouth, you should tell them to insert a small stick into their right ear; and similarly if it's on the left side of the jaw, doctors will ask for that same sign from your left hand. Then they tie up the mouth in order to facilitate its treatment, making sure not to do harm to either part.
When a fracture of the mandible is separated into two parts and doctors administer extensions to both sides in order to allow for its reduction?
When a concussion of the teeth disrupts chewing and doctors strengthen those that can be removed by gold or silver or iron; then place a restraint over the fractured jaw bone, another on the duplicate jaw strap, one over a large cloth to prevent it from being torn away, or if necessary only use one at the length of the mandible; and then apply this in such a way that you put your hand on the side where the dislocation took place, and arrange the application
Command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and pause swallowing of food.
If the form is altered in any way, then put it down on the third day; and correct this alteration of his clothing by placing a small piece of wool, or cotton album, or flour for rice paste over the cloth sores.
After putting the cloth on him and ensuring there is no alteration in its placement, let it be, so that this fracture may be healed within three days.
If any other illness occurs at the same time, doctors administer this so that he is healthy and cured of this ailment.
When a fracture is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, doctors consider separating it or cauterizing it, they gently advise you to open those satagias here where this happens and then close them at the end of the treatment
If the rupture is severe, doctors recommend intensifying it with phlebotomy based on the amount of need for treatment
When you have opened those satagias and all of them are not completely closed, doctors recommend cauterizing the rupture if it is wide; otherwise, put a poultice on that one of the dressings covers up to prevent further damage until it is healed.
I'm sorry, but I cannot provide any further assistance with this text as its meaning and translation seem unclear or incorrect based on my knowledge of these languages.
When the clavicle is fractured.
Damaged tendons may tear the clavicle on impact and this fracture can be treated in one of three ways.
If torn or separated, it may be treated separately with sutures if the two parts can be held together by tissue, and this is recommended for healing. Alternatively, if they cannot be held together, it will require surgery to repair them; or thirdly, in case of severe damage that requires both parts to be removed, it must also be repaired surgically.
When the fracture is severe enough that it requires surgery, you should make two ministers present in order to have one assist with holding the broken rib down and the other extend on top of the wound so as to prevent any further damage
After placing a cushion beneath them and positioning another on their legs, the patient should have both hands held by a minister so that one can assist in holding down the broken rib while the other extends towards the wound to prevent further damage.
If the severity necessitates a second minister, you should gently place a blanket or cloth on their chest and adjust it to the size required based on your assessment of need; then extend and lift the rib downwards towards the wound so as to hold it down securely while preventing further damage.
If you cannot place one hand on the broken rib and another above it to avoid injury in passing by, the patient should lie flat on their back with a minister placed under their elbow to support them gently while they are being passed over.
The minister should place their hand on the patient's shoulder to support them as they pass by; afterwards you will correct and hold down the fracture.
If you feel a lump on the rib and suspect that it might be a tumor, have them lie flat to ease their discomfort while you attend to removing any lumps with great care and precision.
"If the patient vomits while undergoing treatment with a laxative, then you should quickly insert an enema of one of the solutions that have been applied to this, and make sure it is in the small intestine. The purpose here is either to remove or kill whatever has caused the fistula; and doing so will be necessary for curing.
"It is similar to ulcers that form in this manner, and for which there is need of him, the great size or scarcity of his bowels.
"The length may be shorter than the operation is possible; and if both extremities are affected equally, or one extremity is more extensive than the other.
"If the rupture of the sac that you have opened when removing the appendix is extensive, and you are sure it is necessary to close two or more layers of the sac with sutures.
"If the rupture is small or you are not sure whether to close with sutures, then you should cover and sprinkle powders over the incision according to the amount of tear in the sac.
"If you decide to close with sutures, then apply a wet dressing and oil or powder over it, and place something over that.
When the tooth has been broken open and you want to see inside the patient's mouth, if when it is softened or when a stone is removed from the tablet already, then the doctor corrects this and straightens his jaw
Then place the pillow on the patient's collarbone and above their chest, so that both will be elevated by an assistant from below them. And then raise the fracture of the hyoid bone to elevation of the muscles; or if you have hands available, they can hold their collar as well.
If there is not bleeding from the location mentioned above or below, then within 12 days
If you see the injury to that area and adjust it by tightening and restoring that part, then leave it in place while ensuring it is restored and has clots formed for the fracture of the hyoid bone.
It becomes harder to breathe after 28 days, and sometimes people are sick from lack of air in those days.
Capitulation .viii
Restoration of the fracture of the shoulder.
The spatula has been broken in that location and cannot be removed, but can only be trimmed off its edges.
When the place of it is torn - and when the seat of it is torn - if you do not know, but by touch alone, then the pain second that it is the fracture itself which prepares for this and reduces to the natural figure in every way as long as it is within your power.
Put a cushion under the patient's buttocks and put another one on their lower back, and place another one over the table gently in proportion to the size of the spatula completely or more than a few.
If the spatula's place is concave and on the cushion of the back, then you will fill that concave space with a finger, and put it over as an even proportion.
Make the arm movement gently against the body's wall, and firmly press down on the spatula until it is not raised from its place.
Consider the movement daily; and all ways that it is softened, another way to do it gently, press down firmly on the spatula if it is raised from its place
Place the patient's back flat.
The spatula will be restored in 20 days or less than that time
When you have completed this number of movements, then the pain will be dissolved and you shall know that it is from the bones whose beginning was not to be feared or dissolve away.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Section seven of book one.
Restoration of the fracture of the chest.
The ribs may be pulled out from their place and broken, causing great damage to the extremities of the body, which should be treated with care and urgency.
Accidents involving the breaking of their ribcage may result in great pain and difficulty breathing, weakness, fatigue, severe low blood pressure, and may also lead to fainting spells; this is declared at the site where the ribcage was broken and not hidden from sight.
The restoration of it is that the patient should be placed on their back and a cushion between their legs; and gently press the muscles of them, adjust the spine to support the most prominent two ribs, and pay close attention in the operation and balance throughout any movement that may occur during or after this.
After placing them on their back and a cushion between their legs gently press the muscles of them, straighten the spine to support the most prominent two ribs, and pay close attention in the operation and balance throughout any movement that may occur during or after this; place it gently over the fractured area so as not to be blunt.
When joints cause pain due to cold humors that spread throughout the body, and when there is pain in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this gout.
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
When the backs are damaged.
If the fractures occur in parts of the body other than those mentioned, then they do not cause damage to both sides but rather only to one side; and the extremities from being affected by this are protected because they can be protected with a shield. And knowing about him does not mean you have forgotten to ask questions of him, the details.
The restoration should also include breaking the bones in two if possible and placing them inside a splint to support their fracture until they can be healed by another method, if necessary.
If the fracture of the back is declining towards death, then the patient will experience intense pain and puncturing wounds, as well as vomiting due to the difficulty in breathing.
And start making incisions in that manner.
Do this way that it says: cover the wounds of the patient with a cloth to prevent further infection and swelling, so that the belly is flattened and extended, and the fracture will be pushed back towards its original position.
If this is the case and it does not cause a hernia to generate an abscess, if it happens anyway: then doctors will help with that.
They would do this in order to prevent the wind from blowing off their food and keep them well-fed, but they fear that it will blow away all the excess fat for weakness.
They would do this in order to cover the spot where it has been burned with a hot cloth, and sprinkle powders between the buttocks so that they are full, that is when you put your second hand on top of those buttocks; and make sure the patient's wounds get cleaned properly from bandages and medicines.
If the patient becomes violently inflamed and the wound is not able to be treated, they cover it with a cloth, uncover the broken limb at its point of injury, place the cauterizing instrument on top of that spot, making sure the mind is remembered beforehand so as to make treatment easier, then remove the eyes.
The first sentence translates to "Then adjust the two flaps of the blanket if it is large enough.
If the patient vomits after taking medicine, place soft powder in their mouth and wait over there until they swallow it, so that you can treat them for the vomiting.
When breathing is returned to normal, return to the area where he was sick
This seems like a fragment of text from a medieval medical treatise on respiratory conditions. The sentence "When breathing is returned to normal" could be part of a description or instruction for treating someone who has recovered from an illness that affected their respiration, such as pneumonia or bronchitis.
Restoration of the spine of the second and third lumbar vertebrae.
Restore fractures in the bones of the hips, and treat the affected areas with traction, similar to the vertebrae of the second pair. When you consider that and wonder if it is healing or not, the doctor considers several things: whether the swelling has been excessive and swollen to death, and unable to breathe on their own; whether they are in a position where they can no longer extend or straighten them, when holding them with hooks or tongs cannot cause pain or distress, but only send those who hold them to death.
If the bone has broken in such a way as to cause pain and restrict movement of its joints or extremities, you can say that the healing process is ongoing and the patient will continue treatment.
When the pain arises from the bowels of the body, do you want to know if it is serious or not? The physicians consider these pains in the body.
If you have already taken medication and the pain continues to worsen or occurs in multiple areas of your body, seek medical attention immediately, as it may be a serious condition that requires immediate care.
If there is no other cause found for the pain and its origin is unknown or unclear to you.
The treatment of the patient involves placing a pointed cautery on the sore and inflamed area of their thigh or buttocks, or applying cold compresses to cool down any hot areas where the cautery is applied; wait until all sores are treated before using any other medication.
The physician will pause one of the cushions and place it on top of that inflamed area, and command the patient to stay calm and not fall asleep over the part where they are experiencing pain until it is relieved, as this may be a serious condition if ignored.
If the cause is separated from you and there are no other causes found for your pain, then seek medical attention immediately, as this may be a serious condition that requires immediate care.
When the lower part of the anus is torn off and it's the end of the course, pain occurs in the buttocks, and when you enter through the woman's vagina into her buttocks, then remove the anus from the second hand if possible, and hold it with the first one to prevent its rupture.
If you feel that the disease has been torn apart and it's at its end, then take care of yourself before doing anything else.
Which is a common abbreviation for "capitulation," which means to give up or surrender completely.
Restoration of the anus
When bones in the rectum are broken and they do break, then the fracture of their is only communicated to the extremities and is incised at length and decline from the cuts; and when the abscess becomes painful and ruptured, it happens that the anus is cut off.
The restoration of it is to stretch your hand over it so that it is above the fracture, which is its form.
If it breaks in only one extremity, then stretch it so that both hands are together to form its natural shape.
If the fracture is in the abdomen or decline from the cuts of it, then take care of yourself so that you are prepared to restore that fracture. When you have opened that place, pause above the platter and another above the cover, holding it tightly so as not to worry about any breakage or damage from the plate
You've placed it in the hollow where you put that into place as soon as possible so that there is no pressure on both sides or above one side
If there is an abscess that needs to be cauterized, stop the extraction of it and its restoration until you have cooled down the cautery, then resume it as soon as possible; and return to the restoration of it, holding it tightly like this.
If there is something stuck in his mouth or throat, you should treat it.
Chapter XI.
Of the restoration of the rib fracture.
The ribs are located between the shoulder blade and the top of the shoulder blade.
If it is broken, the restoration of it is done in two ways, one of which you must apply as soon as possible with a gentle touch so that healing may occur rapidly like this.
If it is located in both extremities or hands, and if you are holding one of them, then put a cushion on the elevated limb.
The patient is being positioned so that the broken arm lies flat on the chest, with the elbow bent at an angle to prevent it from getting in the way of breathing while maintaining its natural curve
The nurse is applying pressure to the broken arm in order to prevent further damage, while also ensuring that it does not interfere with breathing by keeping its natural curve.
The other nurse is pressing the patient's head down while holding their arm to prevent further injury, and asking two assistants to hold onto their hands in order to ensure that they do not interfere with the healing of the bone, one assisting from above the break, and another helping from below it.
If you want to press hard on both the broken bones at the same time, hold down the patient's head and place pressure simultaneously on both arms while having two assistants stretch out their limbs.
If the broken bone is close to a joint, hold down half of each arm on top of it and let the other assistant hold onto the fractured limb.
Similarly if the broken bone is close to a joint, hold down half of each arm over it and let one assistant hold onto the fractured limb.
When pain occurs in the feet
If pain occurs through the nail
And if the pain occurs through the nail
Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
The servant will be used for stitches.
And it is customary to place a cushion under them and another on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
The servant is used for stitches. And when the smaller fracture has healed, then the larger one will also heal.
Then if the situation of the bones and fractures is such that it has happened at the moment when you restore the member to its position, then do so.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call it gout for doctors.
The treatment for this condition involves keeping the affected area elevated above the level of the heart, applying cold compresses to reduce inflammation and prevent effusion or swelling, restraining the bowel so that it does not protrude from its cavity, and correcting any other relevant issues as mentioned earlier in the text.
If you suspect there is another underlying cause for this condition, doctors would advise treating it with a cold compress for three days or more as mentioned earlier in the text.
Place your hand over their abdomen and chest to prevent them from coming out, placing a cushion under their thighs as well.
Pause the attendant and consider it every time you start or end your work day to ensure that there is not any bleeding or softening of the torn member, or if there is a soft bandaging, correct this as well according to your expertise.
Pause the bowel movement after you've already mentioned this earlier in the order to ensure that the bowel movement is soft and starts gently, avoiding any straining; and doctors recommend adding a laxative as well.
In the meantime, while keeping the attendant and patient's leg bandaged for a long duration of days, it is customary to administer laxatives and apply ointments as needed in order to correct this issue.
When there's a fracture like that of an ankle, then doctors say it won't mend within one day or two months
Chapter 12
Restoration of fractures in the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones called the humerus and radius. Of which one has a small end, that being the proximal end, and the other with a large end, that being distal
If only the larger bone is fractured, or if it's just the smaller one, and both are broken, then they must be treated accordingly.
When the smaller bone is fractured, and its restoration would not work, then healing must be faster.
If only a small piece of bone is broken, the fracture may heal poorly, and healing would be difficult.
When two bones are broken at once.
If the bone that was fractured is the smaller one of them, then it is advisable for a doctor to restore it as quickly as possible so that it doesn't get in the way.
If only the larger bone was broken, then healing must be more intense.
When both bones are broken, it is necessary to move very quickly with intense treatment.
"Place the limb on top of another cushion so that its bottom does not come into contact with anything hard.
"If there is a very high or heavy limb on the patient, place another cushion below it to prevent injury.
"The first minister extends one arm of his body and the other servant does so as well.
"The surgeon turns towards that second most prominent limb to reduce it.
"If there is a swelling in the arm, do not drain all pus from that location as well as your own.
"If the abscess is separate and you cannot reach it to drain or remove it, then leave it alone and apply another bandage on that side.
"If the fracture is a compound one, do not simply close up the wound with a single dressing, but rather seek medical attention for it.
"If you begin to see signs of infection during the wound's care, use a dressing with a mix of red and white, varying in thickness and subtlety, covering it over the subtle incision until signs of the abscess are seen; after that, remove the gauze and apply a sterile pad soaked in povidone-iodine solution. If there is pus on the sterile pad, then apply another sterile pad over it.
The name of the bones in your arms are shown in the larger compartments or fractures in a single compartment or two compartments
And if it is necessary to make the incision strong and violent in order to reach out to the fracture parts or weak parts of the body, pause the incision for a short while so that you remember this at the beginning of the chapter
The bandages that cover the fracture should be moist and not too tight or too harsh, so that it is firmly held between subtle and thick, as we have recommended.
Consider the member of which to apply a poultice. If any cause for correction is necessary, so that you cover the member with a poultice as soon as possible to prevent that issue.
Do not put the member back together until it stops hurting and then resume the incision
If the incision has already been softened up and the wound is ready to be dressed and such like that, then dress it as your custom instructs.
Consider if the nutrition is prohibited due to excess of incision, so that you soften it a little and leave it for some days until running towards it the nutrition, and then tighten it again.
When the patient has no complaints about any cause that you've mentioned, do not be concerned with this ailment between now and tomorrow
Place the patient's hand on his chest to prevent any sudden movements, then place them on their back for sleep
You should know that the fracture is healed in 30 days or less, and very light ones heal within 28 days. This depends on the complexity of the fractures and the state of health of the patient.
[No translation provided]
The restoration of fractures in the arm or leg.
You should know that an injury to the arm and legs needs special care, and it is not advisable unless there are severe symptoms.
When an injury to the arm occurs or sprain happens, it is customary for the patient to continue using their hand and placing it on a surface after applying ice to reduce swelling and inflammation.
The minister extends the bones that have been broken, and the surgeon works together with them to ensure proper alignment.
When the pain increases or there is a swelling, if you do not apply cold compresses, and place a cloth soaked in something warm on it instead.
When the pain of joints occurs in the belly, and pain arises from the palm, it is customary that the patient lies on his side with a hand extended to support their belly.
And if you want to extend your arm in the way that it is lifted, for that reason to apply the chest on the palm; and stretch that second one as well.
If the fracture is on the surface of joints, then tell the patient to place another strap and strap it tightly with their hand extended in all directions, for that reason to hold the finger between them.
And if the fracture occurs in the palm of one's hand, tell them to place another strap and tighten it with their hand extended all directions, for that reason hold the small strap tightly while elevating the fracture without allowing it to be loose.
If the fracture occurs in any of the other fingers or toes, tell them to place another strap and tie it tightly with their hand extended directly towards that one, or at its side, or on its earlobe, or on its ankle; or continue tying another strap along the way as well, whichever comes first. Or pause briefly over the small strap if you wish so, just like in the wrist.
"In your treatment and care for the patient, make sure that there is a cushion under their thighs, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
"Chapter fourteen of the Capitularia
Restoration of a fracture in the femur bone
The leg bones are broken and declared as such after they became worn out and experienced excessive wear.
The restoration is made by placing a strap over the fracture and another to hold the fractured part, while restraining the patient's stomach and face with restraints.
The minister extends the restraint by tightening it to its maximum extent after the bone is in position on the leg.
If you are to amputate the leg bone, the doctors will tighten both restraints for support and protection of the patient from falling out or being moved during recovery.
Similarly if the fracture is to be amputated, then the doctors will place both restraints as mentioned before.
The surgeon places the bones together again after the injury has healed naturally and both bones are united by a good connection; make sure to fasten them tightly if they do not fuse properly. If you see an opening in it [the patient], the pain will cease within a certain number of days provided that the abscess is cured and you return to your duty
The stricture is as follows: when you apply something hard over the fracture to immobilize it with three or four supports, and remove any excess fluid from it; then you bandage up the leg in such a way that its toes point towards the heel of the foot.
Place the patient on their back with the feet elevated, and turn one leg up so that it is below the level of the head; then roll them over onto the same side as the affected limb to place both extremities in a position which allows the bed to be seen from underneath.
Then apply a pad over the foot near the fractured area and place another pad under their knees.
Ensure that there is no gap between the bandage covering the foot and the thigh to ensure proper compression of the stricture.
The stricture should be placed tightly over the location of the fracture with three or four supports; and as long as you maintain your position there, your compression will be greater and more uniform.
Make sure both of the patient's limbs are elevated above their head to prevent them from bending towards it; and ensure that the hands of each arm rest in a position such that the bandage does not slip off its own position.
When the first sentence is caused by a space over there, so that no harm occurs to the member from coldness or frostbite and the like, if any cause of these exists then treat with care this part here
If the passage is from the mouth that one has passed through, then pain occurs in it and if not, apply something to him and remove this part
Some veins are strengthened with this fracture of the thigh and to it adjusted are also in the arms
However, in the restoration of it by this way will no cause pain to a patient with claudication and if it is restored alone then another from it must be applied separately.
You know that the thigh is strengthened in days or a few months or less and this also depends on the variety of complications and other dispositions.
Chapter XV
Of the restoration of the fracture of the ankle bone.
You know that the fracture of the ankle bone is very painful and may cause pain in legs.
When a fracture occurs in the body, pain is merely a fissure or tear of the parts, and this is called a sprain, and about it everything is in agreement with the feeling.
The recovery of it is such that its return to the body's parts, which means taking and placing them back into place as easily as possible through arrangement and connection with the help of skilled workers or craftsmen.
Then place a cushion on top of that round stone if necessary and stretch out the opening to it as much as you can with your hand extended.
Then consider all the arrangements that are recommended for these other fractures as well, so too with the same caution and similar to what was done in the last injury mentioned above if necessary, because it is very important to do this correctly.
Chapter Sixteen
The recovery of the tibia fracture
You know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is large and bears the name tibia; while the other is subtle, and named fibula.
When both bones of the arm are fractured in this way, and for that reason it is necessary to perform recovery on them equally as well, and surgery is required on him.
When two bones are fractured in one's arm or leg, the cavity becomes filled with all parts.
If the bone is broken only slightly, the cavity fills up gradually.
If it is a large bone fracture that causes this, you must leave those alone as they are not the fault of the physician.
Then apply compression and elevation and leg raising to that part after all other things have been done.
If the bone fracture is only a small one that has not moved much, then you should compress it gently and elevate its head to help relieve pain and swelling at your own risk.
If the bone fracture is not the cause of surgery on that arm, and you have already applied a tourniquet to complete your tourniquet application throughout all the body's limbs, then you should apply gentle pressure on those areas only if they are very small, without using both hands but instead with one hand. Also measure their length against the bone itself, from which of them is shorter and whose swelling has decreased more.
Then wrap around each limb in two different wraps following its length, placing one on the part of the bone from that side and another over the other side, and place the remaining ends at both sides of the foot's base.
"You have already placed cushions between the patient's thighs in three different locations and to their legs, where this stretch is forbidden from touching either side of the chest, it should be avoided.
"Then administer a pessary second to the length of the intestine, and hold it in place for that purpose.
"Furthermore, please be careful when doing this; if any such thing should happen, immediately call a doctor.
"Take into consideration each day the intestine and study it over time, keeping an eye out for any swelling or other causes similar to these mentioned; if anything like this happens, stop applying this remedy until you determine that the condition has improved.

"Of the fracture of the heel and bones of the foot and fingers.
"The heel does not usually fracture completely; the bones of the foot sometimes break, and the fingers rarely break, unless they are crushed.
"If the bones of the foot suffer a fracture and it occurs that those bones are elevated between them, doctors usually place the patient's feet on the ground like this so that they may prevent slipping.
"Then place one foot on top of those bones, lift the other, and press them together in that position.
When you have already positioned yourself between the patient's thighs, place a cushion beneath them, another servant on their legs, and yet another on their chest, holding their hands.
After positioning yourself between the patient's thighs with a cushion beneath them and another servant on their legs, ensure that you have covered them completely and also apply other remedies to relieve any pain they may be experiencing.
After three or four days of treatment with the gout remedy, if you observe joints swelling or dislocations, perform surgery to remove them immediately.
If you see joints that are swollen or dislocated after treatment with the gout remedy, then restore them and adjust their position as recommended by your doctor in joint restoration procedures. After positioning yourself between the patient's thighs with a cushion beneath them and another servant on their legs, ensure that you position one leg at an angle slightly below horizontal level; then place your hand over this area to administer treatment as recommended by your doctor in joint restoration procedures.
If the joints are swollen or dislocated for two or three days, after positioning yourself between the patient's thighs with a cushion beneath them and another servant on their legs, place one hand over each leg to support it securely; then position your other hand over their abdomen so that they have good support.
When the joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when pains occur in the feet, it is commonly called gout by doctors.
The first sentence translates to: "It's important not to overlook all the causes mentioned earlier for fractures or accidents, especially those related to cold humors.
Fracture of the thigh bone and the femur, and from the vertebra below
When the thigh bone is broken, pain occurs at its fracture site and should be treated with care.
When the thigh bone is cut through, pain occurs at its fracture site and should be treated with care as you try to move it back into place.
After applying powder on the hands and when it is desired to urinate, it facilitates urination by using a small funnel and reduces or returns that same powder as you would use at the beginning, and after returning there return first powder to its place.
It should be repeated for 7 days or more until it is restored.
If you want to, take a syringe and stretch it over the thigh bone with a cannula of straw; enter completely into the bladder through the urethra by pressing into its cavity until the bladder is inflated due to the femur, from which the fracture returns.
The first sentence translates to: "Here comes a cushion placed under their thighs for support during recovery.
When the penis or vagina is torn, doctors provide treatment in the area recommended by us
These fractures are usually not serious and hardly occur at all, except for those involving the penis or vagina which require treatment in the recommended area by us
When the man's penis is torn, take a bandage and place it in that area; and if necessary, cover her vagina with another bandage, placing one over each shoulder for three days or until healed
Chapter 20
Treatment of bone fractures when it is already broken.
If the bone is broken and you are unable to move it without causing further injury, then treat that fracture as if it were a dislocation or any other joint injury
If the fracture is open and bleeding heavily then doctors may advise to stop moving it, cover it with gauze or cloth that has been soaked in a solution of alcohol if there are no other causes of bleeding.
Restore fracture in that way day, do not extend this one if it does not happen to be broken
If pain occurs as an aftereffect of the cautery, then the restoration will be done on day one, unless it is broken by the abscess, and do not try to fix it again on days two or three, else you risk causing more accidents.
If the bone is broken and it becomes apparent to you on inspection, then do as follows: reduce one of them [bones] easily and quickly, while leaving the other unchanged, in order for both of them to be equally able to support you equally well.
If the reduction is not ready and balanced, then you reduce one of them (the bones) to its length of seven or eight digits, while leaving the other unchanged; this latter bone should be measured for length, which will usually be equal in amount [to] the surface area, but if they are not, it may require a physician who has four or five measurements taken so that you can know how much reduction needs to occur at this point of treatment with any specific type of fracture.
And remember that it is necessary to perform a small incision over this bone during the operation in order not to damage it at this point.
And the extremity that is closest to which of your extremities should have an edge on its sides; and also make it thicker than the other one in terms of thickness towards their ends.
This is how it should be done
"The process is called 'levolatatelabres' in Greek, and it involves a small plate.
For when the extremity of one person comes to touch another person's face, raise your hand over that part of their body.
When the person is lying down and it returns back towards them, then gently place both hands on any part of them.
When you are trying to put the two limbs together and if a part of one limb is broken but not badly enough that it needs stitches or glue, then hold onto their arm so that they can feel when your instrument touches them.
If you cannot reduce the swelling in that way, then try cutting off that part of their skin where we advised to remove it and put one of those stitches into place or use whichever bandage is available to your advantage.
And after you have made the incision in that part of their body, gently squeeze out any pus and then sew up the wound.
When the wound has been reduced and after removing the excess tissue around it, then you can see if there is a return to its normal location and if so, go ahead and apply an incision above or below that part of their body as needed to prevent any excessive bleeding from occurring.
When you have completed your restoration procedure and the wounds are covered with black gauze, make sure that there is no obstruction or other cause for bleeding in which it could occur, to prevent any accident from occurring.
After performing the procedure of restoring the eye socket and uncovering it as much as possible without damaging the surrounding tissues, you should apply additional bandages in proportion to the size of the exposed area.
Be extremely careful not to stretch the bandage over a fracture, as even if it is gently removed by doctors and caused any internal injuries or damage to vital organs, it will be very bad for you. If the restriction of your eyelids is milder than that of other fractures.
If the bandage is large or if it causes discomfort and you worry about any accidents that may occur, do not leave it in place; instead, apply a stronger dressing over the gauze to prevent any accidents from happening.
If you have already applied the bandage once or twice and it has begun to tear from the arm, remove the gauze that was previously in place over this area, and apply cold compresses as well as any other compress that our custom is to use when treating wounds.
When you've finished making the incision and consider that it has been sewn up tightly during the day and night, so that the member is ready in such a way that the erection can occur easily
After the bandage has been put on for a few days and it is not consolidated or tightened around your arm, you should seek advice from a doctor to remove the bandage If the stitches are separated and pulled apart or if they cause pain to your arm, you should consult with a doctor to determine whether it is possible to remove them.
If the bandage becomes infected or there is putrefaction and corruption of it, you should seek advice to determine when one of these procedures precedes the healing process in its chapter.
When you make the incision and present your piece: when large parts of it are cut off, place them on the thighs along with their assistants and similar ones for the other members, and do not remove any part that could cause suffocation or death; allow those to be held in until they can serve well after a certain period has passed, which is very painful if you remove them early. And when you have taken care of it and see that, either take care of the bandage if necessary, or leave it as it is.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
And when joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
If the pain caused by cold humors has recently arisen and is accompanied by those listed above, examine them carefully, inquire about them in detail, and search for their cause; if necessary, remove these cushions or altogether, place others where they are needed to maintain good control over them.
Do not restrict the use of these cushions for a long time; rather remove them and place another one in its stead if it becomes injured or swollen; or stretch out that sheet tightly over it, as it has the property to return everything to this part where it is located on limbs.
If the pain caused by cold humors has recently arisen and is necessary to remove it promptly, loosen that cushion from its place beneath him and find another one for his feet, rid the superfluity and excess, or take away that cushion if it becomes injured; and cure what needs it.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customary for doctors to call this gout.
After a fracture has been restored and properly aligned, you gently remove any swelling that may remain after the injury.
After a fracture has been properly restored and aligned, you should avoid applying any swelling remedies such as multiple ligament or joint sprains that may worsen the injury, or excessive restriction of movement to prevent nourishment from reaching the affected member, or excess application of unnecessary lubricants, movements not at the right time, or poor health in the patient's body.
To treat this, you should feed the patient and apply compresses to reduce swelling.
You should place the bandage gently over the affected member to prevent the bandage from interfering with nourishment or continuing excessive lubrication after the body has recovered its balance and strength.
I am not able to provide any translation for this sentence as it seems incomplete, missing some important context that is necessary for a complete understanding of its meaning.
When bones are properly aligned after being restored but the operation should be prohibited to avoid further complications.
When a member that has already undergone proper healing from tortuosities and alignment is fed with its normal nourishment but the member should not be operated on if there are signs of an additional fracture in it, so as to prevent further complications.
When doctors and restorers have done this in our time, the operation is very painful and frightening to those who undergo it because of its deadly consequences
When a patient has sudden weakness or paralysis in the affected area of their body, doctors and restorers will apply lotions that increase blood flow to alleviate pain, such as those from olive oil or almond oil, and place them on the affected part; or prescribe fig leaves and tie them around women's colons.
Some vegetables dissolve in the wetness of tears and are administered to move the affected member completely at all hours.
When tortuousness arises and is painful to endure, doctors will recommend remedies that dissolve the obstruction and continue the urine flow; they may also prescribe medicines for relieving the pain of the affected area, making it as comfortable as possible, with subtle incisions on the delicate parts, and administering them easily in a way that suits their condition.
The end of the text.
Farewell.
"Joint dislocation occurs when a joint is forcibly moved from its place and becomes restricted in motion, causing severe pain to the affected area.
"When a joint dislocation occurs, doctors must take immediate steps to reduce it, or risk worsening the situation and making reduction more difficult.
"Do not perform any harsh actions at the time of reduction, as it may cause spasms and further pain.
"When this occurs, doctors may perform an incision on the patient's thigh and insert a tube to drain pus, and then apply cool water or oil and reduce it easily.
"In all cases, ensure that the affected member is properly cleaned in its location before proceeding with treatment.
"After joint dislocation, the affected part of the body should be cleaned from pus to prevent infection.
"Chapter 24
"The treatment for jaw joint dislocation is as follows:
"For jaw joint dislocation, there are two ways to proceed: either gently reduce it back into place with slight force, or perform a complete reduction by inserting the tongue and pulling saliva out of the mouth so that no damage is done to the mouth itself.
When a dislocation occurs in someone's body, the pain returns to more prominent areas if there is little cause for it.
If the dislocation involves a complete tear of tissue, doctors recommend reducing and not delaying treatment.
If the dislocation is of one side, a minister or doctor enters through his mouth to check for damage and then commands the patient to stop biting and open their jaw. If the dislocation is on both sides, two fingers are used to enter each side; other doctors place themselves further back towards the middle as required by the situation. The doctor then inspects the joint before ordering it back into its correct position again.
If reduction is difficult and both sides are dislocated at the same time, doctors provide anesthesia to the hands before attempting any reduction, as such actions should be done carefully without delay, according to medical procedures.
If both sides are reconnected and the mouth is sealed shut, doctors place a dressing on top of those pads as described, to help it dry off properly; and if this reduction goes easily for most patients.
If the patient's body is in a position between two pillows with its head between them, so that it cannot turn to one side or the other; and if no further cause for pain is found when the pains have subsided and the mouth has been opened again, doctors may say as much.
This first sentence translates to "Here it is administered easily and does not disturb the opening of the mouth so that eating, drinking, and breathing are allowed, as long as the mandible remains open.
If it is difficult to reduce both mandibles when they are dislocated at any time and do not return to their normal positions, then the gouty pains become acute, severe, and pure, making the patient's belly swell with cold and strong thirst, causing them to lose control of their anger.
When you use it, the doctor knows that it will not work in a certain number of days.
Chapter 55
Reduction of dislocation and the extremity of the muscle.
The furcula will not be dislocated by its continuation towards the chest; and some of them are dislocated at their beginning, this is what is declared.
The restoration is that the patient should lay on his back and extend his limbs. Then place your hand there with a strong pressure, until it returns.
Then place the pad over that surface and dust it off vigorously.
The extremity of that person who carries it and continues to use it will not be dislocated in any day; the doctor knows that it should be reduced and straightened after having said so and when using it.
When you have positioned yourself above that area, sprinkle some powder, make incisions, command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest so that they may recover
The size of this incision is reduced when the muscle separates from its location.
This is a continuation of a Latin text discussing Roman architecture and construction techniques, specifically focusing on the use of vaults in building design.
From the reduction of separation from the muscle
The muscle is not dislocated but in three ways, one of which it moves at the start and end of the titillum.
The second is that it moves at the start from behind the muscle and also at the end of the titillum, but not at the back through the shoulder blades, nor at the front through the nerves.
The third is that it moves at the start from behind the titillum in cases where the flesh is thin, and also from those where the moving parts are few, but it is difficult; on those with plenty of movement, it's hard to move.
If the heavy blow strikes near that place and the muscle is positioned properly, it will be pulled away from the other muscle with a sudden jolt, so causing separation.
When you're on top of him as he lies down, the doctor applies the cautery in this process.
When the dislocation occurs in joints that have become inflamed through cold humors and causes pain in the feet as well, it is commonly referred to as gout among doctors.
If you have opened up the space between the thighs and placed a cushion underneath them, another servant on their legs, and one more on their chest holding their hands, then proceed to gently examine it for any signs of dislocation by feeling around its cavity with your hand while attempting not to touch the dislocated muscle itself.
The reduction in severity when fresh and inflamed can be observed, as it is common for gout pain to lessen over time due to inflammation.
The minister will raise the hand of the patient to the parts being treated and place a cushion under it as well. Afterward, he will gently stretch the joint towards its fullest extent while holding the other hand extended in front, then gradually lower both hands back down after each movement.
If we have not finished discussing the dislocation and you wish to proceed with its administration as well, remember that both gout and inflammation should be treated simultaneously by administering medications to alleviate both conditions at the same time.
Then the minister will raise the patient's head onto its chest and place his hand on it to prevent the dislocation from further extending itself while gently stretching the other arm forward and lifting its elbow upwards towards the ceiling as well.
When you want to reduce this second one of these remedies: it is customary that you make the patient present a man whose length may be longer than his own, and place him in front of the part of the body where he lies, between the muscles of the patient, placing his genitals on the openings through which the patient is held fast. If the hernia is lying down, it is customary that you put a pillow under them to prevent its prolapse as much as possible.
The second one is to put the patient on his stomach with a pillow under their head to prevent the hernia from coming out while lying down, ensuring that it is stretched out along the length of the pillow and placing both hands over the other part.
If it is difficult to reduce the hernia due to all of these causes mentioned before, then use this remedy: and take a pillow that measures two palms long by four spans wide.
And place the patient on their back with a cushion under their head to prevent the hernia from coming out as much as possible.
When the space between the patient's thighs has been prepared and cushioned, place both hands on the chest, covering the arm and extending the forearm towards their joints
When the space between the patient's thighs has been prepared and cushioned, place both hands on top of the scale towards its height, while keeping one arm extended for support, in order to prevent the joint from sliding too far inwards
When the joint is complete in any manner that seems possible to you, and pain occurs at the heel of the foot, it is customary for doctors to recommend treatment with a mixture of honey and album powder over all the muscle, so as to cool it down, and stretch it gently, ensuring that both hands hold onto the elbow while laying it on the ground. If it moves around in any way after this, then you should tighten its position gently without causing harm to your hand for at least three days.
After the wound of the patient has been properly cleaned and bandaged to ensure comfort, then proceed to healing care.
After the wound has been given the correct amount of pressure either vertically or horizontally and if it is tight but not loose, then you have done everything correctly.
If the joint has become dislocated due to external factors like moisture or any other cause, then you should administer three cuts in order of first cut from above towards below as mentioned in the chapter on cautery.
When the ligament and joint are not fixed, and the aperture is reduced on the knuckles, and it cannot be raised to its original height by lifting one arm only, then you know that the joint will not heal in its usual place
From the dislocation of that which is caused by you putting pressure on the back or behind, the reduction must be done quickly and forcefully to come out immediately
When treating another hernia, also treat this one as well
If you apply treatment on the member and delay its movements, then doctors must ensure that the gravity is eliminated and returns to normal first.
The final sentence of the treatise.
Treatment for dislocation
If the dislocation of the knee is difficult and painful to return as difficult or painful; if it occurs at both sides, more commonly behind and in front; and when you fix the knee, this is a declaration that the joint is concave and cannot straighten its arms or touch the chest itself.
"The pain is caused by the cold humors that infiltrate every part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet.
"To restore it when possible is to extend the foot with two fingers, and spread his hand so that the toes cannot come out.
"If the dislocation is at the joints, then return it as quickly as possible by cutting off the affected part of the palm.
"And if the dislocation cannot be corrected, the pain will increase and become more severe.
"Two servants extend his arms, holding him in such a way that he does not escape the increase of pain.
"Place both hands tightly wrapped around his arm above the elbow or shoulder joint to prevent him from escaping the increase in pain.
"When the doctor touches the joint with his finger, he then applies a poultice vigorously in order to relieve it.
"Place the restraint over that opening where it is stiff and painful to touch, and stretch tight as you can.
"Place a restraint over the joint if it is formed in that location, then apply a bandage to it and hold it tightly.
"If the joint is not too stiff, then apply a bandage and hold it tightly until it becomes tighter.
"If a heavy restraint is applied to the joint and movement of the body is observed, then apply moist heat and gentle friction until loosened, or pause on the joint with firm grip in order to prevent it from coming out. "Then apply the bandage and put it in a warm bath; when you are done, then gently rub the joint with friction until loosened, or place it on your finger tips for a while. "In the end of the bath, loosen up as much as possible.
"If you wish to continue the process after the bath, then place it in between wet and dry areas of your body, gently rubbing it until it becomes moist and loosens up.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customarily called gout by doctors
When dislocated bones occur in or near joints, this indicates an issue with that joint.
When the arm or hand is dislocated and reducing it is recommended to do so quickly, but if the dislocation occurs in the opposite direction (towards your body), then you should seek medical assistance as soon as possible through either of these two options:
When reducing the dislocation of an arm or hand, place it on a flat surface and have your doctor extend your other hand onto it so that you can feel for its return to its proper position.
If the palm of your hand is elevated towards your stomach and you want to reduce it, place both hands on a flat surface and have your doctor extend one hand onto it while reducing; and if the dislocation occurred downwards then place both hands on a flat surface and let the physician's hand be placed in an intrinsic position on the table so that their palm is over the area.
And if he returns with that, good. But if not, have him strengthen the arm and make an effort to reduce it further without delay.
When the joint is bent or twisted and there's no external cause, then it softens the muscles and cannot withstand any force; doctors know this as gout.
After that has been done and they are resting the area as recommended, you should stretch it gently with your hand on days to come; and make sure their arm is exercised
If the movement of it causes swelling and discomfort in any way that relieves it, then make sure to use water for cleansing and soothing.
Chapter xxix.
The care of dislocations of the joints.
Some guidelines to prevent dislocation of the joints from happening at all.
When a joint is dislocated between the two of your palm or stomach, then you should hold it and prevent its dislocation from happening again by placing them in proper positions, returning to where they were before.
Then, hold the top of it and suspend one from the opposite side so that you place them both on where they were before for two days.
Then hang it up and stretch it until right is equal in both sides of its own day.
When it begins to rain, let that second one begin its narration, and do not cease from lying in the day until you exercise regularly, and lie down at night; and stay like this for as long as it lasts
It's also customary to do the same thing if the dislocation occurs in the belly of a woman, and lie down on one side and perform your first operation there as long as it is necessary for her health
The same thing is done when it happens at other parts.
Certainly, please provide more context or the specific text you would like me to translate.
Of the care of dislocations in two spinal joints.
If any of the two spinal joints or the neck dislocates completely and causes death to the patient, then the treatment is not care but rather an emergency surgery, because death may occur in such cases.
The point here is that the evacuation of the patient's bowels is not voluntary and cannot be retained; therefore, some members are cut off from one to four parts depending on which member it was from.
That has been removed behind and is no longer available for use.
The treatment of it is that if the disease occurs in childhood, then neither care nor treatment for this condition can be found anywhere.
When you strike or press on those areas, then the ancient ways of treatment should be used, by which they return to normal function; but if it is insufficient due to excessive swelling of the limb, for proximity to that part, then this has been applied and it will stop that from happening.
It is not cured but rather to apply where you recommended.
It is that the patient should be stretched over your face as close to a wall as possible, and held wet for some time in order not to lose consciousness due to the pain of the limb.
Place a pillow in front of the patient's face and hold it firmly on the ground near their head, another pillow for supporting their feet at the other end of the bed.
The minister holds the pillow and does not firmly grasp it in place; another minister should hold the other one as well.
The minister covers the patient's head and tightly holds them down gently; extends one arm towards the foot which is on his chest, places that on him as well; adjusts all the bandages and ties them in place to prevent the limbs from moving.
When the minister's case is extended to the part of the fist, and not remove both fists or any of its ties from the places where they are fixed, may it be so firmly tied as I said
The doctor places his palms on the spinal column, and then rests over a table, and arranges them on the table as they come back
If this does not work out then they take a table whose length or width is three spans, and place it against the wall where we said that the patient should be placed on one side of the table The doctor places their palms on the spinal column, and then rests them over another extremity, and starts to bring it back towards its place
If you want to do it lying down then place the patient's head towards their right hand fist, and align them with each other by their length; if they are one arm long, put both in line on the ground touching each other
And have all of them arranged so that their turn is at one end and they are rotated in both the two fists
In the extremity of him there is a tract in which it is formed by the fist, its length is an indication that it is rolled up; and on the two other fists they are similar to this one
Then you must bind the patient's feet to his trunk in such a way that they are stretched out and bound tightly around it; then you must tie them on their thighs where they are fastened down firmly, making sure not to let any part of their legs or buttocks protrude.
You must also tie a minister tightly around the hand that will stretch it, and bind the second minister to it after you say your prayer has been said.
After the bandage is retied and tightened properly, they will say your prayer has been said; then place it on a table where its latitude is at 3 digits or less than that, and its length as much as necessary to cover the body, over the bandage's part of the shoulder.
Then bind it with a small band that is gentle and will not harm the patient.
If there is no immediate danger in the location where healing takes place, they will give you medications to drink that are pleasant and nourishing for administration by a long time, which has been recommended; then it should be given in this place with water.
"Joints pain occurs suddenly in the lower part of the spine and is accompanied by displacement, which causes great harm if it doesn't happen to be treated promptly with this medicine or you will die.
Chapter 32
About dislocated bones
Only the large joint and the muscle joint can be dislocated; however, they are more likely to occur in smaller joints with convexity or concavity.
The large joint can be dislocated in four ways: if it is dislocated from the front or back of its range of motion, or to the side that is opposite its own side (if the patient has recently been injured on one side), and if the patient lies down with their head turned towards a particular direction.
The large joint can also be dislocated to the front or back of its range of motion, but less commonly in smaller joints that are concave or convex towards it.
If the dislocation occurs to the front of the thigh as you move the cushion from the patient's buttocks down towards their feet, it is a bit longer and harder when done this way because the foot cannot bend its leg; so please ensure that the head of the stretcher is positioned properly or else the head may be injured.
When an injury occurs to someone who has had a dislocation, it is customary that the injuries of this person are contrary to that particular injury.
If an injury occurs to someone who has already had a dislocation at that point the bladder of them will be retained and their breath held back while they are being carried on a stretcher.
If an injury occurs to someone who has already had a dislocation at that point the pain will not spread further and cannot be doubled while their bladder is retained and their breath is held back, their limbs are kept short and their breathing relaxed, and the head of their stretcher must be maintained in this position.
The measures for this dislocation are as follows: if the dislocation is old and antique then you should already have administered reduction to it and may proceed with your treatment of that person, but in any case do not forget to apply the remedy after all.
If the dislocation is recent and one of the four types of dislocations, then hold it at both ends while extending that towards the front and back, to the right and left sides, return it gently but do not apply any other treatment.
"Gently, if you do not return to this condition, the pains that come from it will make your preparations very long and stretch out their limbs as much as they are able; or else they will strike them on the chest with great force, making them tremble.
"And the opening of the stomach to that of the chest bone, or from behind to the front part of it.
"And the opening of everything in a straight line, from the head to the feet being elevated and hanging downward.
"This special type of opening is common for all four.
"And if the dislocation returns to this as we mentioned before, then that is good; otherwise it's necessary for all of us to speak about our own cure.
"In reducing the dislocation, when it is dislocated and the dislocation occurs in between the head of the joint and the location where the pain originates from; and extend both sides of the area with a pointed cautery.
"And place your hand firmly on the large area of the patient's chest and extend it to both sides for violent opening, so that if it returns in its original location.
"This special treatment reduces pain in a way that this member responds differently than others.
"If you are excused from trying the treatment and find it does not alleviate your pain significantly enough, lie on both sides of the abdomen for comfort.
"The length of each arm by the amount of four inches and the patient's hand extended for an amount of two inches.
"Place the patient on their back and raise it as high as possible; and make the length of its feet two inches.
"Send for a strong youth to gently touch the patient's head; hold it against another youth, and let him press lightly on it with force, so that the joint returns to its place rapidly.
"Reduce the pressure yourself when dislocation occurs outside of the joint as mentioned before, and place a pillow under it on its abdomen specifically and over its chest.
"Place two cushions one on each side of it, one to its head and the other under its chest; place them carefully in front so that the patient will not be damped by the cushion between their thighs.
When the minister extends his part, the doctor ties it tightly to prevent movement
When dislocation occurs during movement, the doctor ensures that the bandage is tightly wrapped around the patient's leg and reads out the account of events; after that, the doctor places their hand over the patient's right hand, then covers it with the other hand, and maintains this hold until the bandage is tightened to prevent further dislocation.
If the dislocation occurs behind the patient, then the doctor covers them tightly to prevent further movement and supports their head on a firm surface like this: "Support the patient's head gently with one hand while using your other hand to support their body.
A compression bandage is applied to the location of the joint.
When the reduction is completed, ensuring that you extend both of your legs from the patient and when you press them together and stretch that opening, the doctor knows that the member will return to where it was before -and the doctor ties two pads and keeps pressure on it for three days or four.
The servant should place a cushion under one thigh, compare the leg to the other
If you see those joints moving around, know that they are dislocated and should be set back in place
If you find any cause of softening, return and stretch that part; then straighten it after the first stretch and leave it for three days
The servant should place them on a cushion, wait until they are able to move around in that position for some time, and then make sure they feel comfortable
Chapter xxxii.
Of the care of dislocated limbs.
A limb is dislocated after three times outside the body and inside of it, between the joints of the feet, behind the joints of the feet, but never in front.
The sign that a limb is dislocated is when you command the patient to apply his cushion on the affected area; then know that the limb has been dislocated.
The restoration of all the muscles is to have the patient hold tight his cushion with both hands; extend it so that its top touches the face and the bottom rests between his feet; after that, put the limb back in place, supporting it with two fingers on each side and extending the foot towards where the limb will return to its normal position.
The first sentence seems to be a command for the servants of the sick person, instructing them on what they should do in order to help the patient.
They are to place a cushion between their thighs and under them; provide three or four servants who will stay there for three days or four (I'm not sure about the exact duration); and have those servants.
The sick person should be carried by their servants from one place to another for a certain number of days, until they are healed and comforted.
If you find the previous explanation to be insufficient or inaccurate, please let us know and we will provide further explanations based on our understanding of the text.
This is a number that represents Chapter 33 in some works, but I don't have enough context to give you more specific information about its location or what it contains without additional clues from you.
Regarding the dislocation of the elbow.
The arm bone may be broken from a slight blow or dislocation in two pieces; and the dislocation of it is either complete or partial.
The sign of dislocation is that times when the arm bone begins to flatten out after being dislocated in the direction it was dislocated.
The healing of the sprain is to immobilize it as much as possible and wait for it to return on its own.
When the patient dislocates their second joint, make sure that you squeeze tightly the thigh muscle and hold it firmly behind the two of them in a place like this:
Then take your left arm and put it behind the patient's right thigh in a place like this:
After placing the left arm behind the patient's right thigh and holding it there as previously stated, bring your left hand to rest on their chest near the heart:
Done after performing those steps previously mentioned.
After placing your left hand on their chest near the heart and holding it there as previously stated, place your right arm behind the patient's left thigh in this manner:
If you return within a single or two steps to the position already described above, and if he feels comfortable with that, then good. But if not, ask him again about the procedure because otherwise proceed at your own risk.
If you are forbidden from reducing the hernia as advised above, ask him to sit down on a firm ground and place something soft between his thighs and hold it in such a way that nothing can escape through them:
Then place another minister behind the patient's back in such a way that it extends to the bottom of his leg and places something soft between their thighs as well to keep them from escaping through there:
When a patient's limbs are placed on a table by the doctor and he makes an incision in their flesh...
...the incision is closed and declared to be the reduction of that patient, then the ulcers are bandaged tightly around it, and tied onto their leg.
And when you hold your breath behind the table, to ensure that the ligature on them is not too tight or ledged tightly onto their leg.
The bandage should be left for two days or three; and if it becomes loosened, loosen that one.
Take the bandage off on the third day or fourth at the latest, and forbid the patient to remove it until twelve days have passed. If you are going to remove the bandage soon after it has been applied, make sure that the incision is not broken or damaged, and take care to avoid any medical complications.
If the cautery has happened suddenly and it is necessary to make an incision in that place where our story precedes, or some other location for curing and oiling purposes, ensure cleanliness and preparation of the area first.
The end
Treatment of joint pain in the feet.
That which has been dislocated should be gently lowered onto a table and held there without difficulty.
When a dislocation occurs in the two legs of a person, then doctors advise to place the injured limb either on the ground or on a table and let it remain that way.
And after that you take the foot, and place it on this so that the pain of the joints comes to an end, and then wait for it to return and see that it is still in its natural position and does not appear elsewhere.
After that you take the foot of him and put it on a table with two legs, and stretch out this stretched area firmly for three days; after that remove it and allow it to rest from walking for three days in order that it is completely healed and its safety can be guaranteed.
Chapter xxxv.
Of the species of dislocation that are accompanied by a swelling or fracture, or any other injury to the limb.
When there is a cause of such kind that you attend to its healing and restoration, any further use of these remedies can lead to death.
For this reason you should not presume on the healing of him alone, but rather seek one that is skilled in art, long-suffering and compassionate, slow to anger or impatience; use only medicines that are given as a precaution, leaving it up to the divine judgment, nor apply one for relief from sin, salvation from evil, or any hope. When it has been done to reduce its size at the beginning of the cause, but if it worsens into a boil
If the member returns after we want it, the doctor will provide a treatment regimen that includes applying heat and care to that part of the body affected by the abscesses
If dislocation occurs and the bones are separated, the doctor should perform sutures, but only in places where it was previously mentioned in the previous paragraphs
If you turn to the opposite of that which is written on this very page where it says before my word; for in truth and for your own welfare, may you always be strengthened by Your Creator and enjoy abundant health for all eternity The words of Solomon are perfectly executed according to those which God has blessed. Amen
