chapter seven .	capitol . vii .	1.02692
on the treatment of obstructions in the ear .	de curacio de opilacio de aurelhas .	0.982258
infants sometimes are born with an imperforated auditory meatus . ~~~ some people also get an obstruction in the passage of the ear , either from an injury or from flesh growing in it . ~~~ sometimes this obstruction is at the bottom of the ear out of sight , but sometimes it occurs a little outside the passage and is invisible .	alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz , e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes , opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela ; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement , e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora .	0.0433333
the sort which occurs in the depths of the ear and is invisible is , in general , difficult to cure .	e aquela que accideys en le preon de lu , la qual no comprehen le vezement , es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio .	0.743961
as for that which is within sight , set the patient's ear in the sun and examine it ; and if you see that the object is something external you should make an opening with a fine scalpel like this .	e en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement , cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela .	0.59134
let its extremity be slightly broad , with a sharp point ; while the rest of the scalpel should be smooth on both sides so as not to harm the ear .	e donc si vezes oppulacio apparent , obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu :	0.45487
but if the obstruction be from flesh growing in the auditory meatus , catch it with a fine hook and cut it , with the utmost gentleness , till all the flesh is gone .	si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut , del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no ; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha .	0.617544
if the obstruction be in the depth of the ear , take a fine smooth probe and warm it a little in the fire ; then push it into the meatus .	e donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu , lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn .	0.552525
if you feel the obstruction ( what time the patient will experience hardness of hearing ) , seek to perforate it gently , being careful not to injure the nerve of the ear .	e si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha , lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc , e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha .	0.758354
then put in a plug the width of the meatus , which you will have anointed with egyptian ointment ; do this for some days till you are sure that the wound is healing .	e donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat , per gravetat de ausir , esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat ; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha .	0.664787
or take a plug and dip it into water and sprinkle it with powdered vitriol and use that . ~~~ if you perceive the ear swelling with an abscess you should remove the plug and put in its place another previously prepared by soaking in wax made with oil of roses , till the abscess has subsided ; then dress till it is healed .	e aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac ; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua ; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu ; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada , lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat , entro que sia le apostema caut cedat ; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat .	0.247349
if a haemorrhage occur , dip a sponge or piece of material in cold water and put it on the ear , and apply the rest of the treatment to stop haemorrhage mentioned in the treatise on instillations .	mays si accideys flux de sanc , lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha , e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc , la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio .	0.721875
		0.3
