chapter sixteen .	capitol . xvi .	0.980769
on cauterization of the eyelid when the eyelashes are turned inwards , irritating the eye .	de cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel .	0.802139
the cauterization is of two kinds , by fire and by caustic .	quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel , cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras , quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent .	0.336735
cauterization by fire will be thus : tell the patient previously , if he is one of those who pluck the lashes , to let them grow till they are long and straight ; and if during growth they irritate him , bind the eyes with a fillet so as not to move till they have grown .	si am cauteri de lu am foc , comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan , entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz ; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement , lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz .	0.759863
when they have grown and are straight , put the patient's head in your lap and mark upon the eyelid with ink the shape of a myrtle leaf , beginning near the lashes .	donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz , lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se , e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta , am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta , e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels .	0.660902
then apply cotton wool soaked in egg-white or mucilage of psyllium seeds .	e aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel .	0.914286
then heat a cautery of this form .	e aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu .	0.730952
then burn over the shape marked out , slowly , with many small strokes , till the whole surface of the skin marked out to the shape of the myrtle leaf be cauterized , specially the outer part of it .	e aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada , petit a petit , em motas veguadas , entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta , tota aparent propriament .	0.713571
it will show the correctness of your work if you see the eyelid contracted and the lashes risen away from the white of the eye .	e senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel .	0.467415
then remove your hand and let him be for three days .	e donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns , e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara .	0.832379
then apply cotton wool soaked in butter till the scab falls off ; then treat the place with ointment till healed .	e aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat .	0.444186
but if after an interval there be a return of the same condition of the eyelash and of drooping of the eyelid , repeat the cauterization in the same place just as you did before .	mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada , lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament .	0.655361
and if it be in the lower lid cauterize this also till it falls back to its normal position and the hairs do not irritate the eye .	mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos , lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh .	0.538916
this is the method of burning with caustic : bid the patient let the lashes grow long and straight ; then make the shape of a myrtle leaf out of paper .	mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz , e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra .	0.565276
then take of common soap and of quicklime of each the weight of a drachm or thereabouts and beat them well together rapidly lest the mass get cold ; then spread this on the paper shaped like a myrtle leaf and apply to the eyelid of one or both eyes ; place also under the eye cotton wool soaked in egg-white ; the patient's head being in your lap .		-0.3
place your forefinger on the caustic and press it down a little and move it about according as the patient feels the bite of the caustic ; for he will feel it sting like fire .	e aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc . ~~~ . i . ,	0.00625
while the stinging lasts , let the caustic remain on and move it about with your finger ; and when the stinging dies down take away the caustic and wash the eye with water ; then look , and if you see the eyelid raised up as by a blepharoplasty , either by fire or by incision , good .	o quays aquo , e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be , e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat ; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra , e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos ; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou , e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se .	0.792085
if not , repeat the caustic application in the place that the drug has not affected and which has not gone black , until your operation is complete and the eyelid draws together .	e pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina , quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc .	0.709006
then apply cotton wool with butter till the crust of the burn falls away ; then treat with palm ointment or the like till it be healed .	e donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio , lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit ; donc cum cessa la mordicacio , lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua ; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio , quar lahoras esta be ; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel .	0.219592
but in your operative procedure take the utmost care lest the least bit of caustic get into the eye .	e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio , e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat .	0.558692
and if , after some days , the eyelid be relaxed and some eyelash irritate the eye , then repeat the application , particularly in that part of the lid that has dropped , in the same manner as before ; and treat till cured .	e es necessari a tu , deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina , e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel , lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat , e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament , e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat .	0.847624
this is the shape of the myrtle leaf .	e aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra .	0.86129
you should know that the human eye varies in size ; so let your contracture be in proportion to this .	e sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat , e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio .	0.755093
the right procedure is well known to him who has experience in this art .	e no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art .	0.8425
		0.3
