chapter thirty-eight .	capitol . xxxviii .	0.979412
on the extraction of a fish-bone or anything else that sticks in the throat .	de extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas .	0.839062
there often sticks in the throat a bone or fish-bone or something else .	motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa .	0.48
after you have depressed the tongue with the instrument in the full light of the sun , so that what is stuck in the throat is made as conspicuous as possible , you should then remove whatever can be seen and comes into view .	adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent , sobre le qual catz la vista , pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh , per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola .	0.727536
but when it is not visible to you , and lies hidden in the throat , you should make the patient vomit before the food in his stomach is digested , for often the object comes out with vomiting . ~~~ or let him swallow a piece of turnip or a heart of lettuce or a morsel of dry bread ; or take a marine sponge , dry , and tie it on a thread ; then let him swallow the sponge and when it reaches where the sharp body is then quickly pull on the thread .	e aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro , cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac , quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit ; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec ; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon , e lia aquela fortment am fiel , e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela , quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda , lahoras so foro-getatz .	0.264086
do this a number of times ; for often the sharp body or bone will stick to the sponge and will come out .	e mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada , e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta ; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz .	1.00627
if it does not come out by the methods described , in this case employ an instrument made of lead , thus .	mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas , lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma :	0.479412
it should be a little thicker than a probe , with a crook at its extremity .	e sia pus gros que ray un petit , e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat .	0.603279
the patient himself should introduce it into his own throat gently ; he should raise the head backwards and take care not to touch the larynx lest coughing be aroused . ~~~ and let him remove therewith the bone or sharp body .	e el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus , e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola , per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina , o que aquel le metge am la sua ma .	0.172392
or else let the doctor introduce it with his hand ( although it is better if the patient himself introduce it , since he knows the site of the obstruction ) and push it down and then draw up his hand with the instrument ; all this according to the way it presents itself to him , till it is removed .	mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels , per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos , e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus , tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada .	0.580672
		0.3
