chapter five .	capitol . v .	0.995455
on the repair of a broken collar-bone .	de restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada .	0.560606
the collar-bone is very often broken from the end of the humerus anteriorly , and the fracture of it may be in one of three ways .	motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle , e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras .	0.871209
it may be broken and separated into two without splintering ; this is the easiest to repair . ~~~ or else splintering occurs , which is most difficult to repair . ~~~ or it is a compound fracture .	quar o es trencada , o seperada , o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias ; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu ; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias , e es dificil a restauracio de lu ; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua .	0.0626923
when it is a simple fracture the operation involves having two assistants present ; one of them to hold steady the arm adjacent to the fractured clavicle , and the other to stretch the neck in the opposite direction .	e la operacio en aquela , quan la fractura es ses plagua , es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres , per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada , e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida .	0.805338
then level the fracture with your fingers until it is reduced to its proper form and there is neither prominence nor concavity .	e aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove , e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat .	0.65257
if there is need of still greater extension , place in the armpit of the patient a ball of cloth or wool made to a suitable size ; and stretch and lift up the clavicle and squeeze the roll with your hand until the fracture is set in the proper way .	e si indigeysses mes de extencio , lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana , e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat ; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove .	0.765715
if you are unable to draw the extremity of the clavicle outwards on account of its being depressed , the patient will have to lie on his back and there must be put under his shoulder a medium-sized bolster .	e si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora , per so quar es pervenguda al preon , lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz , e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza .	0.699971
the assistant is to press the shoulder down until the depressed collar bone is elevated , and then you can set the fracture and even it out with your fingers .	e le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus , e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz .	0.706442
if you feel a splinter separated from the clavicle and movable , you must cut down upon the splinter and gently remove it .	mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas , lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat .	0.747327
if the splinter sticks to the bone , you must contrive to cut it with one of the chisels you have prepared for that , having first put beneath the clavicle the instrument to protect the membrane ; an instrument made of wood or iron , of which this is the figure .	e si es retenguda en le os , lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo , pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac ; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu :	0.629027
it resembles a spoon but without a hollow . ~~~ it should be as broad as you need , having regard to the size of the bone , and as long as you can use at operation .	e es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat ; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu , segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu .	0.204553
as you see , it should be provided with one wide and one narrow extremity .	mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio ; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes , e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta .	1.01456
if the opening you made when you extracted the splinter of bone be wide and you feel safe against an abscess , suture the edges together .	e si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla , e yest segur de apostema caut , lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura .	0.622377
but if the opening be small or you fear an abscess , pack the wound with material and pads proportional to the opening .	e si la disrupcio es pauca , o temes apostema caut , lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua .	0.835714
if an abscess occur , soak the dressing with oil of roses and vinegar or wine and apply .	e si accideys apostema caut , lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi , e pausa sobre aquel .	1.17083
as to bandaging the bone when it is without wound or incision , it is thus : apply over the bone the plaster composed of mill-dust with egg-white and put over it soft tow ; then put a pad in his axilla if necessary ; then take a very long sling about a span broad ; then place a doubled pad over the tow and plaster ; then take a splint made of thin board ; its width should be three fingers and its length the same ; then wrap it in a rag ; then wrap the rag together with the splint in that part of the sling that is over the site of the fracture ; then tie the sling round the fracture and wind it round his neck and under his sound axilla and under his injured axilla and carry it several times in every direction as you judge best that the bandaging will hold the fracture firmly , for it will be apparent to you .	mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio , es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou , e pausa sobre lu stopa leon , e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu , si indigeyssas de aquela , e aprop pren humemate , so es torca la qual teno les sarrazis , que sia mot longua , e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel ; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre ; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment ; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap , e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura ; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout , e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute , e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida , e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent , e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu .	0.748371
the whole point is that the splint should not slip from over the fracture ; so you should examine the patient every day , and whenever the bandage has loosened and you see the splint has shifted , then put it right and tighten the bandage .	e tot , que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat ; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia , que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda , lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura .	0.908784
make the patient sleep lying on his back , and at night when he is asleep place a small bolster under the axilla so as to raise his arm from his side , for with the raising of the humerus the fracture of the clavicle will be elevated . ~~~ or bind his arm to his neck .	e aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu , e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi ; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel , e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle ; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel .	0.243113
do not loosen the bandage for twelve days unless there arise at the place any pruritus or swelling .	e no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema , entro a xii dias .	1.00417
then renew the plaster if you think it necessary , and bandage again and leave until the fracture of the collar-bone is set and knits .	e aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo , e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula .	0.972372
the majority of these cases are firm and strong in twenty-eight days , though in some people it takes less .	e es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias , e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel .	1.07436
		0.3
