chapter twenty-six .	capitol . xxvi .	0.942857
on cauterization of the stomach .	de cauterizacio del stomac .	0.752
when cold and many humidities get into the stomach , so that its constitution is disturbed and much fluxion has come to it , and a variety of treatment has been tried to no effect , the patient must be put on his back with legs and arms outstretched ; then give him a threefold cauterization : one a finger's breadth below the hollow of the chest with the claviform cautery ; and two below and to the sides of the first cauterization , so that it has a triangular appearance ; but there should be some distance between each lest they run together when suppuration sets in . ~~~ let the depth of the burning be two-thirds of the depth of the skin .	quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu , e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso , lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat , e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas , e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris : an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh , e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri , entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada ; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura .	0.285398
let the shape of the cauterizations be thus and of no more than this size .	e si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena .	0.589007
if you wish , make a single large cauterization in the middle of the stomach , thus . ~~~ the cautery for this single cauterization is circular , thus .	e sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio , e si vols , cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma ; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma :	0.307927
the stomach may be cauterized with punctures in the case of a person who fears this operation . ~~~ you will have marked the points with ink on the stomach , as many as you wish ; then sear with a punctate cautery . ~~~ then treat as previously described until he be healed .	e sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat : e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta , e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz ; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat .	0.0591682
		0.3
