chapter nineteen .	capitol . xix .	0.957692
on the repair of fractures accompanied by wounding .	de restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua .	0.58
when a man has a compound fracture , especially when it is a large bone such as the femur or humerus or the like , you should at once venesect him if the conditions are suitable for venesection as set out above .	convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua , e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori , o semblant ad aquel , que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit .	0.673764
if there is bleeding from the wound you must hasten to stanch it by sprinkling it with powdered vitriol if you have nothing else at hand .	e si la plagua eflueys sanc , lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat , si a tu autra causa no es present .	0.573641
then begin on the reduction of the fracture the very same day ; do not put it off unless an abscess occur .	e aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia , e no prolongues aquo , si no accideys apostema .	0.698626
but if an abscess does occur , leave the reduction until the ninth day so that the abscess may subside , and in no circumstances touch it on the third or fourth day , for you will bring evil consequences on him .	mays si accideys apostema caut , lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia , entro que sia cedat le apostema , e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot , quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz .	0.703828
if the fractured bone be overriding the skin you must try to reduce it and to straighten it out by hand , gently and with moderate extension .	mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert , lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio .	0.649138
if reduction and straightening by hand is unsuccessful , then reduce it with this instrument ; it is made of iron , seven or eight fingers' breadths long , and wide in proportion to the size of the wound ; that is why the doctor should have three or four of them in the sizes he may need for treating every kind of fracture .	mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas , lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment ; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr , la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua ; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura .	0.569743
it should be round and somewhat thick so as not to bend when pressure is put upon it at the time of operating .	e sia redon , e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio .	0.753034
it should be sharp-ended with a bend at the end ; the upper part should be of some thickness , but from the middle to the lower part it is a good bit thinner .	e sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz ; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent , e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas .	0.880933
this is its form .	e aquesta es la forma de lu :	0.14
it is called in greek bayram , meaning a small lever .	e es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem” , so es paleta pauca .	0.91049
you must place the sharp incurved end of it over the end of the protruding bone , and push it firmly with it .	per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent .	0.428049
when the bone is repositioned and straightened in some measure , try to straighten the ends of the fracture , one to another .	e inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os , e sia engualat am alcuna equacio .	0.789474
if the fractured end be very thin and the instrument does not grip it firmly you will have to cut off that end so as to give purchase for the instrument .	e donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor , e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil , e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio , lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo .	0.627713
if you cannot reduce the bone at all by the means we have described , cut it off with any of the osteotomes we have mentioned that is suitable , or saw it off with one of the saws as best you may .	mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat , lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz ; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible .	0.375269
then strip away any remaining roughness of the bone and fine pieces of shell .	e aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas .	0.831992
if , when you have reduced the bone , the patient feels severe and troublesome pain , you may know that the bone has not returned to its natural site .	e cum le os es reduzit , e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent , lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural ; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament .	0.929508
if you can restore it to its natural site , do so , for you will render the patient a signal service .	cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os , e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre , e propriament si es en estiu , e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli , per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio .	0.833333
when your setting of the bone is complete , soak a dressing in dark sharp wine , especially if it be in summer , but do not put wax or anything oily upon the wound lest it cause putrefaction or corruption .	e aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os , e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua .	0.664157
then apply splints the moment you have finished setting the bone ; and leave the wound open , that is , by making with scissors an opening in the coverings the size of the wound .	e guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura , quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges , e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement , so es sania .	0.726486
and take the utmost care not to bandage up a wound with a fracture ; for many ignorant doctors have done that , thereby causing their patients either death or ulceration or a defluxion ; so make your bandage soft and loose , as opposed to that of other fractures .	e si la tieua strictura leugiera , molli , diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas .	0.540789
if the wound be severe or of great size and you fear for it some one of the grave accompaniments such as we have described , and the patient feels a disturbing pain at the place , then you should not put on splints ; but instead of splints make wrappings of a stiff material and bind them on .	e si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala , e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz , e atrobas dolor en le loc , lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas , mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas .	0.687404
if , after one or two days have passed , you see that the wound is beginning to suppurate , remove the dressing with wine that you had put on it , and then apply the pads and ointments with which it is our custom to heal wounds , such as tetrapharmacon ointment and the like .	e cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar , que en lu sia engendrat brac , lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi , e aprop aministra calguas , enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas , ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel .	0.723436
every evening and morning you will have to loosen the bandaging and carefully examine the wound until it knits and is healed .	e conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada , e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat .	0.787143
you must also place the limb in such a position as to let the pus flow down easily .	si a la plagua passan motz dias , e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac , lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta .	0.555224
if , after many days , the wound is unhealed and it goes on suppurating , you may know that there are some little fragments of bone there ; so you will have to examine the wound with a probe ; and those fragments that are loose take and extract ; and those that are not loose but nevertheless pierce the limb and cause pain , attempt to cut them out and extract them by whatever means you can .	e de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz , aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor , perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla .	0.743201
if a defluxion or ulceration or other kind of corruption or putrefaction happen to the wound , you must meet all these occurrences with the proper remedy described before in its place .	e si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen , so es stiomenios , o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio , lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol .	0.741749
one thing that is necessary is that you should comply with my words and keep them in mind : when a large bone is broken and protrudes from the limb , such as the femur , the humerus , and the other bones of the long limbs , do not meddle with pulling or extracting it , for this often causes death ; but leave it to suppurate . ~~~ it may come away of itself in twenty or thirty days .	e de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa : quan os gros es trincat , emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans , e que no presumas atraccio de lu , ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort ; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca , quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o . xxx . ;	0.244314
then dress the wound if you find occasion ; if not , let be .	e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist , e si no layssa aquela .	1.03125
		0.3
