chapter twenty-seven .	capitol . xxvii .	0.93
on the cauterization of a cold liver .	de cauterizacio del fietge fret .	0.697537
when there is pain in the liver from cold and humidity or from thick vapour , so there is a severe disturbance of its natural constitution , and the patient has been treated as prescribed in the appropriate section but with no effect , the patient should lie back , and you should mark with ink the places of three cauterizations , in this form and exactly of this size below the costal cartilages , where the elbow reaches .	quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua , e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys , lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz , e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres , la hon perve le decubit de home .	0.693575
let there be a finger's breadth between each pair of cauterizations and let the burning be straight along the length of the body .	e sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit , e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta .	0.651429
do not press the cautery hard with your hand .	e no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot .	1.07273
let the thickness of the skin you burn be half its thickness , not more ; and let the patient be standing on his feet during the cauterization . ~~~ alternatively he may be recumbent with legs outstretched and arms raised .	e si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena , e no y sia pus ajustat ; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu ; e si no es estant , lahoras sia jassent , le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas , e eleve les sieus brasses .	0.421978
figure of the cautery .	e es aquesta la forma del cauteri :	1.165
you will also be able to do these cauterizations with the edged cautery when you have craft and facility in the art .	e a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar , quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art .	0.790625
be careful lest you go too deep with the cautery and burn the whole thickness of the skin and the abdomen and penetrate to the intestine , for the skin there is thin ; bear this in mind .	e guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio , e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels , quar la codena aqui es subtil ; e sapias aquo .	0.785
		0.3
