chapter twenty-seven .	capitol . xxvii .	0.93
on the treatment of a dislocation of the elbow .	de curacio de dislocacio del coyde .	0.587903
the elbow is with difficulty dislocated and with difficulty put back . ~~~ now dislocation may be in all directions , and particularly forward and backward . ~~~ whatever way it is dislocated it will not be concealed from you , because it is both visible and palpable , and whenever you compare the dislocated elbow with the sound one it is quite openly and plainly manifested ; for the elbow joint is hollow and the patient cannot flex the forearm back or touch his shoulder with it .	sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat ; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas , e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras , e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat , e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa , aquo es a tu declarat manifestament , quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras , ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle .	0.0406933
you must hasten and reduce the dislocation as rapidly as possible before an abscess occur . ~~~ for if an abscess occur the reduction of it is difficult and maybe it will never be healed ; especially when it is a posterior dislocation , for this is the worst and most painful of all the kinds of dislocation , and often it is fatal .	e cove que·t coytes , e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut , quar si ve a lu apostema caut , dificil es la reduccio de lu , e fort leu no es sanat de tot ; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras , quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio , e de major dolor , e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort .	0.32837
now when it is one of those that can be reduced , the way to reduce it is for an assistant to perform a two-handed extension of the patient's hand , the patient's forearm being opened out , while the doctor's hands are above and below the elbow joint and he thrusts the joint with both thumbs together or with the root of his palm , until it returns to its place .	e la restauracio de lu , quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir , es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas , e le bras de lu sia expandut , e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu , e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps , o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc .	0.774015
if it be an anterior dislocation , it may go back if the hand is bent sharply back until it strikes its own shoulder with the root of the palm .	mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant , lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma , entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma .	0.648913
if the dislocation does not respond to reduction , apply very strong and powerful extension .	e si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio , lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort .	1.00204
for this , let two assistants pull on the arm while two other assistants hold the patient against the extension .	e es que dos ministres extendan le bras , e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio .	1.08308
then the arm should be rotated in all directions after the limb has been wrapped in a long folded cloth or a broad wrapper .	e aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part , pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu , o liament .	0.501421
when the doctor begins manipulating the joint he should anoint his hands with oil so as to assist , by its lubrication , the movement of the joint ; then he should thrust the joint powerfully until it goes back .	e quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma , unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat ; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne .	0.688687
after its reduction he should apply to it a plaster having some styptic and absorbent qualities , with egg-white ; and put on a firm bandage and suspend the patient's arm from his neck and leave it for some days .	e aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou , e sia extrenhut am strictura descent , e·l bras sia suspendut del col , e sia layssat per alcus dias .	0.781034
then undo it ; and if the joint remains fixed in its place , then untie the bandaging and leave it .	e aprop sia desliat ; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc , lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela .	1.14554
if you see that the joint is not thoroughly firm , replace the plaster and bandaging and leave it for a few more days until it is firm ; then untie it .	e si vezas la junctura no be strenher , lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament , e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda ; e aprop deslia aquela .	0.885416
if , after the reduction and unbandaging of the joint , it becomes stiff and is difficult to move , soften it in the bath and apply gentle friction and massage until it is softened , or apply to the joint the tail of a fat-tailed sheep ; bind it on and leave it on for a day and a night ; then remove it and send him to the bath , and when he sweats apply moderate friction to the joint ; then replace the tail and again and again , alternating with the bath , until the joint softens .	mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura , e la disposicio de lu es en movement , lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil , e comprecio , entro que sia aleujat ; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati , so es coyssa de moto grassa ; e aprop sia liada , e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt .	0.840718
if you prefer , apply to it , and bandage on , fresh cow-dung lightened with butter .	e aprop osta aquela , e met aquel en banh ; e quan suza , lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada , e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati , so es ronhonal de moto , una veguada , e la segonda , e la . iii . a . , ~~~ am intrament de banh , entro que sia linit .	0.488787
do this a number of times and it will soften and return it to its original state .	e si voles , pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel ; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas , quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio .	1.05072
		0.3
