chapter thirty-two .	capitol . xxxii .	0.97
on dislocation of the knee .	de curacio de dislocacio del denolh .	0.628571
the knee is dislocated in three ways ; it is dislocated interiorly and exteriorly and inferiorly , that is , posteriorly . ~~~ it is never dislocated anteriorly .	le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras , quar es dislocat a las partidas defora , e a las partidas dedintz , e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras ; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat .	0.429092
the sign of dislocation is to bid the patient flex his leg on his thigh , and if it does not reach the thigh you may know the knee is dislocated .	e le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa ; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat .	0.498932
the way of setting all the types of dislocation is to make the patient sit down with both legs extended , if he can , with an assistant sitting behind him to hold him by the middle and incline him slightly backward . ~~~ then do you yourself sit on his thighs with your back to his front , and put his leg between yours ; then the palms of your hands should be applied to his knee , and join them together by twining the fingers ; then with the palms put strong pressure on both sides of his knee while another assistant extends his foot until the knee goes back to its place .	e la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt , enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba , si pot sobre aquo ; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu , e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes ; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas , e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza , e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc .	0.17978
the sign of its return is that the leg can be flexed back easily and without hindrance upon the thigh .	e senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza .	0.572727
then apply a plaster and flex the leg on to the thigh and bandage them together for three or four days ; then loosen them .	e aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa , e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre , e aprop deslia aquelas .	0.99899
he should do little walking for some days until it gains strength .	e no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias , entro que sia sanat e cofortat .	0.675
but if you cannot effect reduction by this method , apply powerful extension by bandages as we have described above for the treatment of the hip , until it goes back .	mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada , lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio .	0.464397
		0.3
