chapter nine .	capitol . ix .	1.025
on setting the vertebrae of the back and neck .	de restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col .	0.776224
when a fracture occurs in the bones of the neck , which is rare , as mostly they suffer contusion , as do the spinal vertebrae—when it happens to anyone and you want to know whether it will heal or not , then look and if you see both his hands relaxed and numb and dead and he has no power to move or stretch or close them , and when you pinch them or prick them with a needle he does not notice it or feel any pain in them , you may know , as a general rule , that it will not mend , for he is doomed .	alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col , e tart endeve a lor atricio , e semblantment als spondils del dos . ~~~ e cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no , lahoras considera , quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor , lahoras sapias que no es sanat , e en las mes de disposicios es mortal .	0.268147
but if he moves them both and feels in them the pinching and pricking , you may know that the spinal medulla is still intact and that under treatment the patient will recover .	e si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura , lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio .	0.887977
if anything of this nature happens to the vertebrae of the back and you wish to know if he will recover or not , then pay attention to his feet .	e si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no , lahoras considera als pes de lu .	0.650311
if you see them relaxed and in the situation we described in the case of the hands , and when he lies on his back he passes flatus and faeces involuntarily , and lying prone he passes water involuntarily and lying on his back he cannot pass water if he wishes , then you may know his case is hopeless , so do not concern yourself with his treatment .	lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz , accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas , e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos , yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat , e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot , lahoras sapias que es mortal , e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu .	0.823911
but if nothing of this kind occur then the case is easier .	mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas , la causa es milhor e pus leugiera .	0.616071
the way to treat this latter kind of case is to try to reduce the swelling by applying over the injured vertebra oil of roses , alone , or with roasted yolks of egg ; apply three times a day until the swelling has gone down .	e la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol , o am mugols de huous asatz ; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut .	0.590833
then apply to the place one of the strengthening and absorbent plasters and bind it on ; bid him keep quiet and still and sleep only in the attitude in which he has no pain , until he is well .	e lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans , e strenh sobre aquel am liament ; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat .	0.951948
if the injury is accompanied by fragmentation or a separation of part of the bone , you must cut down on it and remove the bone ; then bring together the edges of the opening , by suture if it be wide ; then treat with granulating ointments until it heals .	e si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu , lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os ; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua , am sutura si es gran ; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz , entro que sia sanat .	0.880613
if the last bone of the coccyx , which is the sacrum of the tail , breaks , introduce the thumb of your left hand into his anus and reset the bone with the other hand in whatever way is possible and affords the best setting ; then apply over it a plaster , and a splint if necessary , and bind it up .	mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses , e es la fi de la coeta , lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul , e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda ; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha , si indigeysses de aquels , e aprop strenh aquel .	0.957869
and if you perceive a fragment in the fracture , cut down upon it , remove it , and dress the wound as before said , until it heals .	e si sentes satagias trencadas en lu , lahoras tu fen sobre aquela , e osta aquel , e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada .	0.925991
		0.3
