chapter twenty-nine .	capitol . xxix .	0.921429
on scraping the teeth with an iron instrument .	de razo de dentz am ferr .	0.403571
sometimes there collect upon the inner and outer surface of the teeth and also between the gums , rough scales , ugly , sometimes black or yellow or green , from which corruption is communicated to the gums and thus the teeth become unsightly .	quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras , legas , e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas .	0.788903
the patient should sit before you , putting his head in your lap ; and you should scrape the teeth or molars on which you can discern crusts or gritty substance , till nothing remains ; do them all in the like manner , black , green , yellow , and the rest , until they are all gone .	e donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se , e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa , e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas .	0.759945
if they disappear at the first scraping , good ; but if not repeat the scraping on the following day and the second and third until you attain your purpose .	donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio , bo es ; e sino , lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols .	0.761719
you should know that molars need scraping-tools of many diverse forms and shapes according to the character of your undertaking ; for the tool with which the inner surface of the teeth is scraped differs from the tool with which the outer surface is scraped ; and that for scraping between the teeth is different again .	e sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio .	0.203976
here is a number of scrapers , all of which you will have ready by you ~~~ .	e per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas , e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost :	-0.0781513
		0.3
