chapter thirty-three .	capitol . xxxiii .	0.95625
on the treatment of dislocation of the ankle .	de la curacio de la dislocacio del talo .	0.855882
the ankle is sometimes slightly displaced , sometimes fully dislocated , the dislocation being either internal or external .	le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio , e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment , e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo .	0.915421
the sign of its dislocation is that you will see the ankle swollen , and projecting on the side to which it is dislocated .	e le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat .	0.495172
as to the treatment of its displacement , the reduction of it is easy : if it is gently extended with the hands and straightened , it will go back .	mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio , e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne .	0.773436
as to treatment when it is dislocated completely , you should make the patient sit upright with a strong and sturdy assistant holding him about the middle from behind .	mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment , cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt , e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu .	0.833502
then hold the dorsum of the foot with your right hand , and with the left grasp the foot from below about the heel .	e aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part , e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha .	0.7067
then draw the foot toward you with your right hand , then with the left , twice .	e aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta , e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas , e aprop exten am la sinistra ; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh .	1.0268
then extend it with the left hand and thrust the metatarsus with the right hand without violence toward the leg .	e fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat .	0.45765
do this as we have described , twice .	e aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada , e tu es a la cavilha .	0.851613
then thrust the metatarsus toward the leg a third time while exerting traction at the heel .	donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra , e si vezes le pe engualhat , es bo ; e sino , lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio , quar aquel retorna .	0.581818
if it goes back in one or two attempts thus , and you see the foot is straightened , well and good . ~~~ if not , repeat the operation and it will go back .	mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat , lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra , e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat , e que caja entre las coyssas de lu , e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute .	0.248554
if you find it impossible to reduce it by what we have said , make the patient lie on his back on the ground and firmly fix in the ground between his thighs a stake wrapped in material so as not to hurt him .	e aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas , e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe ; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par , e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel , per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio .	0.713992
then an assistant should grasp his thigh and another assistant should extend the foot , either manually or with a cord tied round the narrow part of it ; the assistants should pull one against another , with the stake upright between the patient's thighs holding him so that his body will not be dragged down with the extension .	e aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas , e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos , quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat .	0.543232
then the doctor should straighten out the dislocation with both hands , while another assistant holds down the sound leg ; then the dislocation will speedily go back .	e donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu , lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment , e ligua le pe am liament a la camba .	0.876429
then when the dislocation is reduced and the soundness of the reduction is manifested to you , apply a plaster and packing , bandage firmly and bind the foot downwards .	e cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo , per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment .	0.715809
you will have to be careful of the tendon above the ankle at the back , not to bandage tightly over it so as to injure it .	e aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres ; e si le liament es mollificat , extrenh aquel .	0.893818
then leave him for two or three days ; and if the binding works loose , tighten it up .	e aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart , e prohibeys le malaute de anament per . xl .	0.845342
then on the third or fourth day loosen it , but the patient is to abstain from walking for forty days , for if he tries to walk before this lapse of time you cannot be sure that the dislocation will not collapse and corruption set in and thereafter be incurable .	dias . ~~~ mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi , no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda , e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio .	0.143992
if an abscess occur you must allay it by the application of such dressings and embrocations as we have already described more than once , until it is gone .	e si accideys a lu apostema caut , lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio , en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio , entro que sia remauguda .	0.614441
		0.3
