chapter seven .	capitol . vii .	1.02692
on the repair of a fracture of the breast .	de restauracio de la fractura del pietz .	0.633333
the breast is sometimes fractured in the middle but this happens rarely ; more often it is the extremities of it that are broken and comminuted .	le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve ; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas .	0.833193
the symptoms that occur when it is broken in the middle are that he bows downwards and suffers violent pain , difficulty in breathing , and coughing , and sometimes he vomits blood ; and there is an obvious and palpable concavity in the bone .	e dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor , e dificultat en lo hale , e tos , e fort leu e vomeys sanc ; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment .	1.25594
now the way to mend it is for the patient to lie on his back , and you place a pillow between his shoulders ; then his shoulders are squeezed , and with your hands you press together his ribs from both sides and skilfully try to equalize them in any way you conveniently can , until the bone is reduced to its proper form .	e la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos , e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi ; e aprop prem als muscles de lu , e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz , e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo , entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove .	0.839232
then apply over it a plaster and a pad and place over that a splint of thin willow board or brier or similar light wood , first wrapping it in cloth ; then gently bind this upon the fractured bone so that it does not slip ; and carry your bandage round about the back several times , tying it firmly ; then inspect it constantly , and whenever it loosens tighten it .	e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat , pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap ; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut ; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas , e strenh aquel am strictura decent ; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora , e quan es mollificada strenh aquela .	0.970169
if you are compelled to loosen it on account of itching at the place , or pain or swelling , loosen it quickly and remove the plaster and correct whatever has occurred with the appropriate treatment . ~~~ then renew the plaster if you think fit , and keep it bandaged until it heals .	e si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment , o dolor , o apostema que accideysso en le loc , lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu ; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre , si vezes ad aquo la facia ; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat .	0.316785
		0.3
