chapter thirty-nine .	capitol . xxxix .	0.95
on the removal of a leech sticking in the throat .	de extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro .	0.618699
when you treat a leech by the medical means spoken of in the appropriate section , with no effect , then inspect the patient's throat in full sunlight after depressing the tongue with the instrument i have described .	quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys , considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh , pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat .	0.933333
if your gaze falls upon the leech , pull it out at once with a small hook or a fine pair of forceps .	donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua , extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment .	0.773684
but if you cannot get hold of it , take a cannula and introduce it into the patient's mouth near the leech , then pass through the cannula a red-hot iron ; do this repeatedly ; while the patient must not drink at all that day .	e si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel , lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute , e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit , e fay aquo tantas vetz ( entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro ) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua .	0.620467
then let him take a vessel full of cold water , open his mouth in it and rinse out with it , but let him not swallow a drop of it ; and he should keep the movement of the water going by hand time after time ; for the leech straightway falls off when it feels the water .	e aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega , e obra la boca de lu en aquela , e lava la boca am aquela ; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma , quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz .	0.721512
if it does not come away by these means , fumigate the patient's throat with urine or with the juice of asafoetida , using the instrument described for fumigating the uvula .	mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat , lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula .	0.742045
do this several times , for then it will fall away .	fay aquo , so en quar cayra .	0.718841
in fumigating , this is the way to set about it : take a pot containing live coals , fitted with a lid and a hole in the middle of the lid into which is fitted the end of the instrument . ~~~ then put in the aromatic ; and the patient should apply his mouth to the end of the cannula , with his mouth closed to prevent the escape of the vapour , until he knows that the vapour has reached his throat ; for the leech will at once come away .	e es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela , es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc , e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument ; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio ; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula , e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua , quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra .	0.445149
but if it does not come away , let the inhalation be repeated many times . ~~~ let the patient endure his thirst , and eat salty food and garlic and drink no water . ~~~ it will inevitably be removed by this treatment .	e si no catz , lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz , e abstengua le malaute de beure , e mange causas saladas e alhs , e no begua aygua , e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada .	0.0522124
this is the figure of an instrument for extracting the leech from the throat when visible .		-0.3
it resembles forceps , as you see , except that it has this bend for entry into the throat ; and the two extremities are shaped like a bird's bill , with the roughness of a file .	e aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista ; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes , sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat :	0.703308
when they have hold of a thing they do not let go . ~~~ and another instrument with which to depress the tongue . ~~~ it is a wide ring of iron , of such a size as to go into the mouth above the tongue .	le qual sia mesa al guolayro , e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia , que es guanta , en la qual es aspretat de lima , per so quar , quan comprem alcuna causa , aquela no leyssa .	0.086087
it is inserted into the mouth standing on its side , and the mouth stays open without the patient's volition ; nor can he dislodge it at all until you turn it .		-0.3
inside the ring appear the words : 'the pattern of the instrument for opening the mouth ; exactly of this size'		-0.3
		0.3
