chapter twenty-eight .	capitol . xxviii .	0.95625
on the treatment of a dislocation of the wrist . ~~~ the carpus of the hand is often dislocated .	de curacio de dislocacio de malassen , so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma .	0.394302
unlike other joints , the reduction is easy , but there should be haste to reduce it as soon as it is dislocated , before the place swells or an abscess occur .	malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada , e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera , e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas , mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada , denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut .	0.928865
the way of reducing the dislocation is to place the patient's wrist upon a board while an assistant stretches the hand , and the doctor puts the palm of his hand upon the prominence of the joint and applies pressure on it until it goes back .	e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel , e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura , e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc .	1.02259
but he should examine : if it is a displacement toward the ventral aspect of the hand , the patient should place the back of his hand upon the board for extension and reduction ; but if it be a luxation toward the dorsum of the hand , then the inner part of the hand should be laid upon the board so that the doctor's hand may come upon the prominence of the joint itself .	mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma , lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio ; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma , lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula , per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura .	0.960331
if it go back at once , good ; but if not , bandage it with a plaster that settles swelling and let it be . ~~~ do not revert to it , for it will not tolerate that , and you will not be able to effect its reduction after some days have passed .	e donc si retorna tantost , bon es ; e sino , lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel ; e no iteres aquo , quar sino , no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias .	0.186127
but the joint will retain its deformity ; and the patient will in no wise be harmed except if his hand is slackened so that he be unable to grip anything ; then you may know that the tendons are either severed or bruised . ~~~ in this situation there is no method but to strengthen it by cauterization ; this sometimes helps but sometimes is of no use at all .	mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat ; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa , sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa ; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz , e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa .	0.218886
when the reduction of the joint is complete , apply to it the plaster we have described , then bandage it and leave it for five days ; then loosen it and try out the hand .	donc cum malassem es retornada , lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat , e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias ; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada .	0.655321
if movement be hampered and any hardness occur in it , soften it repeatedly with hot water and sweating until it be softened .	mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat , lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas , entro que sia alleujat .	0.573462
		0.3
