chapter fifty-two .	capitol . lii .	0.934615
on the treatment of protruding navel .	de curacio de eminencia del umbilic .	1.04062
the navel becomes prominent from many causes ; either from a rupture of the peritoneum over the abdomen , so that omentum or intestine comes through it as in other ruptures ; or from blood extravasation from an artery or vein , as we have mentioned ; or else from wind trapped in it .	eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas ; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre , e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas ; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit , o per ventositat coarctada en lu .	0.612054
if it be due to ruptured peritoneum and protruding omentum , the colour of the tumour will be the same as the rest of the body ; it will be soft and painless and will seem to change its position ; but if it be due to an escape of bowel the change of position , compared with what we have described , will be greater , and it will disappear on digital pressure , and then will recur ; and often there will be crepitus with it , and it will increase in size on entering the bath or on violent exertion .	mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela , lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors ; e es leon ses dolor , e aprop appar de divers situament . ~~~ e si es per egressio del budel , lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat , de mays vehement diversitat , e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat , e aprop retorna ; e fort leu es am lu so , e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh .	0.282656
if it be due to fluid , it will be soft and will not disappear on manual pressure , nor will it grow larger or smaller .	mays si per humiditat , lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma , ni es constrengut , ni es cregut .	0.72212
if it be due to blood , then in addition to these signs the tumour will appear blackish .	e si es per sanc , lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant .	0.962441
if it arise from a fleshy overgrowth , the tumour will be solid and hard , remaining always constant in bulk .	mays si es per carn nada , lahoras es apostema greu , gros e dur , e es ficat segon una quantitat .	1.03645
if it be due to wind , it will be soft to the touch .	mays si es per ventositat , lahoras le tocament de lu es leon .	0.6175
the operation for these is to examine , and if the exomphalos be due to arterial or venous blood , or wind , you should withhold treatment since it is dangerous in these cases , with an uncertain outlook , as i taught you in the chapter on tumours arising from an artery or vein .	e la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria , o de vena , o per ventositat ; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu , quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena .	0.697159
but if it be due to bowel or omentum , bid the patient hold his breath and stand stiffly upright ; then make an ink mark all round the umbilicus ; then tell him to lie on his back before you ; then with a broad scalpel cut all round the umbilicus along the line marked out ; then draw up the middle of the tumour with a large hook ; then ligature the site of the incision with a strong thread or silk cord , tying it securely with a slip-knot .	e si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela , lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu , e sia stant extendut ; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic , e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos , e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta ; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran ; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent .	0.785613
then open the middle of the tied tumour above the ligature and insert your forefinger and search for the bowel ; and if you find it caught in the ligature slacken the slip-knot and push the bowel back into the abdomen .	e aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel ; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament , lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre .	0.812888
but if you find omentum , stretch it with a hook and cut off what is superfluous .	e si has atrobada la tela , lahoras pren aquel am unci ; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu .	0.886124
and if you come across an artery or vein , tie it securely and go on with your work : take two needles and thread them with two strong threads and insert the two needles into the incision that you have made around the tumour , pushing them in so that they cross one another . ~~~ then ligature the tumour in four places over the needles .	mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena , lahoras circunda aquel mot , e aprop retorna a la tua operacio ; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz , las quals fassas penetrar ; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas .	0.231307
if you wish , you may remove the needles and let be until the ligatured tissue necroses and falls away of its own accord ; or cut it away when it is thin and necrosing . ~~~ then dress with the needful ointments until healed .	e si tu vols , osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si ; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys , e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat .	0.320934
but if the prominent navel be due to an overgrowth of flesh there or from humidity , you should slice the tumour as we have said and get out all the blood or humidity to be found there . ~~~ then dress it with stimulating dressings .	e si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat , lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat , la qual atrobas en lu , e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc .	0.252072
		0.3
