chapter fifty-three .	capitol . liii .	0.921429
on the treatment of cancer .	de curacio de cranc .	1.2
we have spoken , in the relevant section , of the kinds of cancer and of the way in which medical treatment of them is to be attempted ; with a warning against treatment by the knife lest they ulcerate .	ja havem dit , en la divisio , de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas , e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat ; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu .	1.02718
we also mentioned the cancer arising in the uterus and gave a warning against its treatment .	e diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu , ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel , e majorment quan es comensant petit .	0.644872
the ancients said that when a cancer is in a site where total eradication is possible , such as a cancer of the breast or of the thigh , and in similar parts where complete removal is possible , and especially when in the early stage and small , ( then surgery was to be tried ) .	mays quan es antiquat e es gra , no cove que te propries a lu , quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre , ni que sia pervengut ad aquo .	0.513684
but when it is of long standing and large you should leave it alone .	e la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit , es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas , e aprop sagna aquel , si es atrobada replecio manifesta .	0.642857
for i myself have never been able to cure any such , nor have i seen anyone else succeed before me . ~~~ the procedure in a case amenable to treatment , as we have said , is first for the patient to be purged several times from black bile ; then bleed him if his veins seem full .	e aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio , e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel ; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu .	0.187795
then put the patient in the most convenient position for operating . ~~~ then attach to the tumour hooks suited to it ; then make a circular incision all round to include the skin with the utmost thoroughness so that not the least root of it remains ; let the blood flow and do not stanch it quickly ; but put pressure upon the place and squeeze out all the thick blood , either by hand or with any instrument you can .	e layssa correr le sanc , e no abscidas aquel leugierament , e exprem les locs , e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments .	0.22878
if in operating you get a very severe haemorrhage from cutting an artery or vein , cauterize the vessel until the bleeding stops ; then dress in the usual way until healed .	mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria , lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat , e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat .	0.614913
		0.3
