chapter three .	capitol . iii .	1.02692
on the repair of a broken nose .	de restauracio del nas quan es trincat .	0.541026
you should know that the only portion of the nose that can break is the upper portion in its entirety or in one of its two parts ; for it consists of two bones .	sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas , o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas , per so quar en lu has dos osses , quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa , e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat .	0.603125
the lower portion is cartilaginous and unbreakable ; what can happen to it is contusion , twisting , or flattening .	mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu , lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas , e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic , e am le dit pous defora , entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural .	0.644705
if one of the two ( upper ) parts be broken you should pass your little finger into the nostril and straighten out the fracture from inside , with your index and thumb outside , until you reduce the nose to its natural shape ; do it gently , and take care that you do not cause the patient pain in doing it .	e sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat , e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor .	0.241364
if the fracture be in the upper part of the nose and your finger does not reach it , it should be evened by means of a probe with some thickness to it .	e si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas , e le dit no perve ad aquela , lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut .	0.774286
if the break be on both sides , follow the same course .	e si la fractura es en doas partidas , lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo .	0.842857
haste must be made to set it on the first day if possible ; but if not , after the seventh or tenth day when the effusion has subsided .	e coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura , si es possible ; e sino , lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut .	0.841756
then introduce into the nasal foramen a linen pad , if it be a unilateral fracture , or two pads if it be bilateral ; the pads should be thick enough to fill the nasal foramen .	e aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li , si la fractura es en una partida , o metz doas calguas , si la fractura es en doas partidas , e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas .	0.757561
certain of the ancient bone-setters suggest that you should soak the pads in butter and change them daily , but i do not think so ; you should rather soak them in egg-white made up into a paste with mill-dust ; then leave the pads in until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardens .	e diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder , e sian permudadas en tot dia , mays no es vist a mi ; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli ; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage .	0.752815
sometimes , instead of pads , the stems of goose-quills are introduced into the nose after being wound round with a piece of soft cloth , so as to make a stronger support for the fracture of the nose and not to hinder the patient's breathing .	e alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas , en loc de calgua , pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon ; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio .	0.688088
this is not absolutely necessary ; do it if you prefer ; or , if you prefer , put in pads .	e aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria ; e si voles , fay aquo , e si voles , fay calguas .	1.20435
if during your operation an abscess occurs , apply to the nose a wax plaster or cotton wool soaked in vinegar and oil of roses or a little diachylon ointment .	e si accideys autra veguada apostema caut , emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat , o am diaquilon .	0.627654
if no abscess occurs you should apply externally a plaster of white flour and frankincense made into a paste with egg-white ; then put on top some soft tow , but do not bind up the nose at all .	mays si no accideys apostema caut , lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou ; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon , e no lies le nas am alcuna causa .	0.779503
if the nasal bones are broken into small pieces or crushed , you should cut down upon them , remove them with a suitable instrument , and then suture the incision and dress with suitable ointments which encourage granulation and scarring .	mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz , lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels , e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels ; e aprop cos la scissura , e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida , e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz .	0.879666
if there occur an internal wound of the nose , you should dress it with pads and employ leaden tubes until it heals .	e si accideys plagua dedintz le nas , lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat .	0.729474
		0.3
