chapter fifty-eight .	capitol . lviii .	0.95
on the treatment of retention of urine .	de curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua .	1.26471
retention of the urine is caused by an obstruction , from a stone or a clot of blood or pus or a fleshy tumour , or similar cause .	retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat , o per poyre o per carnada , e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio .	0.721154
when you have carried out treatment in the ways we have prescribed in their place and the urine is not released ; and when you see that it is held back by a stone sticking in the neck of the bladder , then you should have the patient down on his knees , squatting ; then mount a man on his back to press his abdomen against his back ; and let the patient himself hold his breath as tightly as possible ; for then pressure will be put on the neck of the bladder to force the stone back and liberate the urine .	e si no es dissolvuda la urina , e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica , lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs .	0.255
but if these measures do not free it and the matter is very urgent with the patient , then you should attempt to bring it out with the instrument called a catheter , of which this is the figure .	e aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos , e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible .	0.650172
it is made of silver , slender and smooth and hollow like the quill of a bird's feather ; as slender as a probe ; about a span and a half in length ; and with a tiny funnel at the end .	donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras , per que la urina es absolta .	0.82585
this is the manner in which you draw off the urine through it : take a double thread and with a strong knot tie a little wool or cotton on the end , introduce the end of the thread into the lower end of the catheter , and trim off with scissors any superfluous wool , so that it will go into the tube and close it like a tassel .	e si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute , lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua , del qual aquesta es la forma : sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau , ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig , al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu .	0.53859
then smear the catheter with oil or butter or egg-white . ~~~ make the patient sit down ; then anoint the bladder and the meatus of the penis with humid oils or with olive-oil and warm water .	e la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura ; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua , e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana , mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia e aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou .	0.404588
then gently introduce the catheter into the urethra until it reaches the root of the urethra .	e fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha , e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz , e oli de oliva e ayguaros .	0.905907
then turn the end of the penis upward toward the umbilicus ; then push the catheter inwards until the curve of the catheter ends , and push the catheter in until it reaches nearly to the seat . ~~~ then turn the penis down , with the catheter in it , and push until it reaches the bladder , and the patient now feels that it has entered a hollow .	e aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua ; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic ; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela ; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica , e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda , e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde , sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat .	0.390565
the reason why the operation is done in this manner is that the passage by which the urine is excreted is curved .	e aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit , quar la urina siec la lana .	0.735
then withdraw rather firmly the thread with the wool plug attached , for the urine follows the wool ; then pull it right out and the urine will pour out . ~~~ apply the catheter again and again until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief .	aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina , e usa ciringua , no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio .	0.147468
		0.3
