chapter fifteen .	capitol . xv .	0.95
on adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea .	de la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea .	1.75532
this adhesion happens to many people , the upper lid sticking to the white of the eye and hindering its movement and preventing its natural functions . ~~~ you should introduce the end of a probe beneath the lid and raise it upward ; or stretch it with a hook .	quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel , e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals , donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra , e eleva en sus aquela , o exten aquela am le unci .	0.34372
then cut the adhesion with a fine scalpel ; it should not be so sharp as a cutting scalpel , but somewhat blunt , lest during the operation the patient should shake , and the scalpel slip , and the edge injure the eye .	e aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil , le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios , habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio , e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat .	0.792762
let your incision be as if peeling off the adhesion . ~~~ wait until the lid regains its natural shape and the adhesions be wholly healed .	e sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia .	0.309926
then rinse the eye with saline and cleanse it ; or instil into it drops of a watery solution of eye-lotion of verdigris .	e aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves ; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua .	0.614651
then separate between the eye and the lid with a linen pad and put over the eye a piece of wool moistened with white of egg ; and after the third day employ healing eye-lotions till it is better .	e aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li , e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou , e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat .	0.42973
		0.3
