chapter two . ~~~ on a fracture occurring in the head .	capitol segon : de fractura quan accideys en le cap .	0.333333
the kinds of fracture occurring in the head are many , of various forms and differing causes .	las specias de fracturas son motas , e las figuras de lor son diversas , e las causas son distinctas , quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza , e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac , le qual es dejos le os , ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust , e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial ; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os , e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu ; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta .	0.517206
some fractures are due to a sword-stroke which may cut right through the bone and reach the membrane beneath the bone , like an adze-cut in wood , for which reason this kind of cut is called 'ascial' .	e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca , e de fractura que es contricio o atricio ; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra , e a lor semblantz .	1.08333
or the sword may cut through part of the bone , only slicing through the surface and not reaching the depth ; this kind is called an absolute avulsion .	e aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os ; o es en la facia del os , e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca .	0.948387
the wounds in these two fractures can be either big or small .	e de fractura es que es ameguada en le os , en la subtilitat del cabel petita , e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar .	0.804202
there are also some fractures accompanied by smashing or crushing ; such as by a blow from a stone or by falling on a stone , and the like . ~~~ a fracture of this kind will be either penetrating , reaching the membrane beneath the bone ; or superficial ; the wound in these two fractures may be either big or small .	e es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz , que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz , e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz .	0.47578
then there is a type of fracture that is hidden in the bone , as fine as a hair , a thin crack ; therefore this kind of fracture is called 'capillary' .	e majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz , ayssi cum so caps de efantz .	0.658209
there is a fracture due to a fall or a blow from a stone and the like , making a dent in the surface of the bone and a hollow at the site as occurs in a bronze bowl when a blow falls on it and a portion of it is pushed in .	e so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias , so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas .	0.6173
this mostly occurs in heads whose bones are soft , as those of children .	e yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc .	0.863736
any of these kinds of fracture may also have splinters , jagged or otherwise ; we shall deal with the treatment of all these in their place .		-0.3
all these kinds of fracture are diagnosed by laying them bare and investigating them with probes and removing all the lacerated tissues over them .	e conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor .	0.977792
the 'capillary' kind is diagnosed by laying bare the bone , wiping it clean , and rubbing ink on it , when the fracture will appear black .	e specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os , e es abstergit , e linit sobre lu am tentha , quar la fractura appar negra .	1.11431
as to the treatment of the fracture : begin by paying attention to the patient's symptoms . ~~~ if you observe any symptom clearly indicating something dangerous , such as bilious vomit , convulsion , mental derangement , loss of voice , fainting , high fever , protrusion and inflammation of the eyes , and similar symptoms , then leave the patient alone and do not treat him ; for in the majority of cases these symptoms undoubtedly indicate the approach of death .	mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute , e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor , ayssi cum es vomit de colera , e extencio , e perdement de entendament , e abscizio de votz , e sincopi , e febre acuta , e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels , e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios , ses dopte no es sanat .	0.521319
but if you find symptoms that do not alarm you and you see hope of recovery for him , then begin treatment as follows .	e si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut , lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu .	1.20548
if he be brought to you immediately after his injury and it be the season of winter , you should try to remove the bone , at all events before the fourteenth day .	la qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern , lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio .	0.560414
if it be summer you must hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day , before the covering membrane beneath the bone and over the brain be infected , and before the above-mentioned symptoms occur .	e si es en les dias d’estiu , lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia , habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol , e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz .	1.08584
if the fracture has already reached the cerebral membrane with fragmentation of the bone and depression , then you must cut out the splintered and broken part as i shall now describe to you .	e si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel , e es am partidas menudas e atricio , lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita , segon que yeu recomtare a tu .	0.96086
shave the head of the injured patient and lay the bone bare in any way you can , following the course of the injury and in the manner least grievous to the injured man .	e es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat , e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua , e que sia leugier sobre le malaute .	0.953431
if , when you lay the bone bare , you encounter a haemorrhage or abscess , meet the case with suitable remedies ; that is , pack the place with dressings soaked in wine and oil of roses , and cleanse the wound until the swelling subsides and you are safe from haemorrhage ; then begin the trepanning and removal of the bone .	e si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os , fluxs de sanc o apostema caut , lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove , e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat , e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema , e sies segur de fluxs del sanc ; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu .	1.03732
this may be done in one of two ways .	e aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio .	1.25643
one way is to cut the bone with a fine-bladed chisel , this being the figure of it . ~~~ then after this one employ another chisel , a little broader . ~~~ it is figured here .	e la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal , e aquesta es la forma de lu : e aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest , un pauc pus lat que aquel ; e aquesta es la forma de lu :	0.172692
then use yet another chisel still broader than the second .	e aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon .	0.8
you should have by you a number of different chisels , some broader than others and some shorter than others ; their tips should be exquisitely sharp ; and they should be made of indian iron or best steel .	e cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses , dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres ; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz , e sian de ferr indi o felod .	0.781838
let the strokes upon the chisel be gentle lest the head be shocked or injured .	e usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel .	0.913575
if the bone be strong and hard you should , before you use the chisel , make perforations round about it with drills called 'non-sinking' drills .	e si le os es fort , dur , lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels , les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz .	0.988017
their name of non-sinking drills is due to their not piercing the cranial bone through to what is beneath , because the drill has a circular margin beneath its sharp head like a small collar or wheel , that prevents it from sinking in and going beyond the thickness of the bone .	e no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu , per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit , le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os .	0.733918
you must obtain a large number of these drills each of which will suit a certain thickness of bone ; so that for each skull you have a drill whose pointed extremity is of a length to suit the thickness of that skull . ~~~ here are figured three kinds of drill , large , medium , and small .	e es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os , entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda , la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test .	0.191558
as to the manner of perforation round the fractured bone , you apply the drill to the bone and revolve it with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced , then you transfer the drill to another place , making the distance between the perforations about the thickness of a probe .	e aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels : la qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat ; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc , e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo .	0.623101
then with the chisels cut out the bone between the perforations , using the utmost delicacy , as we have said . ~~~ then take out the bone , either with your hand or with some other instrument you have ready for the purpose , such as forceps or fine tongs .	e aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os , e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat , ayssi cum havem dit , entro que erradiques le os , o am la tua ma , o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo , ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils .	0.31068
you will have to observe the utmost caution that neither drill nor chisel touch any part of the membrane .	e cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac .	0.743243
when you have cut the bone circularly , free from the membrane if adherent to it , and have removed it , then you will have to scrape away and smooth out all the roughness in the remaining bone with another instrument , resembling a chisel , except that it must be finer and slenderer than any of them .	e donc cum auras circuit le os perforan , e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu , e auras aquel extrayt , cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori , mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris .	1.03403
if there are any little bits or spicules of bone left , pick them out with whatever instrument you can , gently ; and then treat the wound with dressings and ointments as we shall describe .	e si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias , lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz ; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz .	0.831341
the other way of operating is altogether easy and free from danger ; galen mentioned it and greatly praised it ; these are his words : you should begin by laying bare that part of the bone where the fracture is severest and most obvious ; when you have done so , place under it the tip of this lenticular chisel figured here .	e l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera , longinqua de paor , la qual diyssec gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor ; e aquest es le sermo de lu : necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta , entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma :	0.843881
the lenticular part of it should be smooth and not for cutting , the sharp part of it being on both sides longitudinally , as you see ; so that the lenticular part is resting upon the meninges while the cutting surface is on the bone .	e es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa , e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut , ayssi cum vezes ; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os .	1.10934
then with a small hammer strike the tool on one side until you gently cut through the bone in a circle , in the confident knowledge that nothing untoward can happen to the membrane even though the operator be the most ignorant and cowardly of men ; yes , even if he be sleepy .	e aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut , e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra , e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor ; certament , e si era dorment .	0.827679
if any membrane stick to any part of the bone , strip it off with the lenticular tip of the chisel and free it gently from it , for it will come away without harm or danger .	lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os , inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular , e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat , quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor .	0.943144
if it be a fracture of the bone not reaching to the meninges , only the surface of the bone being separated , and there remain some roughness and fine splinters , you should smooth down the roughness and remove the splinters with fine scrapers , of which you should have a number , of varying sizes so that you can use the one best fitted and most suitable , in the light of what is suggested by your operative method and the broken bone itself and its shape .	e si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol , e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu , e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils , lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre , de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu .	0.734119
when you smooth the bone you must first use the broadest of the scrapers and then a finer one , and so on until you come to use the finest and slenderest of all .	e cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris , e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu , e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels .	0.766667
as to the rest , the little capillary fractures and fine fissures , you will have to apply to each of them that treatment that will bring about a perfect repair .	mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil , cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu .	0.737468
this is obvious to anyone who has the least practice in this art and is acquainted with what we have written in explanation of the big fractures .	e es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art . ~~~ e stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas .	0.211743
if the meninges are left bare when you remove the bone , you should take a linen dressing measured to the wound , soak it in oil of roses , and apply it to the opening of the wound ; then take another dressing , folded in two or three , soak it in wine and oil of roses and apply it over the first with the utmost gentleness so as not to press upon the meninges ; then employ a broad bandage on top , but tighten it only enough to keep the wound covered .	e si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os , lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua , e submergeys aquel en oli rozat , e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua ; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel , que no graves le ciphac ; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat , e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament .	0.80602
leave it with this dressing on for a day or two until you are sure there is no abscess ; then loosen it and apply desiccant remedies such as lily roots , vetch-flour , powdered frankincense , birthwort , and the like .	e layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut ; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat , ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs , e polvera de enses e de aristologia , e de semblantz ad aquels .	1.1681
the method is that you make a powder of these drugs and sprinkle it , dry as it is , upon the wound ; in short , in these cases use drugs whose nature is cleansing and not irritating .	e es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua , ayssi cum son secas ; e universalment , administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique .	0.95979
in this be most diligent , that the wound , while you are treating it , be clean ; nor let there be any dirty vestiges of ointment in it or any filth ; and let no pus collect in it ; for when pus collects on the meninges it corrupts them and renders them necrotic , which causes great harm to the patient .	e guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta ; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra ; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu ; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel , corromp aquel e poyreys aquel , e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna .	0.965432
sometimes the surface meninges go black when the bone is removed , especially when the treatment of them is neglected ; so observe , and if the patient exhibit any of the symptoms that we have mentioned you may know that he is undoubtedly doomed .	e accideys en le ciphac del cap , cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu , e es negror en la superficia de lu ; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz , sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte .	0.92352
but if the blackness be due to some medicament applied to it , which has the power to produce blackness of that kind , then you should take one part of honey and three parts of oil of roses , beat them well up together , spread on a cloth and apply it to the membrane ; then treat as necessary until cured .	e si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus , e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror , lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas . iii . , ~~~ e am aquels linieys un drap , e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac ; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat .	0.274898
		0.3
