chapter six .	capitol . vi .	1.05
on the repair of a fracture of the scapula .	de restauracio de fractura de la spalla .	0.958095
the scapula is rarely fractured in the broad part but it does break at its margins .	spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges .	0.624378
when any part of it is broken or it breaks in the middle ( which is recognized by palpation ) you should attempt the correction of the fracture according to the shape it takes , and its restoration to its natural form , by whatever means you can .	e donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament , lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible .	0.7515
then apply over the place mill-dust with eggwhite , and soft tow ; and over that a dressing made of a folded cloth ; and over that a broad splint made of thin board to the size of the whole scapula or a little wider .	e aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon ; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat ; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc .	0.808904
if there be beneath the splint a hollow in any part of the scapula , level it with soft tow so that the splint rests evenly .	mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula , lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon , e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat .	0.519429
then bind tightly over it a long sling and make sure that the splint does not slip out of place .	e aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc .	0.741608
examine the bandage daily ; and whenever it gets loose tighten it and adjust the splint if it has shifted .	e considera le liament en quascun dia ; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat , lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc .	0.998864
the patient should lie on his sound side .	e jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa .	0.891176
the scapula mends in twenty or twenty-five days .	e la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en . xxv .	0.876923
when this time has elapsed you may safely loosen the bandaging , for this is one of the bones in which there is no danger of fragmentation or cracking .	e donc quan es complit aquest nombre , lahoras tu dissolveys le liament , e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio .	0.725806
if a splinter of bone protrudes and starts to prick under the skin , cut down upon it and remove it , and do as i said under fracture of the collar-bone , to allay the effusion , if anything of that kind happen .	e si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena , lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu , e osta le , e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui .	0.879684
		0.3
