chapter thirty .	capitol . xxx .	1.00385
on the extraction of teeth .	d’eradicacio de dentz .	1.45714
you should treat toothache with every device and be reluctant to extract ; nothing can replace the tooth when it is extracted , for it is a noble substance—until there is no means of avoiding extraction .	cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu , quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada , quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu .	0.811803
when the patient is determined to have it out , act with deliberation till you are sure which is the painful tooth ; for often the pain deceives the patient and he thinks the pain is in a tooth that is sound , so he has that one extracted ; but the pain does not abate until the diseased tooth is removed .	mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar , que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent , quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana , e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada , quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies .	0.485395
we have frequently seen this happen in the practice of the barber-surgeons . ~~~ when you are quite sure which is actually the painful tooth you should cut away all round the tooth with a scalpel having a certain measure of strength , until the gum is separated all round .	donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent , e que o sabes be , lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut , entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida , e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz , o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas .	0.233266
then , with your fingers , or with a pair of fine forceps , first move the tooth slowly and gently till you stir it ; then get a good grip on it with a pair of large forceps , holding the patient's head between your knees so that it does not move . ~~~ then draw the tooth straight out so as not to splinter it .	e aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort , e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua , e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela , ni al malaute major dolor no dones .	0.0923447
and if it will not come out , then take one of these following instruments and gradually introduce it beneath the tooth all round ; then try to move it as you did before .	e donc si no es foro-getat , lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz , e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament .	0.707971
if the tooth has a hole in it or is decayed , you should plug the hole with a rag , forcing it in with the tip of a fine probe so that it will not break when you grip it with the forceps .	mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa , lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas .	0.614753
you must completely scarify all round the gum . ~~~ take the utmost care not to splinter the tooth lest a piece should remain behind and arouse the patient's ills afresh , causing greater pain than before .	e cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu , e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu .	0.276617
take care not to do those things that the ignorant barber-surgeons do in their rashness and haste in dental extraction , neglecting to employ the methods we describe . ~~~ for they often bring great troubles upon people , the least of which is to break the tooth off short , leaving the whole or part of the root behind ; or to remove the tooth together with a piece of the jaw bone , as i have often seen .	e guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor , ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat ; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas , e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas , o alcunas de aquelas , o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat .	0.213338
then after the extraction let the patient rinse with wine or vinegar and salt .	e aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal .	0.639407
if there occur haemorrhage from the place—a common occurrence—then pound up a little vitriol and stuff the place with it . ~~~ if the vitriol does not avail , cauterize .	e si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso , ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve , lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua , e si no confereys aquel zegi , cauteriza .	0.193831
the shape of the fine forceps with which you first move the tooth should be with long jaws and a short handle , thick , lest they bend when you take hold of the tooth . ~~~ and this is the shape of the large forceps .	la forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat , de breu manubre e gros , per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar .	0.271442
as you see , they have thick handles so that when you apply pressure with them they do not give or bend ; and short jaws .	e sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas , sian breus extramitatz .	0.688212
they should be of indian iron or of steel , strongly made , the jaws tempered and having teeth fitting into each other so that a sure and firm grip may be obtained . ~~~ sometimes the jaws are made like a file , also to give a strong grip .	e sian faytas de ferr de india descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz , e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort , e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia , so es guanta , e son de fort constriccio .	0.213158
		0.3
