chapter fifty-one .	capitol . li .	0.9
on the amputation of warts occurring on the belly .	de seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre .	1.2723
some people often get warts on the belly and on the rest of the body , called fungous warts , because of their resemblance to fungi . ~~~ they have a slender pedicle and a broad head , the edges of which are sometimes inverted ; and some are small , whereas others of them grow very big .	endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges , dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros ; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas , e es de aquels que es petit , e es de aquels que es mot magnificat .	0.389918
i myself once saw a man who had two warts on his belly that looked more like fungi than anything else ; they were white and had thin pedicles .	e yeu ja e vist un , e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz , e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs , de menuda razitz .	0.757784
their edges were inverted and had split open , and a humour flowed continually from them .	e ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian , e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps .	0.954667
i amputated them both and weighed them : one came to about eighteen ounces , and the other six ounces .	donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc . ~~~ e l’autre quays vi unc .	0.08625
this is the operation for amputating them : examine the patient carefully , and if he be of a humid temperament and the colour of the warts be white , and if they are soft , with a thin stalk , amputate them with a broad scalpel . ~~~ but you should also have at hand cauteries in a fire ; for often in amputating them there is much haemorrhage .	e la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit , e la color de atheil es blanca , humit , de subtil razitz ; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat , e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc , quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc ; e si te ventz le sanc , cauteriza aquel .	0.206217
so , if the bleeding be a hindrance to you , be quick and cauterize them . ~~~ on the other hand if you see that the patient is frightened and dreads the cutting of them with the scalpel , take a wire of stout lead , and ligature this type of wart and leave for two days .	e si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros , guarda te de inscizio am ferr ; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt , e strenh am aquel atheil , la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita ; e leyssa aquel per dos dias .	0.192857
then increase the stricture by the lead wire and go on doing this as it sinks into the wart , until the wart is cut through and spontaneously falls away with no trouble .	e aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom ; donc , no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil , entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh .	0.61942
but if the warts have stout pedicles there is some risk and fear in the cutting of them , especially those that occur on the belly .	mays si theil es de grossa razitz , lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor , e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre .	0.926035
sometimes , however , you can cut away the half , or some part , and then cauterize to prevent recurrence .	mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne .	0.693956
then dress until the wound is healed .	e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua .	0.539583
but beware of trying to cut away growths that are dark in colour , with little sensation and hideous in appearance , for they are cancerous tumours .	e guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color , de pauc sentiment , de leg reguardament , quar aquel es absi cancros .	0.799138
i shall soon be mentioning cancer .	e yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso .	0.555
		0.3
