chapter ten .	capitol . x .	1.02273
on setting a fractured hip .	de restauracio de la ancha .	1.15714
it is rare indeed that hip-bones are fractured , and if they are fractured the fracture consists of a comminution of the extremities of them and a longitudinal splitting and a bending inward ; and the patient feels a pain and a piercing at the site , and the leg on the fractured side is benumbed .	les osses de las anchas tart so trencats , e si trencan , lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz ; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura , e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura .	1.07084
to set it , you pass your hand over it and ascertain what the shape of the fracture is .	e la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu .	0.902857
if it is a fracture of the extremity only , set that fracture in whatever manner is convenient for you until it answers to its proper shape .	e si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament , lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural .	0.842429
but if it be a longitudinal fracture or it has bent inwards , have the patient lie on his stomach so as to make it convenient for setting the fracture ; and when you have set it apply over it a plaster and over that a splint of wood or leather , and bandage it in such wise that you have no fear that the fracture may extend or the splint slip .	mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos , lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura .	0.591234
level out the cavity of the lumbar region with some filling so that it may take the bandage evenly , and bid the patient sleep on his back or on his sound side .	e donc quan auras engualada aquela , pausa sobre lu emplastre , e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena , e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha .	0.8
if there occur an effusion , then refrain from bandaging or setting it until the effusion subsides ; and apply to it something to allay it as before said ; then return to setting it and bandaging it as it should be .	e enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat , e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa .	0.668985
if there be any splinters in the bone or anything crumbles away from the extremities , it must not be pulled out or touched , but set externally as we have said , and the bandaging should be left until it heals .	mays si accideys apostema caut , lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut , e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit ; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu , e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove .	0.911643
	e si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas , lahoras tu las tratz .	-0.3
		0.3
