chapter eighteen .	capitol . xviii .	1.01
on gathering up pannus from the eye .	de colleccio de sabel en le huel .	0.60119
pannus is a network of blood-vessels spreading over the eye so as to interfere with the function of sight and , in the course of time , weakening the eye .	sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio , e develican le huel am longitut de dias .	0.794164
you must first examine , and if the eye with the pannus be strong , with no fault other than the pannus , then the pannus should be gathered up .	donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel , lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel .	0.631034
this is done by bidding the patient put his head in your lap ; then , as skilfully as you may , pick up those blood-vessels with one or two hooks . ~~~ the hooks should be of a gentle curve , like this .	e es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se , e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia ; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma :	0.27084
or there can be two hooks joined together on one handle , thus .	o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma :	0.505769
then take up the blood-vessels gently with the fine scissors , and wipe away the blood constantly , till you see all those blood-vessels removed from the eye , and the blood wells forth .	e aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils , am subtilitat , e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora , entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas .	0.896104
but be careful of the eye lest you damage it with the points of the scissors .		-0.3
let your work be done in broad sunlight at midday ; and be very steady in your action so as to cut nothing beside the bloodvessels .		-0.3
when you have finished , instil the red or green lotion into the eye to destroy by its caustic action the remnants of the pannus .		-0.3
if you are unable to gather it all up at that one time , apply a plaster to the eye such as will allay the pain , and leave him* for a few days till* the pain be eased and there is no danger of an abscess .		-0.3
then repeat the operation in the same manner till it is healed .		-0.3
this is a figure of the scissors . [ ~~~ the principle in the operation is that the eye be opened with double or triple openers held by a skilful pupil , the patient's head being in that pupil's lap , while another wipes away the tears and carefully watches the internal and external angles of the eye .		-0.3
you have the choice between beginning the removal from the top or from the bottom of the eye . ~~~ the best method is to fix two hooks in the upper side , one at the end of the iris and the other at the beginning of it .	e guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum ; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh , e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas .	0.233548
hold them between your middle and first fingers . ~~~ then attach hooks below the points of the first two , and hold them between your third and fourth fingers .	e quan tu auras complitz , lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel .	0.179099
raise your hand slightly until you see that the whole pannus has been lifted . ~~~ then cut from the lesser angle , with scissors or a fine scalpel , as you wish . ~~~ introduce the scraping-needle and cut away the entire pannus until it is lifted over the conjunctiva .	mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora , e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu , e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut .	0.113846
do not interrupt the wiping , for tears and blood will flow and hinder you .	e aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat .	0.675
then cut with scissors what is left over the iris , from above and below , until nothing remains adhering except over the cornea .		-0.3
if you can remove it from over the cornea , peel with the scraping-needle , for it is better , and in some cases is easily done .		-0.3
when you cut it , its . . . will come out for some days ] .	e aquesta es la forma de las forfexs :	0.474194
		0.3
