chapter nine .	capitol . ix .	1.025
on the treatment of stones occurring in the eyelids .	cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels .	0.559394
there often occurs in the eyelids a thing resembling a hailstone in its strength and hardness , and therefore called 'hail' .	motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia , e per so grandissia es apelada .	0.880745
it is actually a collection of thick humours in the upper or lower lid .	e es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus .	0.921039
the operative treatment for it is thus : examine ; and if the stone is external on the outer aspect of the lid , and mobile in all directions , dealing with it is simple .	donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida ; e la causa de lu es leugiera .	0.611186
you make above it a transverse incision ; then scrape gently around it till it is free ; then catch it up with a hook and cut it away .	donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut , e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca , e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela .	0.586162
if it is in such a position that you cannot excise it without cutting through the lid , that will not harm the patient at all .	mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc , lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa .	0.577311
if the incision be big , gather it up with a suture and dress it till it heals .	e si la figura es gran , lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura ; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada .	0.847619
if it be small , it will be no trouble , for ointment will restore it and heal it .	e si es pauca , a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna .	0.945055
if the stone is rather toward the inner aspect of the eyelid , then invert the lid and catch up the stone with a hook—you will not need to incise the lid—and cut it all round . ~~~ if the lid is pierced in the cutting , it will do no harm at all .	e si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz , lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci , otra que tu indigescas de incizio , e prem aquela de tota part , e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada , aquo no notz en deguna causa .	0.238233
then , after cutting away the stone , wash the eye with salt water ; then treat with cicatrizing medicines till healed .	e aprop la incizio , lava le huel am aygua salada ; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat .	0.871429
		0.3
