chapter twelve .	capitol . xii .	1.00385
on the removal with the needle of irritating lashes from the eye .	de elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur .	0.514286
if it be one or two hairs the operation will be to take a fine needle , thread it with a fine smooth silk , bring the ends together , and knot them with a tiny knot ; the thread should be about a span in length .	quan son pels no-naturals , durs e aspres e pungentz les huels , lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon , e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil . ~~~ e sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma .	0.301494
then in the loop insert another fine thread , shorter than the first , and join the ends with a knot if you wish .	e aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu , e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols .	0.788812
then let the patient put his head in your lap in full sunlight , so that the operation may be clearly seen , because it is very fine work .	e aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se , e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada , quar es operacio subtil e menuda .	0.969311
then introduce the needle with the loop to the root of the superfluous hair and run it quickly through the eyelid till you make it come out above the natural hair .	e aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen , e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural .	0.616621
then draw the thread to the top of the loop and introduce that hair into the loop if it be one , two , or three , but not more .	e aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati , e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays .	1.12222
then draw away your hand with it until the hair emerges with the loop on the eyelid among the natural hair .	e aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural .	0.687895
if you pull the loop and the hair does not come out with it , you draw the loop down by means of the thread which you have previously passed through it , until the loop comes out at the upper perforation .	mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel , atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela , entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira .	0.577491
then put the hair back in and draw them both up ; keep on until the hair rises up in the upper perforation and you can see it . ~~~ then extract loop and thread and take them both out , and bind the eye and leave it bound for two or three days till the hair be fixed in its place and there is regeneration of flesh over it .	e vegas aquela am la visio del huel , quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel , e grotan quascu e clautz le huel , e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres , entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn .	0.331653
if the hair be short , put with it a long natural hair so that it may be raised together with that ; or let the hair grow till it reach a greater length , then raise it .	e si es mays breu le pel , lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals , e es elevat am aquel , o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi , e lehoras tu eleva aquel .	0.720677
		0.3
