chapter three .	capitol ters .	1.02692
on the cauterization of non-chronic migraine .	de cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua .	0.696139
when there occurs pain with headache in one side of the head and the pain extends to the eye ; and the patient has cleared his head with purging drugs and there has been applied the other treatment that i have mentioned in the sections on diseases , but to no avail ; in this disorder cauterization is of two sorts , either with caustic or with the actual cautery .	quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo , o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh , sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz , e sia aministrada l’autra curacio , la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias ; e tot no aprofieyta , lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras : o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent , o am ferr .	0.712557
this is the manner of cauterization with caustic : take one clove of garlic ; peel it and cut both ends off ; then cut open the site of the pain in the temple with a broad scalpel till there is room to contain the clove under the skin ; then introduce it under the skin till it lies completely hidden .	mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh , e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps . ~~~ e aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena , entro que sia occultada .	0.0859239
then bind up the wound tightly over it with pads and leave for fifteen hours ; then unbind it , remove the garlic , and leave the wound open for two or three days ; then apply cotton wool soaked in butter till it suppurates .	e aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio , e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas ; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh , e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn , e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac .	1.15384
then dress with ointment till it heals .	e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat .	0.896078
if you would rather , you may carry it out with one of the caustic drugs that i have included in the eighteenth treatise , on caustics .	e si tu voys , fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz .	0.642692
the actual cauterization with iron should be done in this way : heat a cautery of this shape .	mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra : igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma :	0.564935
it is called the claviform ; the head is nailshaped in that there is a slight curvature with a small protuberance in the middle .	e es apelat claus clavilhs , quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat , e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita .	0.609361
apply it then to the site of the pain , hold your hand steady and revolve it little by little .	e aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor , e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat .	1.08086
let the thickness of skin burnt be about half ; then remove your hand so as not to burn a subjacent artery , for thus a haemorrhage arises .	e si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu , e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos , per so que no vengua flux de sanc .	0.675221
then soak some cotton wool in saline , apply to the place , and leave three days ; then apply cotton wool with butter ; then treat with ointment till it heals .	e aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc , e layssa aquel per tres dias ; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder , e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat .	1.41683
or if you prefer you can cauterize this migraine with the knife-edge that juts out from the cautery ; but be careful not to cut an artery , specially in this kind of migraine that is non-chronic .	e si voys , cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri , e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua .	0.768459
		0.3
