chapter forty-seven .	capitol . xlvii .	0.95
on the treatment of the male breast when it resembles the female .	de la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas .	0.701299
the breasts of some males may swell on attaining puberty so as to resemble the female breast , and they remain permanently swollen and ugly .	alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz , e aprop so infladas las mamillas , e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas , e romano apostemosas , lejas .	0.451282
if this is abhorrent , a semicircular incision should be made on the breast , like this figure , from b to g . then dissect away all the fatty tissue and pack the wound with a cicatrizing compound and sew the lips together and dress until healed .	e ad aquel que avoreys aquo , cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma , de la linha de . b . entro a la linha de . g . , e aprop excorja la groceza tota , e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu , e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura , e cura aquel entro que sia sanat .	1.0575
but if the breast is pendulous and flabby on account of its size , as happens with women , you should make two semicircular incisions on the upper side , the ends joining one another , in such wise that the longer incision encircles the other like this , from b to g . then dissect away the skin between the two incisions and remove the fat and sew up as we have described ; and apply styptic powder and the necessary dressings until healed .	mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas , lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras , am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar , de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna , entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de . b . e la linha de . g . e aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua , e osta la pingueza , e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat .	1.02451
but if you cannot make the incision as full and perfect as it ought to have been , because the patient is restless , or because haemorrhage arises , you should pack the wound with cotton wool soaked in corrosive ointment and leave till it eats away the remainder of the fat ; then dress until healed .	e si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute , e per flux de sanc , lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa , e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat .	0.748804
		0.3
