chapter twelve .	capitol . xii .	1.00385
on cautery in cataract of the eye .	de cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel .	1.17586
when by those signs i have mentioned in the relevant section there is brought to your notice the beginning of a cataract of the eye , start with draughts for the patient such as shall cleanse his head ; and guard him from all humidities .	quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio , lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu , e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz .	0.723475
make him also sweat for some days , fasting , in the bath .	e fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns .	0.486867
then tell him to have his head shaved ; and burn him with one cauterization in the middle of the head ; then cauterize him with two burns on the temples if the cataract is beginning in both eyes ; or on the one side only if it is in one eye .	e aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap , e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap ; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels , o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel .	0.768586
and with the cautery cut all the subcutaneous veins and arteries ; and let the cauterizations be long , across the breadth of the temples .	incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena ; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas .	0.741836
beware of haemorrhage ; if you see any , stanch it straight away with any means you can .	e guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat ; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc , osta le am alcuna medicina , la qual es a tu possible .	0.904167
we shall deal later on with the method of extraction and cutting out of arteries , and provision against haemorrhage .	e yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc .	0.955445
two strong cauterizations are sometimes made on the back of the neck below the two bones .	e alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz .	0.772
		0.3
