chapter eleven .	capitol . xi .	0.975
on the various methods of blepharoplasty .	de manieyras de tactimi del huel .	0.592241
when superfluous lashes grow on the eyelid outside their natural place , below the natural lashes , and continue , they injure the eye and give rise to many kinds of disease , such as chronic lachrymation , dropping of the eyelids ( ptosis ) , and whiteness and opacity , eventually resulting in the destruction of the eye .	quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz , lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel , e cura se en quatre manieyras : o per cauteri am foc ; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri ; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura ; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre .	0.579089
the plastic operation on the eye is carried out in four ways : by the actual cautery ; by caustic in the way mentioned above in the book on cauterization ; by incision and suture ; or with canes , as i shall describe .	e donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se ; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra , e si es convertida , bo es ; e sino , entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra , e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus , e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels , e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra , e converteys aquela am le ray .	0.571528
you should place the patient's head in your lap , then with your left hand turn out the eyelid . ~~~ now if it thus becomes everted , good ; otherwise introduce a threaded needle beneath the eyelid and pass the needle up ; let that be near the hair itself .	e aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre ; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap , e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta , e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt .	0.295358
then draw the thread up with the lid and invert the lid with a probe ; then make an incision on the inside of the lid below the superfluous lashes with the lancet , from the greater to the lesser angle .	mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra , quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes , quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada .	0.542089
then draw out the thread and put beneath the lid a small pad of cotton or linen ; then mark with ink on the eyelid the shape of a myrtle leaf .	e aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas , e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor .	0.617028
the shape should be according to the amount you wish to raise the lid , and varies in different people .	e si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey .	0.707692
in some cases you should cut away a fair amount in proportion to the ptosis but in others a smaller incision is enough ; all this in due proportion to the extent of the ptosis . ~~~ then with a scalpel incise over the two lines you have marked , beginning at the greater angle and going toward the lesser angle ; and let one incision be close to the natural lashes , at a distance of about the breadth of a probe .	e aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena , e aprop excoria aquela tota , e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil , e abstergeys le sanc , e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans , si voles far aquo , e sino , non cures .	0.268555
then introduce a hook into one angle of the skin and peel it all off ; then join the edges with a needle and a fine woollen thread and wipe away the blood ; and stick the ends of the threads to the eyebrow with adhesive , if you like ; but if you do not it does not matter .		-0.3
then let the suture and the threads remain for about three or four days , then dress .	e aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre , e aprop cura aquo .	1.39183
if you like , you may leave the wound without suture and treat it with drying medicaments and styptics ; then the eyelid will be lifted as the wound heals and comes together ; but suture is better .	e si vols , layssa la plagua ses sutura , e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh , quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu ; mays sutura es milor e donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir .	1.0691
the ancients mention this method of operating .	mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute , e es de bona operacio , e no es en lu temor .	1.0439
it involves some burden for the patient ; but the operation is good and safe .	e es autra manieyra en taxmir , e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt , e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma :	0.946324
yet another way of operating is to mark on the eyelid the figure of a myrtle leaf as we have described ; then lift the eyelid with three hooks , either separate or joined thus . ~~~ then cut away the superfluous lid with a small pair of scissors with an even incision .	mays si no es possible aquo , tener les uncis , e aquo no es engualhat , lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura , e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major , e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre , e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat , e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual , eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat .	0.199062
the scissors are of this pattern .	e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura , e cura aquel entro que sia sanat .	0.980172
but if you cannot conveniently hold with the hooks , take a threaded needle and introduce it into the middle of the marking ; and put another thread through near the greater canthus , and a third thread near the lesser canthus .	mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura , seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz , e am enguentz .	0.708571
with your fingers hold the threads evenly and then raise your hand evenly and you will raise up the whole of the marked skin as we have said .	e alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz , adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio ; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial .	0.498261
then bring the edges together with a suture and dress till healed .	ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma :	0.145946
but if in your incision , or the opening you have made , a swelling arises , then allay the swelling with wax and similar sedatives .	e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat ; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum .	0.653968
sometimes the lower lid also has the lashes inverted .	e tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas , la on tenes les fils .	1.23439
for this you should use any of the methods we have mentioned : the incision and suture , and the operation by the actual cautery and by caustic . (	aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel , e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura , e layssa aquela per alcus jorns , quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra .	0.677419
the operation by the actual cautery or caustic ) is more effective , and easier on the patient , than incision and suture , ( but incision and suture ) is more workmanlike in either lid .	mays si es tardat , lahoras trenca la am las toroyras , e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat .	0.682174
trimming the lid by means of canes is done as follows : you invert the eyelid and cut the inner slit as i have described ; then you prepare two slender canes or rods of a length equal to that of the eyelid and a breadth less than that of a scalpel ; and at either end of each you make a notch to hold the threads .		-0.3
then gently put them together over the superfluous part of the eyelid and tie them firmly together at both ends and leave for a few days ; for the ligated flesh will necrose and turn black and putrefy and eventually fall away spontaneously .		-0.3
but if it is slow in sloughing , cut off with shears ; then dress till healed .	donc cum es solidada , la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo .	0.8125
and when it is healed the eyelid will be raised and the lashes will no longer irritate the eye .	e aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma :	0.591393
now this is the figure of the canes ; you should prepare them exactly in this shape and of this length and breadth .	e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens .	0.78366
		0.3
