chapter twenty-three .	capitol . xxiii .	0.93
discourse on dislocations .	de sermo en dislocacio .	1.44286
a dislocation is a displacement of any of the joints from its place , whereby the movement of the joint is hindered , the member is deformed , and the patient is caused violent pain and hurt .	dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc , per que es prohibida de movement , e es orrezada la figura del membre , e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans .	1.14027
when anyone sustains a dislocation he should hasten to have it reduced , not delaying it at all . ~~~ for if it is delayed the place will swell up and the reduction will be thereby made difficult .	donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio , lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit , e no tarde aquela reduzir , quar si es tardada , le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio .	0.129245
so it should not be delayed , nor moved or extended during the time it is swollen , for that often leads to spasm and excruciating pain .	e per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio , quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz .	0.821563
instead , when this occurs , you must hasten to venesect the patient , and then let be until the swelling has subsided a little . ~~~ then massage the member with hot water and oil and let it be gently reduced .	mays quan aquo accideys , lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute , e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema ; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli , e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat .	0.388571
and treat every member with the things that will be mentioned in their place .	e tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc .	0.8375
i have disposed the chapters on dislocations in the same order as the foregoing ones on fractures , that is , from the upper part of the body to the lower part .	e yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura ; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos .	0.662097
		0.3
