chapter ninety-one .	de extraccio venae cruris .	0.971053
on the extraction of the medina vein .	aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- ategi en terra de arabics e en las terras de india caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre .	0.452083
this kind of vein occurs in the leg in hot countries such as the hejaz and the lands of the arabs and in hot arid infertile countries .	e fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas .	0.394444
it also often occurs in other parts of the body beside the legs .	e la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn .	1.02453
the origin of it is a corruption taking place beneath the skin in the same way that round-worms and worms and gourd-worms arise in the inward parts of the body ; also the worms that are generated between the skin and the flesh .	e senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement ; e aprop le loc es vesicat ; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta .	0.63172
the sign of the beginning of the occurrence of this vein is a violent inflammation in the leg ; then the place swells up and blisters ; then the vein begins to extrude at the blistered place as if it were a plant-stem or an animal .	e adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat , lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac . ~~~ entro a ii drac . ,	0.020082
when its extremity has appeared it should be wound and tied round a little piece of lead , from one to two drachms in weight , which you leave hanging from the leg .	e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba . ~~~ e tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora , envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel .	0.324951
then as fast as any of it issues from the leg , wrap it in the lead , and if there be plenty of it cut off part and tie the rest of it ; do not cut it right down until it has all come out ; for if you cut it right down it will contract and draw back into the flesh and produce at the place an abscess and suppuration and a bad ulcer .	e si mot es prolonguat , lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent ; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida , quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala .	0.838318
therefore it should be treated gently , and drawn out slowly until the very extremity of it emerges and not the least bit of it remains in the body .	per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit , entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors .	0.672221
in some cases the vein comes out five or ten spans in length ; indeed i have heard of one twenty spans long that came out from a certain man .	e de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms .	0.748939
if it breaks during your treatment of it , then pass a probe into the hole and open it up with a long incision longitudinally , until all the contained matter is evacuated ; and try to make the place suppurate with medicines for a few days , then treat as an abscess .	e si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio , lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors , entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia , e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas ; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas .	0.756187
sometimes also this vein is found branching , especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot itself ; and in this case there are many openings and a branch comes out of each .	e aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps , e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe , e veno a lu motz orrificis , e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram .	0.781643
the treatment is as mentioned above in the section .	e donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit .	0.981818
		0.3
