chapter forty .	capitol . xl .	1
a general dissertation on the perforation and incision of tumours .	en le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor .	1.03966
the kinds of tumour are many and various , as will be mentioned in order in this book .	les apostemas so motas specias , de motas manieyras , segon que ve rememoracio de lor , de quascuna en aquest libre .	0.938571
they differ in the way they are to be perforated or incised , according to two criteria . ~~~ one is the kind of tumour it is in itself and the humidities it contains .	e so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras , de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys ; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz .	0.437818
the other is the part of the body where it occurs . ~~~ for the tumour occurring in the head is different from the tumour occurring on the posterior , and a tumour occurring in a fleshy part differs from one on the joints ; each having its separate category of operation .	e la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos , quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul ; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura ; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio .	0.249279
there are some tumours that should not be opened till after the pus in them is matured and ripe . ~~~ but others should be opened when still raw and immature , such as a tumour near the joints .	e mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor .	0.232
for when a tumour occurring near a joint lasts long enough to putrefy its surroundings , it often breaks down the ligaments or the tendons of the joint and causes paralysis in the limb . ~~~ or if the tumour be near a major organ , if you delay the opening of it until it ripens you will damage that major organ .	so autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes , e no son maturatz segon lor compliment , ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas , quar apostema quan ve prop junctura , lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu , e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura , per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre ; o es apostema prop de membre principal , e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal ; o es prop le cul , donc perfora aque no-madurat ; e no cove que·l perforas cru , de no-complida degestio , sino aquel que es prop del cul , per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul , e sia fayta fistula , o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat .	0.335325
in the same way , if it be near the anus you must open it , although unripe for opening .	mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema , e aysso es quan es maturat .	0.824026
the reason why you must open an abscess near the anus while still unripe , before it is brought to a head , is to prevent it from putrefying the cleft and penetrating to the inner part of the anus and becoming a fistula , and incurable .	e sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre , e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio , e la acuitat del cap del apostema , e les autres senhals .	0.82053
it is necessary too to know the time to open fully mature swellings : it is when the pain of the swelling is lessened , the fever departs , the redness and the throbbing are reduced , and the head of the abscess becomes wrinkled , with other signs .		-0.3
the perforation should be made in the lower part of the swelling if possible , so that the pus may more easily drain downwards ; or else in the thinnest and most swollen part of the swelling .		-0.3
your incision should be longitudinal if the swellings are in such places as hands or feet or in the site of joints , tendons , nerves , or arteries ; and , in short , in all flat places where there is no curvature .		-0.3
in curved places let the perforation proceed according to the place .	e quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia .	1.48631
but when the swelling is in the fleshy parts it is best to leave the perforation , as we have said , until it is fully matured .	e perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors , si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes , e en loc dels lacertz , de las cordas dels nervis , de las arcerias ; e , al derier , en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio ; quar en aquels que so reflectitz , usa de perforacio segon aquel membre .	0.763387
for if you perforate it prematurely the sanious discharge will go on longer and will be excessively foul ; and often both the edges and the depths of the opening will become indurated .	mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos , lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment , ayssi quo havem dit ; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo , es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia , e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu .	0.756303
some swellings are perforated latitudinally if necessary , or having regard to the requirement of the part .	mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat , o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys .	0.711728
in small swellings you should use a single perforation ; while in large ones you should use wide or multiple perforations according to the size of the swelling .	e cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas .	0.619173
there are also some swellings that need a circular incision of the skin , and should be cut when they have become like a rag , and necrosed —which actually happens often in abscesses and sinuses .	e autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida , quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua , ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos .	0.67424
and there are some that should be incised triangularly ; and others with an incision of myrtle-leaf form ; e . g . ~~~ a tumour on the groin .	e de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles ; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra , ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars .	0.39635
there are others again to which should be applied circular and lunate and similar incisions .	e de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar , e semblantz ad aquels .	0.649095
those that have no head , such as the smooth and flat ones , should be incised with only a simple perforation .	mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials , cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial , o plana tant solament .	0.93
when a swelling is large and has collected a large quantity of pus , and you perforate it , do not be in a hurry to get it all out at once ; but get some of it out and then bandage it till another day ; then again remove part of the pus ; and so do , again and again , gradually , till it is all got out .	e cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania , que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora ; habantz extratz de aquel una partida , e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia , e aprop extratz una partida major , e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat .	0.562866
this particularly applies if the patient be in a weak state , or a pregnant woman , or a baby , or a decrepit old man ; for the animal spirit is very often dissolved with the sudden evacuation of the pus , and the patient dies unexpectedly .	e majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut , o femna prens , o enfant petit , o viel en decrepitut , quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania , e fort leu mor le malaute , e tu operte les .	0.879673
be very careful therefore , with this sort . ~~~ then , after you have opened the tumour , you should cleanse the wound and consider : if the tumour has only a small opening , or it is one simple incision , employ swabs of lint or cotton wool ; but if it is a large tumour with multiple incisions , introduce a swab into each incision so that they meet .	don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela , e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas , cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca , o es una seccio plana , lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic ; e si le apostema es gran , e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas , lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps .	0.198737
and if the tumour was such that you cut away a part of the skin , or sliced the tumour , you will need to pack it with cotton wool or plucked linen , dry ; and bandage until the third day . ~~~ then remove it and treat with the needful ointments until healed .	e si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit , lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li , ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos , ses humiditat ; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia ; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat .	0.285299
if a haemorrhage occurs while you are operating , use cold water and vinegar , soaking a lint rag in both and frequently applying it to the place .	mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua , lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li , e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas .	0.9
and if the bleeding still persists then it is necessary to employ the method and the treatment and the powders that we have prescribed in many parts of this book and in their own sections .	mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc , lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio .	0.537241
now if this should be in winter and the site of the tumour abound in nerves , you should have some pads soaked in hot wine and oil and then apply to the place .	mays si es en temps de hivern , e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis , lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut , e pauses aquels sobre les locs .	0.790551
but if it be in summer and the parts be fleshy , apply the pads soaked in water and oil , or wine and oil , all being cold , till the third day , as we have said .	e si es en estiu , e les locs son carnoses , lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli , e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia , ayssi cum havem dit , e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat .	0.490595
then unbandage the tumour and wipe it and give it the treatment suitable to it , until cured . ~~~ this is the information you need about the treatment of tumours in general . ~~~ as for the particulars , i now review the way to treat each tumour , by chapters , in detail .	e aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment , mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment .	0.276056
		0.3
