chapter thirty-seven .	capitol . xxxvii .	0.95625
on removal of the tumour of the uvula that is called 'uva' .	de inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada .	0.525
when a flux descends to the uvula and it swells and the uvula becomes white and elongated , then it is called 'columella* . ~~~ and if it should be swollen below and rounded then it is called 'uva' .	quan catarr deysen a la huvula , e es apostemada e es longa , lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular ; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda , e lahoras ela es apelada buba .	0.463333
when it has been treated as mentioned in its section , and the treatment is unavailing , and you see the inflamed tumour subsiding and the uvula becoming thin , you should amputate it . ~~~ now those of them that are bunched up and rounded and not elongated , full of blood , or of a dark colour or black , and without sensation , these you should avoid incising ; for this course is dangerous for the patient .	mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio , e no comfereys la tua curacio , e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil , lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda ; e si es ad aquela longitut , e es sanguina , de fusca color o de negre , e no es a lu centiment , lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu , quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute .	0.452807
but when you see them as i have described , somewhat pale and elongated , get the patient to sit in the sunlight and depress his tongue with the instrument described above ; then take hold of the uva with a hook and draw it down and cut it off with one of the two instruments described for excision of the tonsils . ~~~ you should not cut away more than up to the natural limit .	e quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa , que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva , e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas .	0.274754
for if you cut more off you cause injury to the voice and speech . ~~~ then , after excising , carry on the treatment on the lines described under removal of the tonsils , and treat till healed .	e cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio , quar si tu inscides de lu mays , lediyras le sieu parlar .	0.212059
but if the patient flinch from operation , then you must contrive to cauterize it , fearlessly and boldly .	e aprop la inscizio , usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas , e cura aquela entro que sia sanat .	0.983949
the method is to employ a caustic ; you put the patient's head in your lap ; then , having depressed the tongue with the instrument described above , take some of the corrosive fluid mentioned in the book on cauterization , make it up with quicklime to a medium consistency , and fill with it the hollow in this instrument , whose form is thus .	mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu , cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor , e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda , e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se , e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit , e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio , e comfeys am aquela caus viva , e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil , e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma :	0.737458
the end of it where you put the caustic should have a hollow like that of the spoon of a spoonprobe . ~~~ with the patient lying on his side , letting the mucous secretions flow from his gullet out of his mouth so that none of the corrosive may run down his gullet and cause harm , you place the instrument right on the uvula .	sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray , e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula , e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina , per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel .	0.234433
then , steadying the hand that is holding the medicament , press it out on to the uvula for the space of half an hour until you see the uvula turn black and the corrosive action cease .	e aprop te la tua ma am la medicina , e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina .	0.857151
if you wish , you can take some cotton wool twisted on the end of a probe , and , having soaked it in the caustic , apply the probe with the wool , down through a cannula till the wool sticks on the uvula . ~~~ do this over and over again till you have done all the cauterization you want , then let be ; for it will shrink and fall off in three or four days .	e si vols , prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray , e submergeys le coto en la medicina , e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula , e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva , e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre .	0.385849
if you need to repeat the treatment , do so . ~~~ after the cauterization , wipe all round the uvula with wool soaked in butter , and with that mop up all the caustic remaining round about it . ~~~ then let him rinse his mouth out with cold water and do you treat with external embrocations , and gargles within , till he is well .	e si indigeysses que iteras la medicina , itera aquela , e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder , e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina , e sia lavat am aygua frega , e sia curat deforo am embrocacio , e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat .	0.206384
this kind of treatment is safer than incision and less to be feared .	e aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor .	1.07368
sometimes uva is cured by a method milder than either incision or cautery , namely by means of vapour in the following manner : take pennyroyal and artemisia absinthium and organy and rue and wormwood and chamomile and southernwood and similar herbs and put them all , or some of them , in a pot , cover them with vinegar , and boil them .	alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio , quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra : recipe calament , ysop , origua , ruda , scicados arabic , camamilla , broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas , e ajusta totas aquelas causas , o alcunas de lor , en una ola , e sian submergidas am vi agre , e bulhan ; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment , e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc , sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra ; sia fayt de argent o de aram .	0.758103
the pot should be luted with clay ; and there is to be a hole in the middle of the lid to which is fitted a hollow instrument like this , made of silver or bronze , and the end in which is the protuberance should be put in the patient's mouth so that the vapour passes up the tube to the uvula , which becomes of a very dark colour .	e sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula , entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada .	0.500473
do this repeatedly till it sloughs away . ~~~ be careful not to apply this treatment at the first appearance of the tumour , for often you will aggravate the tumour ; but you should do it at the decline of the inflammation .	e aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca , e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas , quar trop ajustaria en le apostema , e no cove que tu fassas aquo , sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut .	0.220994
if you do not have this instrument , take a reed and fit an egg-shell on the end so that the patient's mouth is not burned ; for the egg-shell will prevent the heat of the vapour from burning the mouth .	mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument , lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou , per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida , quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca .	0.757084
this is a really good and safe treatment .	e aquesta curacio es bona am salut .	1.25
		0.3
