chapter sixteen .	capitol . xvi .	0.980769
on setting a fracture of the leg .	de restauracio de la fractura de la camba .	0.880952
the leg consists of two bones . ~~~ one of them is thick and is called 'leg bone' ( tibia ) . ~~~ the other is slender and is called 'fire-stick' ( fibula ) .	sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros , e es le nompnat per nom de la camba ; e l’autra es subtil , e es nompnat focil .	0.0854167
both of these are liable to the same kinds of fracture as occur in the two bones of the forearm , therefore the repair of them will be like that of the arm , and the operation is one and the same .	e accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras , e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment , e la operacio de lu es una .	0.85989
if both bones are broken together , the leg will turn in all directions .	e si so trincatz dos osses ensemps , la camba es convertida a totas partidas .	0.8425
if the fibula is broken there will be a forward deformity of the leg .	e si es trinquat le os pus subtil , la camba es convertida a las partidas denant .	0.815132
if the tibia be broken , and that low down , it will be obvious to you .	e si es trincat le os pus gros , atrobas aquel dejos , e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas .	0.955545
employ levelling and extension and binding on of splints similar to that ( sc . ~~~ of the arm ) .	e aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment .	0.366892
but it will be necessary , if the fracture of the leg be a serious one with much fragmentation , for the extension to be gentler and lighter ; and you must employ the utmost gentleness in setting it .	mays empero cove , si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias , que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera , e alleuja am la tua vertut .	0.740455
the operation on the leg involves one more process than that on the arm , namely , that when you have set the splints and have finished the task , you should take two strips of pine wood such as are used for roofing upstairs rooms , being put in the gaps of the planking , or they may be palm stalks ; pick out such as are somewhat thick and not too thin ; they should be as long as the leg from the knee down .	e en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras , e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio , lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies , e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma ; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza , e no sia ges de las manudas , e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba , e del denol entro al pus dejos .	0.769618
then wrap each of them in a cloth folded into two longitudinally , and put one on each side of the leg ; they should reach from the knee to the extremity of the foot .	e aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu , e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part , e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe .	0.705283
then tie the two strips in three places , namely at the two ends and in the middle ; this binding prevents the leg from bending to right or left and it will be held in a good straight position .	e aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc , quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra , e sta per bona stacio .	0.812195
sometimes a 'gutter-splint' is used , made of wood according to the length of the leg ; the leg is placed in this and it keeps the leg motionless .	e ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba ; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement .	0.662551
this is particularly necessary in a compound fracture .	e majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura , e quan am aquela es plagua propriament .	1.0375
then carefully examine the leg every day and use the utmost care to guard against effusion or swelling or other like things ; and when anything of this sort happens employ the means to meet the case until it heals . ~~~ the bone of the leg mends in thirty days or so .	e aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi , e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz ; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas , lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat .	0.241912
		0.3
