book three ~~~ on bone-setting	ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida : de restauracio .	-0.15
this third part of the book , too , is an essential necessity in the practice of medicine ; it concerns the setting of the fracture or dislocation occurring in bones .	aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina ; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses .	0.809959
you should know , my sons , that ignorant practitioners and laymen and those who have never turned the pages of a single book of the ancients about it , nor studied a single letter of it , arrogate this part of the art to themselves .	o , filh , sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels antics ni legiro de aquels una letra .	0.617371
for this reason this section of the science has died out in our parts ; i have myself found no one competent in it ; and whatever skill i have , i have derived for myself by my long reading of the books of the ancients and my thirst to understand them until i extracted the knowledge of it from them .	e per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat ; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot ; e no he adhibit aquo que apres , sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels , entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels .	0.764987
then through the whole of my life i have adhered to experience and practice .	e aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida .	0.643966
so now i have described for you in this book all that my knowledge has encompassed on the subject and that my experience has encountered ; i have made it accessible for you and rescued it from the abyss of prolixity ; i have reduced it to a brief outline ; and have explained it most clearly . ~~~ i have made for you many drawings of the instruments that are used in it , which is an adjunct to explanation , as i did in the two previous books . ~~~ and there is no power save in god the high , the great .	e yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment ; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio ; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio ; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio ; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel , cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio , ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz .	0.097491
		0.3
