chapter forty-two .	capitol . xlii .	0.964286
on the incision of scrofulous glands in the neck .	de seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col .	0.544156
tumours of this kind often occur in the neck and in the axilla and in the groin ; and sometimes in other parts of the body .	motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars ; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos .	0.854978
those occurring in the neck are sometimes single and sometimes multiple , one arising from another ; and each scrofula is contained in a capsule of its own , like the cysts and tumours of the head that we have described .	e so aquelas que accideysso en le colh , e so motas que so engendradas entre lor , e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria , e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap , ayssi cum havem recomtat .	0.980131
there are many kinds of these glands ; some are stony , some contain humidities , some are malignant and do not respond to treatment .	e las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas , quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas , e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz , e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio .	0.960505
but those that you find by touch to be benign and are of a colour not greatly differing from the skin , freely movable in any direction , not adherent to the nerves of the neck nor to a jugular vein , nor to an artery , and are not deep-lying ; these should be incised with a simple incision from above downwards , from line g to line b	donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le tocament , de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena , e es mauguda a tota partida , e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh , ni am las venas , ni am la arceria , e no es preonda , cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de . g . entro la linha de . b . , e scorja aquela de tota partida , e exten dos labias de la codena am onci , o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels , ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap , e extratz aquela petit a petit . ~~~ e es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi .	0.240498
and dissect away all round and draw the edges of the skin apart with one or two hooks or with several if necessary , as we said on the subject of tumours of the head , and draw them out very slowly .	e sia le spatum no mot agut , que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio , o que enquiete le malaute , e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir ; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio , lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc , e estrenh la plagua , e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida .	0.592578
be most careful not to cut a blood-vessel or nerve .	quan le sanc es abscindit .	0.467702
the scalpel should not be over sharp lest you make the incision too big , or the patient flinches and so you cut open that which does not need cutting .	donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida .	0.0969388
if you cut a vein or artery and be thus hindered in your operating , apply powdered vitriol or some styptic powder to the wound , and bandage the wound and let be till the worst of the swelling has subsided and the opening is relaxed and threatens to turn purulent ; for then the bleeding will stop .	e aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas , donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas .	0.410531
then return to your operation and finish it .	e si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena , cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz .	0.489474
then feel with your forefinger to see if there are any small glands left , in which case dissect and clean them away .	abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument .	0.537844
if there is a large blood-vessel at the root of the gland , then you should not cut that gland at its root but should ligature it with a strong double ligature and leave it till it sloughs away of its own accord without harm .	e aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac , e aprop cura aquel .	0.472414
then pack the wound with cotton wool previously soaked in egyptian ointment ; then continue dressing .	e si inscides aquela scrophula tota , lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat .	0.825287
if you excise the whole gland , you should at once draw together the two edges of the wound and suture them , when you are absolutely certain there is nothing of it left .	mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula , cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela , e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit .	0.769565
but if you see that , on account of the size of the scrofula , there is still some superfluity left behind , you should carry the incision to the root and base of it , and employ suturing and the rest of the remedies mentioned .	e aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz , perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu , e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos , ayssi cum havem dit .	0.748095
the glands that contain humidities you should open with a single perforation where they seem to have matured ; make your perforation from below , as we have said .	e aprop aministra perforacio , calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels , per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio .	0.791209
then after opening use swabs soaked in egyptian and similar ointments to do away with the unhealthy remains , till you see that the wound is clean ; then dress with nourishing ointments until healed .	e aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada , lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada .	0.573303
		0.3
