chapter thirteen .	capitol . xiii .	0.985714
on entropion occurring in the upper eyelid .	de la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus .	0.903509
the eye that suffers this inversion of the lid is called 'leporine' ( i . e .		-0.3
hareeye ) . ~~~ now sometimes this inversion is natural , sometimes acquired . ~~~ it is acquired either from the cicatrization of an injury , or an incision , or cauterization , or the like .	quan ve en le huel ehacratir , e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus , o a dextra o a sinistra partida , per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri , e es apelada leporina , e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental , e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri , o per semblantz a lor malcuratz .	0.0775884
the idea of the operation is to excise the scar , separate the edges of the wound , pack linen between them , and bandage up till healed .	may la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu , e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li , e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas .	0.935135
in the treatment of it you should not use anything styptic or drying , for if you do the inversion will return worse than ever before .	e no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan , constrenho ; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz .	0.88013
employ relaxing substances such as fenugreek ; and fomentation with water in which mallows and linseed have been boiled ; and diachylon plaster which has been previously softened with one of the oils and spread on the packs ; and treat it with this .	usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec , e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li , o enguent dyaquilon , le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis , e submergeys en aquel la meca , e cura am aquel .	0.470521
the main thing in the treatment is to use every device to prevent the healing up of the place as it was before .	e lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament .	0.623333
this operation which we have described is but some correction of the inversion , not that the appearance of the place will necessarily revert to what it was .	e aquesta operacio la qual havem dita , no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant .	0.689778
		0.3
