chapter fourteen .	capitol . xiiii .	1.01
on the treatment of entropion of the lower lid .	de la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos .	1.05068
this inversion in the lower lid is that which is truly called entropion ; and it is either congenital or acquired .	aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos , la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati ; e es de lu alcuna natural , autra accidental .	0.987872
it is acquired by injury or incision or cautery or something like that .	mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz .	0.63
this is the method of operating for it : you take a needle through which has been passed a double thread and you run it into the flesh , making it penetrate from the left angle of the eye to the right angle so that the thread is fixed in flesh both ends .	e la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble , e fiques aquela en la carn , e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre , entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn .	0.733379
then with the needle stretch the flesh upwards and make an incision with a broad scalpel ; and if the eyelid returns to its proper shape , well and good .	e aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula , e inscideys am spatum ample .	0.750787
but if not , take a probe and put it on the site of the incision and with it turn back the lid .	e donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove , bo es ; e sino , pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda , e am aquel converteys la palpebra , e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos .	0.746757
then make two incisions on the inner side of the lid ; the two incisions should begin from the angles of the incision already made and run together making an angle so that when they join they are like this .	e sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio , la qual has fayta entro que concurren , e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor .	0.713863
it is the greek letter lambda .	e aquesta figura es letra greca : la landa .	0.934615
you remove that flesh in proportion as the angled side is lower than that adjoining the lid ; then bring the divided parts together with two sutures made with a woollen thread .		-0.3
then treat with the relaxing medicaments and dressings we have mentioned , till healed .	e aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu , aquo que siec la palpebra .	1.1855
but if the inversion is acquired , from incision , suture , or cautery , you should make a simple incision below the eyelashes , as has been described , then bring apart the two edges with a packing , as we have said .	e aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana ; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat .	0.558647
the sum of what there is to say about the treatment of inversion , whether it is in the upper or the lower lid , is that you should make your procedure follow the actual lines of the inversion itself ; for this is of varying shape .	e si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri , lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit . ~~~ e aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit .	0.140161
the experienced practitioner will make use of his skill in any way he can to re-establish the natural form or approximate to it .	en la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos , que corra en lu operacio , segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati , e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz .	0.782243
the disease itself will generally indicate to you the appropriate operation and instruments .	e le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural , o prop de aquela , e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios .	0.803704
		0.3
