chapter fifty-five .	capitol . lv .	0.875
on the treatment of boys born with imperforate urinary meatus ; or with the meatus small or not in the proper place .	de la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz .	0.693048
sometimes a boy is born from his mother's womb with the glans penis not perforate .	alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat ( o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc ) .	0.603325
so at the moment of his birth you should be quick and make a perforation with a fine scalpel figured thus .	donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma :	0.289286
then put in the opening a slender leaden sound , tie it and keep it in for three or four days .	e aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel , e te per tres jorns o per . iiii . tre .	0.53287
when he wishes to make water , it will be removed and he will do so ; then put it back .	e quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine ; e aprop retorne aquel .	0.622222
if you do not put in the leaden sound it may be that the urine passing through the place will prevent the wound from healing .	e si tu no pauses le plom , ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc , no leysa aquest claure .	0.671274
the case having too narrow a meatus should be treated with the leaden sound , as we have said , for many days until it is wide enough .	mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de plom , ayssi cum havem dit , per trops dias entro que sia amplificat .	0.610345
in those cases having a misplaced meatus—for example , there are some born with the opening at the edge of the glans so that they cannot make water forwards until the opening of the penis is lifted up by hand , nor can they beget , since the semen cannot reach directly to the uterus , a disorder which is very ugly .	mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc , so leditz , la qual causa es quar de aquels , aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz , entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus ; e no es a lu generacio , per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut , e es malautia mot laga .	0.908203
the manner of operating in this case is for the patient to lie back ; then with your left hand draw out his glans firmly and cut the end of the glans at the place of the meatus with a broad knife or sharp scalpel , as if sharpening a pen , or as if you were whittling something , so that the middle of it protrudes like a glans penis and the opening falls in the middle as it should .	e la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos , e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio , e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut , ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma , o que tu ne razas alcuna partida , per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove .	0.775432
and beware , in your operating , of haemorrhage , which often happens ; meet it with styptics and dress the wound until it heals .	e guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc , quar motas vetz accideys aquo ; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc , e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada .	0.884591
		0.3
