chapter twenty-one .	capitol . xxi .	0.911538
on cauterization for toothache .	de cauterisacio de dolor de dent .	0.8
when the toothache arises on account of cold , or if there be a worm in the tooth , and medical treatment does not avail , then cauterization should be undertaken . ~~~ there are two ways of doing this , one with butter , the other with the cautery .	quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat , o en lu es freg o verm , o no comfereys la curacio am medicina , lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras : o cauteri am boder de vacas , o cauteri am foc .	0.254453
cauterization with butter is done thus : take cows' butter and let it boil in an iron ladle or pan ; then take cotton wool , wind it round the top of a probe , and dip it in the boiling butter and quickly apply it to the aching tooth and hold it there till cold .	cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta , e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit , e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat .	0.950801
repeat this a number of times till the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth .	e aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz .	1.15352
if you prefer , dip wool or cotton in cold butter and put it on the aching tooth , then on top of that apply the hot iron until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth .	e si voys , submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit , e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent , e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent .	0.915198
the actual cautery is administered thus : take a tube of bronze or iron with some thickness in the body of it so that the intensity of the fire does not reach the patient's mouth .	mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr , e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute .	0.940198
then heat a cautery whose figure will be given shortly , and apply it to the tooth itself and hold your hand until the cautery gets cold . ~~~ do this several times over ; the pain will certainly depart the same day or the next .	e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra , e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat ; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia .	0.390523
after this cauterization the patient is to fill his mouth with good butter and keep it in for a while , then spit it out . ~~~ this is the figure of the cautery .	e cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le ; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri .	0.267231
cauterize with whichever end you prefer according to circumstances .	e cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible .	0.567643
this is the figure of the tube .	e aquesta es la forma de la cannula :	0.920513
		0.3
