chapter eighty-two .	de curacio de almesamir , so es clau .	0.860526
on the treatment of corns , inverted and otherwise , and dry warts and pimples .	sapias que alamermar , so es clau , e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel , e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz , e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament .	1.17086
a corn is a round knob , the same colour as the body and resembling the head of a nail .	e adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau , e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci , e sia eradicat de la sua razit ; e aprop cura aquel .	0.879051
it occurs in all parts of the body but particularly in the soles of the feet and the toes , whence arises pain in walking .	e si vols , cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol .	0.6225
you should cut away what is round the corn and take it with forceps or a hook and tear it out by the root ; then dress it .	mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos , e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz .	0.477644
if you wish you may cauterize it in the manner already described in the book on cauterization .	e curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela , o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja .	0.747102
then concerning dry warts : a wart is a little round rough compact eminence on the surface of the body ; it occurs often on the hands of boys .		-0.3
now the treatment is to draw out the wart and cut if off ; or tie it off with a silken thread or a hair until it falls out ; or if you wish , cauterize as said before , either with the actual cautery or with caustic .	e si vols , cauteriza aquo , segon que havem dit , am foc o am medicina acuta .	0.377419
sometimes warts , inverted or otherwise , are uprooted with the instrument i shall describe under the treatment of pimples .	e ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre .	0.865385
a pimple is also a little compact thick prominence on the skin surface , going deep ; when it gets cold there is a feeling as of an ant's sting in it . ~~~ it is found all over the body but mostly on the hands .	mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon , e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua , e es fayta entorn le cos .	0.161016
the treatment is to take the quill of a strong feather of the goose or the vulture , and place the quill over the pimple so as to encircle it with the circumference of the tube ; then revolve the quill with your hand so as to cut all round the pimple , and go deep into the flesh , and then the pimple may be drawn out by the roots .	e curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor , e sia fort , e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu ; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua , e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn , e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit .	0.748664
if you wish you may extract it with a tube of bronze or of iron , of this form .	e si vols , fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma :	0.595152
the upper closed part of the tube should be fine , solid , and twisted , to give easy purchase for the fingers in holding and revolving it .	sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat , sorda ( so es no-perforada ) , envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela .	0.609735
if you wish you may cauterize the pimple as described earlier on the cauterization of warts in the book on the cautery .	e si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri .	0.53087
		0.3
