chapter ten .	capitol . x .	1.02273
on the treatment of hydatid in the upper lid .	de la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel .	0.541148
hydatid is fat which arises in the folds of the upper lid . ~~~ it is a disease chiefly occurring in children , irritating their eyes , giving them morning catarrh ; they are unable to look full into the light of the sun , since they get an immediate secretion of tears .	axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus , e majorment endeve als enfantz , agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti ; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels .	0.252576
and for that reason you will find them lying always on their faces , and they also sleep on their faces ; and the eyelids below the eyebrows are moist and covered with swellings , while the hydatid stands out prominently ; and when you press upon the place with your finger you can feel the fat beneath it . ~~~ the manner of operating is for the patient to let his head rest in your lap . ~~~ then you take a scrap of linen and prepare a pad of it .	e per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps , e sobre les lors caras dormen ; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas , las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio , e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh ; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz , tu centes accernac entro aquels .	0.0959502
make it into a circle of sufficient size to enclose the whole of the hydatid on all sides , then place it on it and squeeze with your fingers on all sides , so as to gather up the hydatid in the centre of the circle . ~~~ then in the middle of this humidity make a crosswise incision with a lancet , but do not let the incision be larger than that made for a venesection .	e alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se , e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua , e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida , e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle , e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut , e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia .	0.286337
as to the depth , the skin should be incised right through till you come to the hydatid , which in most cases will come out from the incision , in the shape of a white piece of fat .	mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach , quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca .	0.459804
draw it out with a cloth rolled between your fingers , turning your hand to right and to left till it is separated .	donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut .	0.65234
be careful not to go so deep with your scalpel that it sticks in the eye and injures it .	e guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel .	0.816499
if you do not see the hydatid at the first incision , you must gently cut a little deeper till it comes forth , then draw it out as described . ~~~ then dip some cloth in vinegar and water , apply to the place and bind it up with pads .	mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura , mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach ; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit ; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils .	0.281098
there are some who grind up salt and put it in the hollow of the incision to liquefy thereby the remains of the humidity .	e so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat .	0.643124
then dress till healed .	e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat .	0.628571
if an effusion occur in the place , treat with sedative plasters till healed .	mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut , lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat .	0.756346
		0.3
