on the amputation of limbs and the sawing-off of bones .	de inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses .	0.838933
sometimes the extremities become gangrenous , either from an external or an internal cause . ~~~ now when you have treated this disease by medical means , ineffectively , and you see that the disease is spreading over the limb and nothing will stop it , you must cut off that limb as far as the disease has spread , so that the patient may escape death or great affliction , greater than the loss of the limb .	las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca , o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys , o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa , lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio , per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre .	0.130233
now the sign of the victim of this state is that the limb goes black , so that you might think it were burnt with fire , or , after the blackening , it putrefies , and the putrefaction spreads to parts adjacent to that limb and begins to attack the whole body ; cut it away as soon as you can .	e le senhal de aquel al qual accideys , es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit , o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors ; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel .	0.629358
so must you do if the disease is caused by the bite of some dangerous reptile such as the marine scorpion , viper , or venomous spider , and so on .	e semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz .	0.913063
if the disease or bite be at the tip of the finger , cut off the finger , giving the disease no opportunity to spread to the rest of the hand .	e si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit , lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma .	0.83218
similarly , if it attacks the hand , cut if off at the wrist , giving the disease no opportunity to spread and attack the two bones of the forearm .	e semblantment si accedeys a la ma , lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil , e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras .	0.74354
similarly , if it attacks the forearm , cut it off at the elbow through the joint itself .	e si envezeys aquel , lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura .	0.616018
if the disease passes onward and you perceive that it has reached the region of the shoulder , by no means cut the shoulder , for that will be the death of the patient ; use any treatment but that , as best you may .	e si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde , lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute ; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut .	0.806691
in the same manner act in regard to the foot when the disease attacks a toe ; namely , amputate the toe through one of the interphalangeal joints .	e semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe , lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes .	0.475
if the disease attacks the tarsus then amputate the whole foot ; and if it ascends toward the knee , amputate the leg at the knee-joint .	e si pren en la pente del pe , lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe . ~~~ mays si pueja entro al denol , lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol .	0.0575893
if it be that the disease has passed on above the knee , there is nothing of any avail in this case but to leave it , and for the patient to resign himself to death .	e si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol , lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio , e layssar le malaute a la mort .	0.620793
now the way to amputate or saw off a limb is to bind a ligature round below the site and another above ; an assistant draws the one downward and another assistant draws the upper ligature upward ; while you dissect away the tissues between the two ligatures with a broad scalpel until it is laid bare of flesh ; then it should be cut or sawn .	e la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir , e strenh autre liament sobre le loc ; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos , e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus ; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn ; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat .	0.728441
you must place linen dressings on every side lest the saw touch a part that is sound and thus cause the patient additional pain and inflammation .	e cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa , e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut .	0.912857
if a haemorrhage occurs while you are operating , cauterize the place as quickly as possible , or apply to it one or other of the styptic powders ; then continue until finished .	mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras , lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament , o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc ; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida .	0.779354
then bind up the mutilated limb with a suitable bandage and dress until healed .	e aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient , e cura aquel entro que sia sanat .	0.826679
now i shall relate to you an example ; what i am going to tell you is exactly what happened to a certain man's foot . ~~~ he had a blackening of the foot , with a burning like that of fire .	e yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe , aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat , le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc .	0.257508
the disease , to begin with , was in one toe , but it went on to involve the whole foot .	e aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe .	0.652941
when the man saw the disease spreading in the limb and felt the violent pain and burning , he hastened of his own accord to amputate it at the joint , and he got better .	e adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu , e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura , e foc sanat .	0.812421
after a long time had passed the very same kind of disease arose in the forefinger of his hand .	lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic .	0.575522
he came to me , and i attempted to suppress the superfluity with remedies that i applied to the hand , after purging his body ; but the superfluity was not to be suppressed and began to spread to the second finger , and eventually the whole hand was involved in the disease .	e adonc venc a mi , e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas , aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu ; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma .	0.847366
he urged me to cut off his hand , but i did not wish to do this , hoping i should be able to overcome the superfluity , and also fearing he would die at the amputation of his hand , for the man's strength was on the decline .	e el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu , e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat , e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort , quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement .	0.847631
when he despaired of me he went back to his own country , and i then heard that he had gone and cut off his whole hand , and got well .	e pus que el se desperec de mi , es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota , e es sanat .	0.828312
i narrate this story as help against this kind of malady when it occurs ; and as guidance for you to take and act upon .	e no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia , e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat .	0.585069
		0.3
