chapter twenty .	capitol . xx .	0.975
on the treatment of the callus that remains from a fracture .	de la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura .	0.708597
this callus often occurs after the healing of a fracture , especially one near a joint , and thereby the shape of the limb is spoilt ; and sometimes there is limitation of the natural function of the limb .	motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura , e majorment que es prop de las juncturas , e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre ; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural .	1.07809
examine it , and if the callus be soft , apply astringent remedies to it , such as aloes , olibanum , myrrh , balsam of sarcocol , acacia , and the like .	adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen , e enses , e mira , e sercacollo , e acrassia , e semblantz ad aquels ; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas , e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic , o am album de huou , o am vi agre , e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa , e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio .	0.841686
take some or all of these ; beat them up with a dry wine or egg-white or vinegar , apply to the callus on some tow and bind up firmly . ~~~ leave the bandaging on for many days ; then undo it and repeat until the callus is removed , god willing .	e leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias ; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra , entro que sia remauguda la nodacio ; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment , quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres .	0.221163
or bind on it a firm sheet of lead ; for lead has the property of taking away lumps from limbs . ~~~ but if the callus is stony hard and its removal is urgent , incise the place and cut away the superfluous prominence , or pare it away with a scraper until it is gone ; and dress the wound until it heals .	mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament , e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu , e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent , o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda ; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat .	0.304951
		0.3
