chapter eight .	capitol . viii .	1.05
on the repair of ribs when they are fractured .	de restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas .	0.576923
you should know that fracture of the ribs occurs only at the thick parts bordering on the vertebrae , whereas the anterior extremities are only contused , because they are cartilaginous ; this is easily diagnosed on examination with the fingers .	sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos ; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas . ~~~ e cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz .	0.18997
they should be set by levelling out the fracture with the fingers in any manner you can so that the form is as it should be ; then apply the plaster and bind the broken bone with a splint , if necessary .	e la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla , entro que sia engulhat segon que cove , e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela , si indigeys de aquel .	0.790798
if it be a depressed fracture of the ribs , then the patient will have a vehement pain and a piercing sensation like that of pleurisy , since the bone is piercing the pleura ; in addition he will have difficulty in breathing and will cough , and vomit much blood ; the treatment of this is difficult .	e si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz , lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura , ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci , e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament ; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit , e tos , e vomit de mot sanc ; e aquesta es de dificil curacio .	1.27664
in this the ancients practised many devices .	e ja les antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz .	0.905128
some said that the patient should have food of such a kind as to generate wind and inflation to blow out and stretch the belly and so push out the fracture .	e de lor so que diso : cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat , per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut , e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora .	1.04968
we , however , reject this , since it will excite an effusion if one has not already arisen ; and if one has arisen it will increase and confirm it .	mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut , si no accideys ; e si ja accideys , lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo .	0.763622
some of them said a cupping-vessel should be applied to the place and strong suction be made ; this seems more reasonable except that there is a risk of the vessel's drawing superfluities to the place on account of his weak state .	e diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut ; e es semblant a ratiocinacio , mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat .	0.781627
some of them said that the place should be covered with wool soaked in warm oil and that a pad should be placed in the intercostal space to fill it up so as to make the bandaging level when you wind it round . ~~~ then treat the patient with diet and medicines as for pleurisy .	e diyssero alcus de lor : cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut , e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida , que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat ; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina .	0.167308
if the patient is in such a bad way that he cannot bear it , the bone painfully piercing the pleura , and we are afraid for him , then we shall have to cut down upon the place and lay bare the broken rib ; then we place under it the instrument to protect the membrane , which has been described , and gently cut out the bone and remove it .	e si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta , e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent , temem sobre le malaute , lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc , descubram de la costa trencada , e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac , la rememoracio del qual es precedida , e que inscidam le os am facilitat , e extraguam aquel .	0.893773
then the edges of the wound should be joined , with a suture if large , and dressed with ointments until healed .	e aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua , si es gran , am cozidura , e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada .	0.88913
if meanwhile there arise an abscess , quickly soak pads in oil of roses and apply them to the place and treat the patient with internal remedies against abscess too .	e si accideys dedintz apostema , lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc , e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz .	0.951806
let him lie upon the side which is easier for him to sleep on , until it heals .	e sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm , entro que sia sanat .	0.985543
		0.3
