chapter thirty-one .	capitol . xxxi .	0.942857
on the cauterization of dropsy .	de cauterizacio de ydropici .	0.776923
the cautery is particularly effective in ascites .	cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament .	0.925758
when you have , without effect , treated a dropsical person with the various measures mentioned in the section on diseases , you should sear with four cauterizations around the umbilicus , and one over the stomach , another over the liver , and another over the spleen , and two behind his back between the vertebrae , one at the level of the breast and one at the level of the stomach ; and let the burn be almost skin-deep .	quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio , lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac , e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge , e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa , e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos , e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz , e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac . ~~~ e la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena .	0.2517
then keep the burn open so that it suppurates for a long while .	e aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps .	0.876923
do not let the patient , after cauterization , be without the necessary treatment , so that you combine both methods for him , and a cure will speedily come to him .	e no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios , e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio .	0.828919
the cautery with which his belly is cauterized should be claviform like the figure previously given ; while the one with which his back is cauterized should be olivary .	la forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent , e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma .	0.726424
		0.3
