chapter thirty-six .	capitol . xxxvi .	0.97
on the treatment of swelling of the tonsils and other swellings in the throat .	de extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas .	1.33409
sometimes there occur in the throat buboes called 'tonsils' , which resemble the buboes occurring externally . ~~~ when you have employed the remedies described in their own place , without effect , examine , and if the tumour be hard , dark coloured , and devoid of sensation , do not touch it with an instrument .	quan endeveno en le golayro godat , so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat , las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas , las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat , lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur , de fusca color , de pauc sentiment , lahoras no toques aquel am ferr .	0.322287
if it be of a red colour , with a thick root , do not touch this with an instrument either , for fear of a haemorrhage ; but let it be till it come to a head ; then you may perforate it or let it burst of its own accord .	e si es de roga color e la razic es grossa , lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc ; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat , e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel , o sira romput per si .	0.670968
but if it be pale coloured , round , with a slender pedicle , this is the kind that should be cut .	e si es de blanqua color , radon , e la razit de lu es subtil , lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit .	1.03077
the operation for this is first to see , before operating , whether his inflamed tumour has already completely subsided or to some extent diminished . ~~~ then make the patient sit down in the full light of the sun with his head in your lap ; open his mouth ; and have an assistant before you to press back the tongue with an instrument like this .	e la operacio en lu es que consideras , denant la tua operacio , si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio ; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl , e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se , e huebre la boca de lu , e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma :	0.198271
it should be made of bronze or silver , and slender like a knife .	e sia fayt de argent o de aram , e sia subtil cum cotel .	0.988636
and when the tongue is depressed with its help , the tumour will be made manifest to you and your direct vision will fall upon it . ~~~ then take a hook and fix it in one tonsil and pull it forward as far as it will go ; but be careful to not pull away with it any of the mucosa .	donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema , e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement , lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla , e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes .	0.0786388
then cut it with an instrument of this form ; it is like scissors except that its extremities are curved , the beak of each meeting the other , and very sharp .	otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas , e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma :	0.576031
it should be made of indian iron or damascene steel .	e es asemblat a forceps , empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas , ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra , mot agudas , le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut .	0.806818
if you have not this kind of instrument , cut it with a scalpel of this form , on the one side sharp , on the other quite blunt .	mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present , lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu : e sia agut de la una part , no agut del autra part .	0.8794
and when one tonsil has been cut away , remove the other in exactly the same manner .	e pus que has inscidit una mella , inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio , e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	0.662014
then after the excision let the patient gargle with cold water or vinegar and water .	mays si endeve flux de sanc , guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt , e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat .	1.04093
but if there occur a haemorrhage let him gargle with water in which have been boiled pomegranate peel or myrtle leaves or similar styptics till the haemorrhage is stanched ; then treat till healed .	e alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas , e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment .	0.442485
sometimes there grow in the fauces tumours other than the tonsils ; remove them just as described for tonsils .		-0.3
i once treated a woman for a tumour that had grown in her throat and was rather dark in colour and had little sensation . ~~~ it had almost blocked the throat and the woman had only a narrow opening to breathe through , and was quite prevented from eating or drinking , so that she was at death's door , if she had so remained for a day or two .	e yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu , le qual apostema tendia a color fusca , de pauc sentiment , le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu , e la femna respirava am meat streyt , e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua , e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos .	0.347131
from the tumour there arose two offshoots , which had eventually emerged through the nostrils .	e l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs .	0.460886
so i made the utmost haste and , fixing a hook in one of them , drew it forward , and out came a sizeable piece . ~~~ then i cut it off where i had hold of it near the nostril .	donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci , e tiregui aquel , e atirada es de lu gran porcio , e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau , e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu , e compremegui la sua lengua , e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema .	0.316349
then i did the same with the one projecting from the other nostril .	e aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu , e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc .	1.0625
then i opened her mouth and depressed the tongue ; then fastened the hook in the tumour itself and cut off a part of it , with only a little haemorrhage ; and the woman's pharynx was freed and immediately she had a drink of water , then took some food . ~~~ and from time to time , for long after , i continued to cut away this tumour .	donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna , e comensec tantost beure aygua , e aprop presec vianda , donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps , e succesia apostema en loc de aquel , le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel .	0.191578
but fresh growth continually replaced what was excised till we both grew weary of it . ~~~ then i went about it astutely and cauterized the tumour high up in the throat , and it stopped growing .	donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu , donc astec de addicio ; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec dieus de aquela aprop mi .	0.279144
then the woman left the district and i do not know what god has done with her since i had charge of her .		-0.3
		0.3
