chapter seventy-six .	capitol . lxxvi .	0.95
on the extraction of the dead foetus .	de extraccio del fet quan es mort .	0.935632
when you have dealt with a dead foetus by those methods mentioned in their chapter , and it does not come out , and you are compelled to operate , you should examine to see if the woman be in a healthy state and not having any disease on account of which you might entertain a fear for her life .	quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit , e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma , lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio .	0.670261
the woman should lie on her back on a couch , her head tilted back and her legs raised .	lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos , e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas .	0.821429
an assistant on either side should hold her down firmly or she should be bound down to the couch , lest the body be drawn out of position in extracting the foetus .	e·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet .	0.423243
then the opening should be anointed with moistening oils and with mucilage of marsh mallow and fenugreek and with linseed .	e aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li .	0.942688
then the midwife should anoint her hand with these oils and mucilages and gently introduce it into the vagina and with it locate a place in the foetus to fix hooks in .	e aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages , e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre , e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet .	0.814083
the suitable places for that : consider , and if the foetus present the vertex then she should fix the hooks in its eyes or in the neck or in the mouth or palate or beneath the chin , or the collarbone , or about the ribs , or beneath the false ribs .	e locs convenient en aquo : adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap , e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu , o en le col , o en la boca , o en le palat , o dejos la barba , o en la furcula de lu , o en les locs propdas de las costas , o dejos les ypocondres .	0.744175
but if it present the feet let the hooks be fixed in the pubic region or middle ribs .	mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu , lahoras en le pentenilh , o en le mieg de las costas .	0.697826
she should hold the hook in the right hand and put the curved part between the fingers of the left hand , and introduce the hand gently and fix a hook in one of the places before mentioned , driving it in until it comes to a hollow .	e cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta , e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra , e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz , entro que pervengua a la causa boyda .	0.812581
then opposite it let her fix another or a third if need be , so as to give even traction , not pulling to one side .	e aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci , o le tertz si es necessitat , per so que sia atraccio engual , e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament .	0.992308
then she should pull evenly , not just in a straight line but with the foetus moved from side to side so that its exit may be eased , as is done in extracting a tooth .	ans sia maugut a tota partida , per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu .	0.958824
from time to time the tension must be relaxed , and if any part of it be held up the midwife must oil some of her fingers and introduce them to one side to manipulate the retained part .	e cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada ; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda , lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut .	0.809396
and if a part only of the foetus come away she should shift the hooks to other parts a little higher up , and so on , until the whole of the foetus has come out .	donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada , lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut ; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat .	0.652941
if the hand should come out before any other part and it is impossible to reduce it on account of the pressure , then a tape should be wound round it and she should pull on it until it is all out ; then it should be cut off at either the carpal or the elbow joint .	mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra , e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu , lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela ; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada , e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde .	0.72283
in the same manner should the other hand be dealt with , and the feet .	e ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes .	1.01136
if the foetal head be large and it is tightly squeezed in exit , or if there be a collection of fluid in the head , you should introduce between your fingers a spike-shaped scalpel and split the head to let the water out ; or you should smash it with the instrument called cephalotribe which will be illustrated , together with figures of the other instruments , in the chapter following .	mays si le cap del fet es gran , o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment , o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada , lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua , o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat” , la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest .	0.690554
in the same manner you act if the foetus have a naturally large head : either you should cut the skull open or smash it with the cephalotribe as we said ; then you should draw out the bones with forceps .	e semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura : e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu , o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit ; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps .	0.931465
if the head comes out and the foetus is held up at the collar bones , an incision should be made to let out the humidity in the thorax , for the thorax will then shrink .	e si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula , lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda .	0.617925
but if the thorax does not shrink and is not disposed to emerge then you should cut off pieces in any manner possible .	mays si no es complicat , ni obezeys a eyssiment , lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible .	0.773684
if the lower belly be swollen or dropsical then you should make an opening to draw out all the fluid .	e si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici , lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu .	0.611501
if the foetus present the feet then the extraction will be easy and it will be a simple matter to guide it to the maternal opening .	mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes , lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera .	0.82706
if it be stuck about the abdomen or thorax then pull on it with a cloth wound around your hand and cut an opening in the abdomen or thorax to allow the contents to flow out .	mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz , lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma , e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels .	0.561833
if all the limbs are removed but the head is turned backwards and is jammed , the midwife should introduce her left hand and , if the mouth of the womb is open , should put the hand into the cervix of the womb and investigate the head and , with her fingers , draw it down toward the opening and fix a hook or two in it , and extract it with these .	mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap , lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra ; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta , lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre , e cerque am aquela le cap , e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre , e aprop entrometa en lu un unci , o dos uncis , e atire lu am aquels .	0.840179
if it should be that the mouth of the womb is closed on account of an abscess , then one must not be rough with it but should use in this case instillations of moistening greasy substances ; plasters also should be applied ; and the woman should sit in a bath of softening and moistening waters .	e si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u , lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu ; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas . ~~~ e aministre emplastres ; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan .	0.186654
if the foetus present laterally and it is possible to reposition it , there should be applied the things mentioned for a living child .	e si le fet es sobre le sieu costat , lahoras si possible es , sia agulat : e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu .	0.837529
but if this be not possible then it should be cut away piecemeal and extracted .	e si aquo no es possible , lahoras sia inscidit en pessas , e sia extrayt .	1.32882
it is necessary that not a scrap of the afterbirth be left behind in the womb .	e cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina .	0.685068
when you have completed your treatment then also apply those treatments we have mentioned for abscesses occurring in the uterus .	e cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio , lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre .	0.66
if haemorrhage occurs , the woman should be put into styptic fluids and the usual treatment applied .	e si accideys flux de sanc , lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio .	1.12236
now i myself once saw a woman who had become pregnant and the foetus had then died in utero ; then again she conceived and the second foetus also died ; and after a long while she got a swelling in the umbilicus which grew and eventually it opened and began to produce pus .	e yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort , e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada , e aprop foc mort es le fet autre .	0.616667
i was called in to attend her , and i treated her for a long while but the wound did not heal up .	accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic ; e inflat es entro que foc ubert , e comensec a getar brac .	0.825
so i applied to it certain very strongly drawing ointments , and then a bone came away from the place ; then a few days passed and another bone came out ; and i was mightily astonished at this , seeing that the abdomen is a place where there are no bones .	e yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu , e medicat a lu per lonc temps , e la plagua no es consolidada .	0.944636
i formed the opinion that these were bones from a dead foetus .	adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio , e eyssic de lu un os , e aprop passero alcus jorns , e eyssic un autre os ; e yeu fu trop meravilhat , cum en le ventre no sia os .	1.15385
so i investigated the place and got out many bones belonging to the head of the foetus .	e adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort .	0.591973
i continued this procedure and got a great number of bones out of her , the woman being in the best of health ; indeed she lived for quite a while like that , with a little pus being exuded from that place .	donc yeu enguisigui la plagua , e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios , e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps , correc de lu un petit de brac .	0.866011
i bring forward this uncommon occurrence here since it gives knowledge and help about the sort of treatment that the doctor who piactises surgery may contrive .	e yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh , sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra .	0.666964
		0.3
