chapter ninety-three .	de sectione super aegritudinem nafir .	0.864286
on incision for the disease known as 'flitting disease' .	aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir , e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres , e aprop es permudada de membre en membre .	0.744712
the disease known in our region as 'the flitting disease' is a pain arising in a limb and then passing from limb to limb .	e yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare .	0.585165
i have personally seen it as i shall describe to you : i was called to a woman patient in a country district , who uncovered her arm and showed me a small inflation of the cephalic vein . ~~~ after i had waited a while i saw the swelling creep like a worm along the forearm , ascending towards her shoulder , with the greatest possible speed , as of quicksilver running from place to place .	yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila , e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras , e pus que fu romas per una hora , vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest , mays pus leugierament que esser por , ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc .	0.310076
then the pain left that place and settled in the elbow .	e adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle , e aprop aqui stec per una hora .	1.25167
then i waited a while and the pain ran through the whole body until it reached the other arm .	e aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras .	0.598383
then she related to me that it used to pass all round her body as i had seen it .	e aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi ; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre .	0.571429
i was amazed at the speed with which it migrated from one part to another , as i had never before seen this disease in this form , though i had seen many who had a pain that passed from limb to limb ; but never with my own eyes had i seen anything like what i saw in this woman .	e yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra , empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre . ~~~ mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna .	0.0867366
the only opinion i could form of it was that it was due to the woman's being of the dwellers in the wilds , dry of body , with outstanding veins , and hence that moving vapour was perceptible .	e yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela , on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas , e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada .	0.747349
but it follows then that it does not appear in that manner in people leading a leisured life , with humid bodies and hidden veins .	e es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas .	0.688474
when you want to cure this , and the patient feels the pain of it , and if you observe the appearance we have described , then tie a bandage round above and beneath it as quickly as possible and cut down on it so that the vapour enclosed there may come out ; and cauterize the place .	e cum tu voles la curacio de lu , e le pacient sent aquela dolor , lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit , lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada , e cauterize le loc .	0.926113
but if there is nothing visible to you then treat by purging of the body and by medicines dispelling and getting rid of flatus , such as foetid pills and pills of sagapenon and the like .	mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels , alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz , e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz .	0.753947
		0.3
