chapter thirty-one .	capitol . xxxi .	0.192857
on the extraction of roots and of broken pieces of mandible .	de erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas .	0.89819
when , in extracting a tooth , a broken-off root remains behind , you should apply to the place cotton wool soaked in butter for one or two days to soften it ; then insert the tongs or forceps with stork-bill jaws ; this is the figure of the forceps .	quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa , lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat ; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta , la forma de las forceps :	0.663519
the point should be made like a file or rasp on the inside .	las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi .	0.458036
if it does not respond to your attempt to extract it with these forceps , you must dig down over the root and remove all the flesh , and then insert the instrument that resembles a small crowbar ; this is its figure .	e si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas , lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali , so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta :	0.681143
it has a short rather thick extremity , and should not be tempered lest it fracture .	e sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit , e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat .	0.633333
if the root comes out , good ; if not , get assistance from the other instruments figured here . ~~~ first , with a triangular point , somewhat stout .	donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada , bo es ; e sino , ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas : la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa :	0.276564
another , triangular and slender .	la forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat .	0.757143
sometimes also we get help from this forked instrument and beside this , from other instruments and appliances mentioned above under scraping of teeth .	e ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent :	0.276592
sometimes also recourse may be had to this instrument resembling a large hook , figured thus .	e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz ; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran , e aquesta es la forma :	0.757806
the hooked extremity is triangular in section , of some thickness lest it break , not tempered .	de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta , la qual sia alcuna grossesa , e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat .	0.709934
you should know that dental instruments are very numerous , as are the other instruments , almost beyond reckoning .	e otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments .	0.580789
and the experienced worker with a knowledge of his craft may devise fresh instruments according as his work on actual cases suggests them to him . ~~~ for there are certain diseases for which the ancients did not mention any instruments , on account of the variety of them .	mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art , atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas ; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument , per las formas de diversas specias .	0.156714
now if the mandible or one of the bones of the mouth be broken or decayed , explore the site with some instrument that is suitable for it , namely one of the instruments or forceps mentioned for extraction of roots . ~~~ we also make use of forceps of this form .	mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca , o si poyreys , lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz , e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma :	0.252766
they are fairly thick , to grip the bone firmly lest it slip before the bone has been got out . ~~~ then cicatrize the place with suitable drugs .	e sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit , e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat ; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo .	0.0735431
if the bone is only slightly decayed , scrape it clean of its decay and blackness , then dress till healed .	mays si en l’os es petita poyredura , lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror , e cura aquel entro que sia sanat .	0.760375
		0.3
