chapter thirty-three .	capitol . xxxiii .	0.95625
on interlacing loose teeth with silver or gold wire .	de restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent .	0.812121
when the front teeth are loosened by some blow or fall and the patient cannot bite upon what he is eating lest they fall out , and you have without avail treated them with styptic medicines , the technique in this case is to bind the teeth with gold or silver wire .	quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament , e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga , e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas , e no ha valgut la tua curacio , lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent , quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias , mays aur nul temps no es mudat .	0.702067
gold is the better , for silver oxidizes and corrodes after some days , but gold remains for ever in its state and does not suffer this change .	e sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz ; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas , e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas , o si’ una o motas , entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida .	0.592308
the wire should be moderate in thickness in accordance with the distance between the teeth .	e aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest , e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda .	0.875113
the method is to take the wire and run it doubled between two sound teeth ; then with the two ends of the wire you weave between the loose teeth , either one or several , until you bring your weaving to a sound tooth on the other side ; then you repeat your weaving back to the side whence you began ; tighten it gently and judiciously till they do not move at all .	e sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca . ~~~ e aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras , e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti , e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda , per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua .	0.231507
you should tie the wire at the root of the teeth lest it slip .	e aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman .	0.825
then with the scissors cut off the two ends of the wire remaining over , and bring them together and twist them with forceps and hide them between a sound tooth and a loose tooth so as to not injure the tongue ; then for the future leave them thus bound .		-0.3
but if it comes undone or breaks , bind them with another wire ; so may he have the use of them all his life .	mays si es desliada o rumpuda , strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps .	0.553727
this is a figure of the teeth and the manner of interlacing two sound and two loose teeth , as you see .	e aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas , ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas :	0.706024
after one or two teeth have fallen out they may be restored to their place and bound in as instructed , and become permanent .	e quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs , e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat , e que remauguan .	0.830321
this can be done only by an expert and gentle practitioner .	e no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi .	0.645455
sometimes a piece of ox-bone may be carved and made into the shape of a tooth , and placed in the site where a tooth was lost , and fastened as we have said , and it will last and he will get long service from it . ~~~ both illustrations are from h . there is no figure in m .	e alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca , e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent , e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent , e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit , e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps .	0.35574
		0.3
