chapter twenty-two .	capitol . xxii .	0.942857
on the treatment of fractured bones when they mend crooked and are inhibited from their proper functioning .	de curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove .	0.609268
when a limb that has been set has some distortion after healing , or the bone that was broken has some prominence or callosity , so that the limb is deformed , but there is nevertheless no limitation of its natural movement , then you should not listen to those who think that the bone should be broken again .	quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio , e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre , mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural , lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat .	0.877069
in our parts there have been many ignorant doctors and bone-setters who have done this . ~~~ the operation is most blameworthy and leads to great dangers , death itself not being the worst possibility .	mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera ; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal .	0.15835
but if the distortion and callosity be recent you should massage it with an infusion of the herbs that have an emollient quality , such as leaves and roots of the marsh mallow , and melilot and the like : and apply one of the emollient plasters such as carefully prepared diachylon . ~~~ or take mucilage of the root of the marsh mallow and beat it up with chicken fat and oil of sesame , and let a cataplasm of these be applied . ~~~ or take a fat fig and beat it up with pigeon's dung ; and the like remedies that are termed 'inhibitors of scarring' .	mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz , lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz , ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu , e mellilot , e semblantz ad aquels ; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt ; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami , e sia emplastrat am aquel ; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom , e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio .	0.0863841
sometimes also the callosity is resolved by long-continued gentle friction with the hands ; and constant movement in every direction should also be applied .	e alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas , e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas .	0.749911
but if the deformity be long-standing and fixed and hardened and you are compelled to treat it operatively , you will have to cut down on it from above , and free the junction of the bone , and with fine chisels cut away the redundant callus or bone ; be gentle in this , with diligence and care . ~~~ then treat the wound with the means previously described until it heals .	mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr , lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut , e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils , e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi .	0.318672
		0.3
