chapter sixty-three .	capitol . lxiii .	0.95
on cutting for a fleshy hernia and its treatment .	de seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu .	1.11818
you should know that cutting for this kind of hernia has an uncertain outcome and in most cases results in death ; and therefore i think it better to let it be and to safeguard the patient .	sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios ; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor .	0.6125
however , i shall mention the manner of operating for this and all kinds of tumour .	e yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas .	0.855
now i say that many tumours arise from the bodies composing the testicles ; and this from several causes . ~~~ it may be from an acrid superfluity running down into the testicles , or from a blow .	donc , dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas : o per superfluitat aguda agra , la qual es efundida als genetius , o per percuscio .	0.141914
the colour of the tumour will be like that of the rest of the body and there is no water to it .	e es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos , e no es atrobat en lu dolor , e es apostema greu .	1.03
the lump will be solid and often will be stony hard , of a dark colour , and without sensation .	e fort leu es apostema lapificada , del qual la color es fosca , e no es centiment a lu .	1.08818
sometimes also it arises from a knotting and inflation of the arteries , as has been mentioned , or from an inflation of the veins .	e alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias , e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu , o per imflacio de venas .	0.802778
the sort arising from a swelling of the arteries may be recognized by a dispersal of the lump when you press upon it with your fingers ; this should not be interfered with at all .	mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz ; e no cove que aquel toques .	0.533631
the sort arising from a swelling of the vein will not disperse when you press upon it with your fingers .	mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz .	0.418922
it is sometimes possible to cut down on this kind and also on the other fleshy tumours thus : make an incision in the skin of the testicles ; then draw the testicle upward and out of the tunica albuginea , and free the suspensor from the vessels and tie the vessels , and cut the suspensor after you have freed it from all round the testicle .	e ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns ; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius , e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus , e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc , e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels , e ligua les , e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou .	0.853304
should it happen that the testicle is adherent to the fleshy growth , you will have to cut away the testicle itself and remove it .	donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida , lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel .	0.652424
but should the adhesion have formed somewhere inside the membranes or in the space between the vessels , then you must free the adhesion as a whole and cut it away with a circular incision .	e si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac , o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels , lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda .	0.634962
if the fleshy growth should be at the site of the junction which is behind , you will have to cut the whole thing away and remove the testicle as we have said .	mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras , lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu , e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit .	0.54308
and when your operation is finished , pack the wound with wool moistened with oil of roses and wine ; then dress in the usual manner until healed .	donc cum es complida la tua operacio , lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi ; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat .	0.7825
		0.3
