on incision for the worm arising beneath the skin , called 'the cattle disease' .	de sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina .	0.50696
this complaint is called by us in some regions 'the cattle disease' since it frequently happens to cattle . ~~~ it is in fact a small solitary worm generated between the skin and the flesh , that creeps all over the body , both up and down ; it can be felt as it creeps from one part to another until it breaks out at a place where it can break through the skin , and out it comes .	aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn , e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan , e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora .	0.189472
it arises from the putrefaction of certain humours as do worms , round-worms and gourd-worms in the abdomen .	e la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre .	0.991304
part of the harm that may be expected of it is that when it creeps about the body and goes up to the head and reaches the eye it may make an opening in the eye and come out and destroy the eye ; this frequently happens .		-0.3
if you wish to treat this and extract it , it must be done while it is creeping about and can be felt . ~~~ you must tie a tight tourniquet above and below it , then cut down upon it and extract it .	e es temut per la malicia de lu , quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap , e es pervengut al huel , lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel , e aquo endeve motas veguadas .	0.417039
but if it burrows into the tissues and you cannot locate it , then apply the actual cautery to the place until you have burnt the worm .	e donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu , lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment , e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort , e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel .	0.939216
the greatest damage to be feared from it is damage to the eye , as we have said .	e si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes , lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora , e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit .	0.6
so if you see that it has entered the head and is near the eye , then bind a strong bandage over the forehead beneath it , then cut down upon it and draw it out . ~~~ it is important also for the patient to take care to cleanse his body with laxative medicines from all corrupt and evil humours . ~~~ he should also avoid all foods giving rise to putrefaction .	may si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel , lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura , e aprop secsa sobre lu , e extratz aquel ; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas , e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio .	0.053617
		0.3
