chapter fifty-six .	capitol . lvi .	0.934615
on pustules occurring on the prepuce and on the glans ; and blackness and necrosis and adhesions between glans and prepuce .	de albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua .	0.801547
these pustules very frequently occur in the urinary meatus and are excrescences of foul tissue .	motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga .	0.613235
some are malignant and some are not .	e de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna .	1.20323
the nonmalignant you should seize with a fine hook and pare away until they are altogether gone ; then apply to the place cotton wool soaked in egyptian ointment ; then afterwards dress with palm ointment until healed .	no-maligna , cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota ; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac ; e aprop aquel , cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat .	0.74011
but when the pustules are malignant , of a dirty colour , for these you should employ the cautery after cutting and scraping them .	e si albater es maligna , de lega color , lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu .	0.961695
if the pustules be on the prepuce of an uncircumcized unbeliever and there are some inside the prepuce and some outside , those that are inside should be removed first ; and when they are healed over , then treat those outside . ~~~ for if you deal with both at the same time you are in danger of going through the prepuce .	mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis , e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora , lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat ; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo , quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci , no es asegurat que no sia trinquat .	0.222544
sometimes there occurs a blackness and necrosis in the testicles and prepuce ; then you should scrape away all the black part which looks ready to go necrotic or has already necrosed . ~~~ then afterwards smear on the place honey with pounded and sifted pomegranate peel and bitter vetch .	e ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio , adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput ; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel , le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz .	0.390155
then carry on with the usual treatment until healed .	e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana .	0.825455
if haemorrhage set in , cauterize with a lunate cautery figured thus .	mays si endeve flux de sanc , lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma :	0.672639
for the cautery serves a twofold purpose , namely against haemorrhage and for a putrefying wound .	quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps , so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda .	1.45582
if at any time the penis mortifies and goes entirely , you should pass into the urethra a leaden cannula so that the patient can make water .	e si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora , lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela .	0.741589
as to the adhesion of the glans to the prepuce ( which occurs in him who has his prepuce intact , being under no obligation to be circumcized ; sometimes too adhesion may occur by reason of a wound or an abscess ) you should scrape it with a flat-nosed scalpel until the adhesion is divided and the glans penis is freed all round from the prepuce .	en la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua ( et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa , e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio ; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema ) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida .	0.733715
but if the complete separation of the two be difficult then you should dissect away a little of the glans and of the prepuce ; for the prepuce is thin , and consequently it is often pierced quickly .	e si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament , lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii , e aysso es quar le prepucii , quan es subtil , fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament .	0.608333
separate then between the glans and the prepuce with a piece of fine linen dipped in cold water to prevent further adhesions .	e aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil , le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada .	0.501429
then let it be dressed with some styptic wine till it heals over .	e aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat .	0.724038
		0.3
