chapter nineteen .	capitol . xix .	0.957692
on turning a fistula into the nose .	de reduccio de arizati al nas .	1.00385
doctors give the name 'fistula' to what laymen call 'a quill' . ~~~ when you have treated it with the cautery or with caustic according to the instructions given previously , and it is not healed , there is no clear method of treatment except to cut down on the tumour at its ripening and let out all the humidity or pus therein , till you reach the bone .	quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat , lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu , e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os .	0.15131
when bone is reached and you see necrosis or blackness , scrape it with an instrument like this .	e donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror , lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma :	0.6675
it is called 'rough-head' and is made of indian iron .	e es nompnat de aspre cap , e sia feyt de fer indi , e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil ( ayssi cum es en la forma seguent ) .	0.513333
its head is round like a button but is engraved with markings finely engraved , like those of a file or a rasp .	e pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os , e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz , e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa .	0.743333
place it on the site of the diseased bone and spin it between your fingers , pressing down a little with your hand , till you are sure all the diseased bone has been scraped away .	e aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas , e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas .	0.838841
do this several times . ~~~ then let the place be dressed with stanching and styptic remedies .	donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per . xl .	0.500607
and if the place heals and flesh is generated there and the flow of sanies is stayed and there is no return after leaving for forty days , and there is no swelling , and nothing emerges , you may know it is perfectly healed .	dias , e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident , lahoras tu sapias que es sanat .	0.897805
but if not , there is no other means for it but to turn the fistula into the cavity of the nose , in this style , namely , that you lay bare the bone a second time , either by an instrument or by caustic ; and when the bone is uncovered , then take a drill like this .	e sino , lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas , e segon aquesta manieyra : e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta , e cum sira descubert le os , lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma :	0.873437
its extremity , which is of iron , should be triangular ; and its wooden handle should be conical in shape , and , as you see , tapering to the extremity .	sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada , e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi .	0.460408
then put it to the bone itself near the canthus ; but keep your hand a little away from the eye ; then with your hand rotate the drill till the bone is perforated ; and the patient will have the sensation of this , since , if he holds his hands over his nose he will find the breath coming out through the hole .	e aprop pausa aquel sobre le os , e sia aquel prop del lacrimal ; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel , e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os , e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma .	0.710265
and then dress the place with styptic and stanching remedies as i have taught you .	donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat .	0.469565
and when the flesh begins to grow and the place gets hard , the matter which before was coming outward will be turned into the nose ; and this will be easier for the patient .	donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit , lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas , donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute .	0.808957
		0.3
