a clyster may be made of silver or of chinese alloy or of cast or hammered bronze .	de forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri .	0.713462
large and small varieties of this instrument are made , to suit those on whom they are to be used ; those for the treatment of children will be small . ~~~ patients with stricture of the anus , or pain , will have very slender clysters .	alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat ; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz , quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit ; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes , les cristeris de aquels sian petitz .	0.203882
figure of a large clyster .	la forma de cristeri gran e pauc :	0.663354
the upper end of the funnel to which the membrane is bound should be broad like this ; it should have a rim where the membrane may be bound down , as you see .	le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra ; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes .	0.630933
the lower extremity , which is introduced into the anus , should be closed and smooth , and on one side of it should be two holes , and on the other , one ; the width of the holes should be about that of a probe or a little wider .	e la extremitat de lu pus dejus , la qual es entromesa en le cul , sia sorda ( so es no-uberta ) mot leon , atrasent a subtilita ; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs , e en l’autre costat un trauc , e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit .	0.976181
the membrane to hold the medicament is made out of an animal's bladder or of parchment , made up in the form of a small bag , a span in diameter .	e sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha , e la razit de lu sia un palm .	0.628334
it should be pierced with a number of holes in a circle a finger's breadth apart ; and into these holes pass a strong thread of yarn , twisted of ten or so threads , and with this gather up the skin like a bag ; and when the medicament is placed in it tie it down firmly between the two rims on the upper end of the clyster ; and then give the enema .		-0.3
this is the figure of the circle of skin with the holes .	e sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda ; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit .	0.603727
now the way to give an enema with this instrument is for the parchment or bladder to be filled with the medicament , which should be warmed so as to be tolerable for the patient ; but beware lest it be too hot or too cold . ~~~ then let the patient lie back and raise his legs ; and put under them a leather mat or a blanket .	e aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels , o enviro aquels ; e ajusta am aquel la borsa ; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa , sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio , e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc : mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina , que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute ; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja .	0.172957
then anoint the tip of the clyster with oil or egg-white or mucilage of fenugreek or the like ; then gently pass it into the anus ; then let an assistant take the membrane in both hands and together firmly squeeze it until all the contents are squirted into the bowel . ~~~ then the clyster should be removed and the patient should raise his legs against the wall .	e aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos , e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol ; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz ; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat , e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri ; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret .	0.302553
if the enema stimulates him to evacuate , let him hold it as long as he can ; if he delay all night long , it will be all the more efficacious .	e si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment , tengua le tant quant poyra ; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt , es mays derier en juvament .	0.857095
if the enema be given in a case of diarrhoea and he has to evacuate hastily , then the use of the enema should be repeated until he is cured .	mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta , lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat .	0.581416
if there be haemorrhoids or painful tumours in the anus , the clyster should be exceedingly slender and smooth , of the sort employed for children .	e si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens , lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon , dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz .	0.833255
here is a figure of a fine clyster with its skin tied on .		-0.3
		0.3
