chapter twenty-six .	capitol . xxvi .	0.942857
on the reduction of a dislocation of the humerus .	de la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle .	0.859459
you should know that there are three ways in which the humerus may be dislocated .		-0.3
one is a dislocation down into the axilla , another is a dislocation toward the breast ; it may also be dislocated upward , which is rare .	sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras , de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos .	0.798657
it is not dislocated backward , because of the scapula ; nor is it dislocated forward , on account of the tendons .	e la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle , e aquo es fayt tart ; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla ; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis .	1.10532
mostly it is dislocated and displaced down into the axilla , and particularly in those of a spare build ; in such it quickly comes out and quickly goes back . ~~~ but in those of a fleshy build it is the opposite ; it comes out with difficulty and goes back with difficulty .	e majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic , e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas , leugierament es dislocat ; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns , es eyssit fora am dificultat .	0.26125
sometimes a man suffers a blow or a fall , so that the upper arm swells up with an effusion , whence he forms the opinion that there is a dislocation .	e fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement , e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut , e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat .	0.840413
so you must examine it to make sure of it and then proceed to treat it .	adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu , e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu .	0.44386
a dislocation down into the axilla may be diagnosed by comparing the sound and the dislocated humerus ; for you will find an obvious difference between them ; you will find a hollow at the head of the humerus , and in the axilla the head of the humerus may be palpated like an egg , and the patient is unable to lift his hand to his ear , and full movements are restricted .	e es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic ; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa , quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta ; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou , e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha , ni maure aquela per totz movementz .	0.70132
similarly if it is displaced toward the breast or upward you will find it obvious to the touch and not hidden .	si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus , e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament , e no es amaguat .	0.663521
the reduction of this dislocation will be quite simple if it be only recent or the patient be a child .	e de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant .	0.764
to reduce it , his hand should be lifted up by an assistant , then you should put both your thumbs under his axilla and lift the joint up powerfully into its place , while the assistant lifts and stretches his hand upward ; then he puts it down and the dislocation will at once go back .	e la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus ; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu , e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc , e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu , e extenda aquela en sus ; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament .	0.79289
if it is not reduced by the means we have stated , being a dislocation of many days' standing , the patient should take a hot bath and use relaxing and softening fomentations , such as decoction of marsh mallow root and fenugreek and melilot .	mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna , e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio , motz dias , lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea , e fenugrec , e melillot en aygua , e sia administrada .	0.861413
then the patient should lie on his back and you put under his axilla a ball of wool of moderately hard consistency . ~~~ then the doctor should put his heel on the ball and grasp the patient's hand and draw it downward , while pushing the ball with his foot , and it will straightway be reduced .	e aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura , e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera , e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut , e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos , e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute , que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos , quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc .	0.389636
or , if you prefer , reduce it in this way : get a man taller than the patient to stand on one side and pass his shoulder under the patient's axilla and lift it up until the patient is suspended in mid-air , while another assistant pulls the patient's hand down towards his lower abdomen ( if the patient is light it will be necessary to hang a weight from him ) ; then the dislocation will straightway be reduced .	e si voles , reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra : e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute , e estia de la part de aquel latz , e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre , e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre .	0.762434
it is also reduced by another method : that is , to fix in .	mays si le malaute es leugier , lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda , per so que grave aquel , quar la dislocacio retorna tantost .	0.20266
the ground a long spar of wood ; its head should be of a round shape like the pestle of a mortar , neither massive nor slender ; then after a soft pad has been put on the head of the spar it should be placed under the axilla of the patient , who should be standing alongside the spar ; then let his hand be drawn downward on one side and his body on the other , powerfully . ~~~ then the joint will immediately return to its place .	e es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra : e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura , ayssi cum pilo de mortier , que no sia gros ni subtil , e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute ; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons , e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust , e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part ; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza , quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat .	0.216179
if it proves difficult to reduce it by any of the means we have stated , employ this treatment : take a wooden spar some two cubits in length , two fingers thick , and four wide ; it should have a round head to facilitate its introduction into the hollow of the axilla ; of this shape .	e si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas , lahoras usa de aquesta cura : e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses , e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz , e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma :	0.6869
then you bind on the round head soft rags so that the wood will not hurt the patient .	e aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute .	0.732609
then it is placed under the patient's axilla , and his whole hand and arm are stretched down over the spar , which is to be bound down to the upper arm , the forearm , and the tip of the hand .	e aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute , e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos , e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma .	0.83756
then let the arm be placed cross-wise over the rung of a ladder and the hand stretched downward , and let the rest of the body hang down on the other side ; then the joint will very quickly go back .	aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut , e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos , e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part , quar la junctura intra tantost .	0.74026
once it has gone back properly , in whatever way is possible , there should be put under the axilla a ball of wool of moderate size ; then apply the plaster prepared from mill-dust with olibanum and egg-white , all round the shoulder . ~~~ then firmly bandage the ball under the axilla and carry the bandaging round over the plaster .	e cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla , e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat ; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle , ayssi quo es revolvut desus , e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent ; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre , e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu , e sia leyssat , e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias .	0.389242
sling his hand from his neck , then let him be left without moving his hand for a week .	e cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca , entro que·l membre sia confortat , quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu .	0.73
the patient's diet should be light until the limb gets strong , for that will hasten the cure . ~~~ after five or seven days it can be unfastened and he can make trial of its movement ; if it is firm and not slack then it is healed .	e aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement ; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat , lahoras ja es sanat .	0.386538
if the joint is frequently dislocated , on account of a humidity arising in it or some other cause , then use should be made of the cautery with three prongs spoken of earlier , in the book on cauterizations .	mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa , lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs , segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri .	0.714454
if you do all this and loosen the bandaging after a week and the joint is still not firm , and you repeatedly plaster it and bandage it , and it is still loose and comes down and dislocates and you are unable to raise it up , then you may know that the tendons at the head of the humerus are either cut through or stretched or loosened ; in which case you may know that the joint will never stay firm in its place .	e si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada , e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas , e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus , lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu , les quals so al cap del muscle , ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz , e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu .	0.806748
as to the dislocation toward the chest and breast , and posteriorly , the reduction of this is done by thrusting and extension with both hands until it goes back .	de la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras , la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas , entro que retorne .	0.766511
and apply the usual bandaging and treatment until it is healed .	e sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura , e cura aquela entro que sia sanada .	0.897863
if , after it has healed , a callosity arises in it , and it is slow in movement , the patient should take frequent hot baths until that callosity is softened and the member returns to its original condition .	e si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu , lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera .	0.791176
		0.3
