chapter seventy-two .	capitol . lxxii .	0.95
on the treatment of unperforated female pudenda .	de curacio de alratica .	0.485714
this condition is when a woman's pudenda have no opening or have only a tiny opening ; it may be either congenital or acquired .	alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat , o sia le trauc petit . ~~~ e es o natural o accidental .	0.122601
the acquired sort is due to some preceding disease ; either to a fleshy growth or to a membrane , thick or thin .	accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit , e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes .	0.636923
it may be in the fundus of the uterus or in its walls or in the upper part or in the lower part ; and it prevents intercourse , conception , and delivery ; it often also hinders the menses .	e es fayt o en le preon de la mayre , o en les costatz de lu , o en le pus sobira de lu , o en le pus bas de lu , e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament , e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas .	0.859508
this is recognized by inspection by the midwife , if the obstruction be obvious and low .	e la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona , si la oppilacio es apparent , propdana ; mays si no es apparent , lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray .	0.491892
but if it be not visible she should palpate with her fingers or with a probe .	mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil , e es propda a las doas labias , lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela .	0.852381
and when the obstruction is due to a thin membrane near the labia you should lose no time in breaking it down .	e es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils , e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps .	0.675
this is done by applying some sort of pad to the labia ; then put both thumbs upon it .	e la femna sia sobre le sieu dos , las sieuas coyssas extendudas , e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta .	0.558385
the woman should be upon her back with her legs spread wide apart ; then the labia are to be stretched strongly till the thin membrane is ruptured and the obstruction is laid open .	e aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc , e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat .	0.656948
then take wool soaked in oil and apply to the place , and let the woman engage in coitus every day lest the place close over .	mays si le ciphac es gros e espes , lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta .	0.603529
if the membrane be thick and strong you should incise it with a broad myrtle-leaf scalpel .	mays si la oppilacio es per carnada , lahoras suspen aquela am unci , e inscideys aquela .	0.625225
but if the obstruction be due to a growth you should catch hold of it with two hooks and cut it away .	e sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio , ayssi cum ahacatia , e sanc de drago , e enses , ajustat am album de huou .	0.67037
and have at hand remedies for allaying haemorrhage without pain , such as acacia and dragon's blood and olibanum , all mixed with egg-white .	e aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament .	0.484082
then use a cannula of lead to prevent the wound healing up too quickly .	e tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec .	0.895798
she should keep it in position for some days and employ a bandage of dry linen .	e aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada .	0.695312
then treat with the usual healing dressings until it heals .	e alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns , e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra .	0.779412
sometimes other growths of flesh arise in the uterus itself ; you should cut away in this manner all except cancerous tumours ; for a cancerous tumour arising in the uterus is under no circumstance to be treated with the knife .	mays si aysso es per apostema crancos , a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra .	0.422314
		0.3
