chapter four .	capitol quart .	1.02692
on the treatment of a chronic flux of bitter tears into the eyes .	de la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels .	0.697959
when lachrymation is chronic and arises from the external vessels on the cranium , nor does treatment by any kind of medical remedy have any effect , and you see the patient's features flushed , and he feels a creeping in his forehead like that of an ant , and his eyes are wasted and moist , and the roots of the lashes itch , and the eyelids are burned by the bitterness of the tears , the ancients were compelled to treat it by this operation which they called 'treatment by the sword' .	quan so lagremas aciduas , e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo , e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina , e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas , e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz , humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz , e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas , les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio , e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa .	0.738523
you bid the patient shave the hair of his forehead ; then you make three parallel incisions across his forehead a little apart ; and let the length of each incision be two fingers' breadths ; the first incision continuing the line of the nose in the middle of the forehead ; and the second at a little distance from the temporal muscle ; and the third incision on the other side of the forehead .	e es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front , e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front . ~~~ e si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz : la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front , e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal , e la tersa del autre part .	0.117391
beware of cutting the two arteries which are at the sides , and keep your hand away from the mandibular joint ; and let there be a distance between each incision as of three fingers joined .	e guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz , e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas .	0.557143
have ready by you some pieces of sponge or a number of linen towels to wipe away the blood .	e si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz .	0.664637
then introduce the double-edged scalpel shaped thus through the incision near the temple to the middle incision , and with it pare off all the skin between the two incisions with the periosteum ; then do the same from the middle incision to the third one ; then draw out this scalpel and introduce into the first incision another instrument which is known as 'the knife-shaped' : sharp on one side , smooth and blunt on the other , thus .	e si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc . ~~~ e aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz , del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu :	-0.0243976
the sharp edge of it should be turned upward to the subcutaneous tissue and the smooth edge toward the bone ; then push it on to reach the middle incision and with it cut all the vessels passing from the head down toward the eyes , without letting the incision come through the outer skin .	que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio . ~~~ exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os , e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio .	0.067838
then do the same from the middle incision to the third .	e aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar , agut de una part e del autre no agut .	0.642642
after a moderate quantity of blood has flowed , express the bits of blood-clot from the place and pack into each incision a pad of teased-out cotton wool .	e pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena , e le latz de lu leon dintz le os , e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera , e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels .	0.864063
	mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena , e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura .	-0.3
over all put a pad soaked in wine and oil , or vinegar and oil , lest an effusion occur .	e pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual , exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat .	0.728571
on the third day loosen the bandage and rinse with plenty of tepid water and afterwards dress with balm of basilicon with rose-ointment and other treatments for wounds , until healed .	e aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh , e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre , e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut .	0.878224
	e en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza , e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas .	-0.3
		0.3
