chapter thirty-six .	capitol . xxxvi .	0.97
on the cauterization of fistulae in the anal and peri-anal regions .	de cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu .	1.16101
when the patient will not submit to the cutting operation we have described in its own place , and is afraid of it , he may perhaps be cured with the cautery .	quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc , e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo , sia sanat am cauteri .	0.754977
so when somebody gets a fistula , and pus and foul humidities have for a long while been running from it , you must first explore it with a fine probe and judge of its depth by the probe .	donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier , e es antiquada , corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas , e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil , e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta .	0.686195
then heat a spike-shaped cautery and introduce it , hot , into the fistula , in the direction of the bottom of the fistula and to the depth to which the probe entered .	aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray .	0.372028
and repeat the cauterization till all those corrupt bodies are burnt away ; once or twice or three times over , as you have need .	e aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula , e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta .	0.625958
but beware of burning a nerve should one be there , or a big blood-vessel .	e itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres , segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat .	0.50974
if the fistula penetrates to the urinary bladder or the intestine , beware of all these parts . ~~~ do this only when the fistula is in a fleshy part and you judge that it does not open into any other part .	e guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena ; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel , lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz ; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant .	0.439807
afterwards dress the place till healed .	e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat .	1.03182
if the place cicatrizes and the flux of humours ceases and it remains so for a long while , you may know that it is perfectly healed .	e si le loc es sigillat , e so abscindidas de lu las materias , e roman ayssi per lonc temps , lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament .	0.808908
but if the flux of humours from it is not stopped , understand that it has perforated or that at the bottom there is a piece of diseased bone or the like ; which will be mentioned in its proper place .	e si las materias no so de lu ostadas , lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput , o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc .	0.789583
		0.3
