chapter sixteen .	capitol . xvi .	0.980769
on incision of ungula and excrescence of the canthus .	de inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals .	0.819368
ungula occurs in two forms : either the nervous , which resembles a fine hard membrane ; or the non-nervous , like a white congealed humidity ; which , when the iron touches it or you try to pick it up with a hook , is cut through and the hook has no hold on it .	sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras , quar o es nervosa , e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil ; o es no-nervosa , semblant a humiditat blanca congilada , la qual quan ferr la toca , o es forsat aquela prendre am onci , es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu .	0.867523
both kinds grow from the greater angle of the eye , whence they spread little by little until they cover the pupil and block both the vision and the movements of the eye .	e amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel .	0.740517
this is the method of incision : the patient places his head in your lap and opens his eyes ; then you raise the lid with your hand ; then with a gently curved hook pick up the ungula and pull it upward ; then take a needle threaded with a horse hair or an ox hair , and a strong thread ; slightly curve the end of the needle ; then thrust it into the middle of the ungula , piercing it with the needle ; and tie the ungula with the thread and pull upwards ; and , with the hair , peel the side of the ungula adjoining the pupil , and divide it with a sawing motion right through .	mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se , e aprop obre les huels de lu , e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma , e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus .	0.383834
then what is left in the root of the angle cut out with a fine scalpel , or with small scissors ; and leave the natural caruncle in the canthus lest , in cutting it away , a chronic flux of tears occur .	e aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua , o de semblantz , o de fiel fort , o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla , e penetra aquela am la agulha , e lia am fiel la ungla ; e exten aquela a las partidas desus , e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla . ~~~ e ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu .	0.353002
	e aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs , e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla .	-0.3
the ungula may be drawn out with the hook alone or with the thread as we have said , and scraped away with the smoothtipped scalpel of this form .	e alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel , ayssi co havem dit , e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu :	0.580153
but beware lest the scalpel touch the corneal covering and cause a fissure in it and the pupil protrude .	e guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura , e que la pupilla sia perforada .	0.847291
then after the incision put into the eye a little powdered salt or an eye-lotion of verdigris , and leave it till the following day ; then treat as may be necessary till it heals .	aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar , e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia ; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat .	0.850176
if the ungula is non-nervous in origin and you cannot transfix it with a needle nor get a hook to hold fast in it , this sort is often successfully treated by medical means .	e si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha , ni es ficada en aquela le onci , lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas , e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio .	0.738298
	e si tu vols inscindir aquela , lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma :	-0.3
so treat as described in the section .	am subtilitat .	0.664286
but if you prefer to cut it , open the patient's eye , and take a fine smooth scalpel , rather blunt , like this and with this gently scrape away the ungula from above ; and if you see that it is crumbling away and breaking down under the scraping , then immediately instil into the eye some eye-lotion of verdigris , or the red eye-lotion , or a little powdered salt , and bind the eye up till next day .	e si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit , lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat , e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia .	0.568984
then repeat the operation on it till you have removed it all , unless an abscess forms in the eye , in which case cease the operation and treat the abscess till cured .	e aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu , sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel , quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela , e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat .	0.715021
then repeat the treatment with the same scraping till healed .	e aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat .	0.766038
as for a protuberance of flesh in the angle , if it causes great hurt pick it up with a hook and cut part of it away , with not too big an incision lest there be a flux of tears .	la emenencia de la carn lacrimal , si notz en le huel per gran nocument , sia suspendut am onci ; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida , e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas .	0.581931
then into the canthus instil red eye-lotion or lotion of verdigris till healed .	e aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat .	0.88125
		0.3
