chapter fifty-nine .	capitol . lix .	0.911538
on the manner of irrigating the bladder with a syringe , and the forms of the instruments that serve for that .	de qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo .	0.559341
when there occurs an ulcer in the bladder , or there is a clot of blood or a deposit of pus in it , and you wish to instil into it lotions and medicaments , this is done with the help of an instrument called a syringe .	quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema , o sanc congilat en aquela , o es coartat poyredura , e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas , lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra , e aquesta es la forma de lu :	0.749912
it is made of silver or ivory , hollow , with a long fine tube , fine as a probe ; entirely hollow except for the end , which is solid with three holes in it : two on one side and one on the other , as you see .	sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda , so es clausa . ~~~ et en aquela so tres traucs : dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes .	0.211765
the hollow part containing the plunger is exactly of a size to be closed by it , so that any liquid is drawn up with it when you pull it up ; and when you press it down it is driven in a jet , as is done by the projector whereby naphtha is thrown in naval battles .	en le comensament es loc concau , en le qual es aquo que es enpellit , e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel , ses addicio , entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz , sia atirada , e quan es expellida , am aquo sia atirada , e quan es expellit lonc , segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar .	0.746154
so when you wish to inject fluid into the bladder , dip the end of the syringe into the fluid and draw up the piston , for the fluid will be drawn up into the cavity of the syringe .	donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica , entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat , e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus , quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra .	0.868953
then introduce the end into the urethra as we described for catheterization ; then expel the fluid by means of the piston ; the fluid will immediately flow into the bladder and the patient will have a sense of its entry .	e aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua ; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys , quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost , e le malaute cent aquela .	1.05418
this is the illustration of a fine clyster also for irrigation of the bladder .	forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada , e es aquela la forma :	0.464773
it is made of silver or white copper . ~~~ the upper part of it is like a small funnel and beneath it is a groove where falls the thread of the ligature .	e sia fayta de argent o de lato , de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma , e dejos lu cana dedintz liament .	0.228202
then take a camel's bladder and fill it with whatever fluid you wish to wash the bladder out with , and tie it to the syringe with a strong ligature of double thread between the two ridges .	e aprop pren vesica de moto , e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica , e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble , e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc .	0.822877
warm the fluid a little over the fire ; then introduce the end of the siphon into the end of the urinary meatus .	e aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua .	0.792857
then apply strong pressure to the bladder containing the fluid until the patient can feel the fluid has entered his own bladder .	e aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica .	0.741667
but if you have not a bladder , then take a piece of parchment and cut out a circle ; then make holes in the edge all round the circle ; then pass a strong ligature through these holes all round and draw the circle in , as a bag is closed with a draw-string , first putting into it whatever fluid , oil , or water , you desire .	mays si a tu no es present vesica , lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle ; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat ; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs , ayssi quo so revolgut ; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur , pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz , e olis e ayguas .	0.649517
then tie it to the instrument and do with it as with the camel's bladder , squeezing until the fluid reaches the bladder of the patient .	e aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica , e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica .	1.01518
		0.3
