chapter twenty-two .	capitol . xxii .	0.942857
on the treatment of hypopyon .	de curacio de alconati .	0.728571
this disease which is called 'hypopyon' is a collection of pus in the eye which resembles cataract but is not so .	aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela .	0.643432
the method of operating in this disease is to make the patient sit upright on a chair before you . ~~~ take his head on either side with your hands and shake it about till you can see the pus come down ; then it will be fixed and not move ; and the light will pass and the patient will see things as he was before .	mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta , e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos , e aprop sia siccada e no descenda , e sia ostat le lum , e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia .	0.118952
but if it does not come down , we know it is cataract .	e si no descendra en jos , sapias que es aygua .	0.722065
but if the pus is not ready to be brought down by this method , then seat the patient in front of you ; then take a fine scalpel and cut a little above the corneal tunic near the coronal junction of conjunctiva and cornea , till the pus comes out .	mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit , lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona ( entro al loc vuet ) , entro que sia fora-getada la sania .	0.6498
when it comes out , instil warm water mixed with honey , or water boiled with fenugreek and honey .	donc cum es fora-getada , lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel .	0.459788
then treat as usual till healed .	e aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat .	0.45
		0.3
