chapter thirteen .	capitol . xiii .	0.985714
on the repair of fractures of the palm and fingers .	de restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz .	0.751163
fractures of the metacarpus and of the small bones of the fingers very rarely occur ; the only frequent occurrence is contusion .	sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura , e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas .	0.654208
when a fracture or crushing of the palm of the hand occurs the patient should sit cross-legged with a chair of the right height in front of him , on which he should put his outstretched hand .	e quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio , lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat , e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda .	0.943908
then an assistant is to extend the broken bones while the doctor straightens them so as to achieve a proper union .	e aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio .	0.569925
then a plaster and a dressing should be applied , if an effusion do not occur ; then a splint over that , measured to the site and wrapped in a soft cloth .	e lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa , si no accideys apostema caut ; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc , e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li .	0.942166
if the fracture be lower down , near the inner part of the palm of the hand , make a ball of cloth , bid the patient grip on it with the fractured palm of his hand , and then bind it up with a long bandage .	mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma , e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap , e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada ; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc .	0.657764
the splint should be of leather that is somewhat soft , so as to fit into all the folds of the palm ; and bandage it on suitably .	e sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat , per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma ; e strenh aquela segon que cove .	0.9
but if the fracture be on the outside you will have to put one splint above and another beneath the palm of the hand , to keep the hand opened and straight ; then put on the bandage , carrying it round the hand and in and out between the fingers .	mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora , lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma , per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta ; e aprop pausa la strictura , ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz .	0.728465
the fracture may occur to one of the small bones of the fingers . ~~~ if it be the thumb , then set it in the proper way and bind it down to the palm of the hand ; if you like you can apply a small straight splint to it to keep the fracture straight so that it does not shift .	e si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz , lahoras si es le dit pous , sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles , pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda .	0.257541
if the break be in any of the other fingers , such as the middle or index or little finger or the ring finger , straighten it out and bind it to the sound finger next to it ; or let them all be bound up one to another , which is better ; or apply a small straight splint , as we said for the thumb .	mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz , ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc , o en le indic , o en le auricular , o en le anular , lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel ; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio , e es milhor ; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita , ayssi cum havem dit en le pous .	0.766673
while you are setting it , and afterwards , look out for an effusion and counteract it with what is required if anything of this sort occur , according to what has been repeatedly prescribed .	e considera , en la tua restauracio , e aprop aquela , la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas , segon que es iterada la narracio de lu .	0.837188
		0.3
