chapter ninety . ~~~ on cutting for varices .	de inscizio de vices , so son varicas .	0.226562
varices are thick twisted veins filled with melancholic superfluities . ~~~ they occur in most parts of the body , but generally in the legs , particularly in the legs of couriers and ploughmen and porters .	vices so son varicas , e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors , e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas , e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz .	0.29865
first you must purge the body free from black bile , several times , strongly . ~~~ then venesect the patient in the basilic vein .	adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort , e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica .	0.240649
the treatment with the knife is of two kinds : one is to incise and bring out all the black blood , the other is to draw out the vein and extract it bodily .	mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras : la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre , e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota .	0.832527
the incision is done thus : the leg is first well fomented with hot water to liquefy the thick foul blood ; then bind up the patient's leg well from the upper part of his thigh to below the knee ; then make an ample incision into the vein in one , two , or three places . ~~~ then with your hand press the black blood upward from the lower part and downward from the upper part of the leg and draw off as much blood as you see suffices or as the patient's strength can bear .	la seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra : embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut , que es feculent de la camba , e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda , e aprop secca la vena en un loc , o en dos , o en tres am seccio ampla , e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus , e desus en jus , entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar , e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute .	0.223869
then bind up , and bid him abstain from foods that give rise to black bile .	e aprop lia aquela , e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz .	0.897814
the evacuation and venesection should be repeated whenever the veins fill up again to the patient's hurt .	e itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute .	0.719718
extraction is carried out in this way : the patient's leg is shaved if it is very hairy ; then bring him to the bath and foment the leg in hot water until it becomes red and the veins are filled .	mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra : tu que razas la camba del malaute , si en lu so motz pels , e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas ; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort , si banh no es a tu present , entro que·l membre sia scalfat .	0.516682
or if there be no bath available let him take violent exercise until the limb gets hot .	e aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol , o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo .	0.461623
then make a longitudinal incision in the skin over the vein , either at the upper end of it near the knee or at the lower end near the ankle .	e aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment , e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror .	0.804093
then with hooks open up the skin and dissect away round the vein on each side until it is laid open to view .	e donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda .	0.694412
when it is visible you will see it red almost to the point of blackness ; and when it is freed from the skin you will see it look like a cord .	e aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena , e sospen aquela am onci orp leon .	0.671125
then pass beneath it a probe to lift it up , and when it is clear of the skin hold it with a blunt smooth hook .	e aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz , e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia .	0.638916
then make another incision near by , three fingers distant ; then dissect away the overlying skin until it comes to view ; then raise it with a probe as before and lift it with a second hook as you did at first .	e aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo , e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda , e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela .	0.781313
then make yet another incision or several if need be ; then draw out the vessel at the lowest incision near the ankle and cut it through .	e fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios , entro que tota es yssida ; e lahoras inscideys aquela .	0.564809
then pull it and draw it out until it emerges from the second incision .	e si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar , lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la , o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada .	0.896186
then draw it towards the incision above that and so on until you draw it out of the third incision ( or ) the uppermost , until it is all extracted ; then cut it off .	e guarda te que no sia inscidida ; quar si es trencada , es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument .	0.636538
but if it does not respond to your attempts to draw and extract it , pass in a needle with a strong double thread and ligate it and draw it up ; and introduce a probe beneath it , and twist it all round until it comes out ; but be careful lest it break ; for if it break the total extraction of it will be very difficult for you and harm will thereby come to the patient .		-0.3
when you have got it all out , apply to the incisions wool soaked in wine and oil of roses , or olive-oil , and dress it till it be healed .	e cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada , lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat , e cura aquel entro que sia sanat .	0.881818
if the varix be contorted , with twists and turns from side to side and not in a straight line , as we said , then you should cut down along both sides of the twisted part and the places where it is tortuous , then catch it up with hooks and extract it whole .	e si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas , e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit , lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu , e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota .	0.72417
be careful in incising over it that you do not cut into or injure the vein , for this will render the extraction difficult ; therefore be most careful .	e guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela , quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela ; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela .	0.781452
the lancet for cutting upon a varix .	forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit :	0.222581
the blunt hook .	forma de unci orp :	0.257143
it is not bent like other hooks , and its extremity must be blunt so as to not injure the vein . ~~~ it should be of a broad curve and smooth , for if it is fine-pointed its fineness may cut the vein ; rather it should be quite thick , as we said .	no es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena ; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon , quar si era subtil , inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat ; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit .	0.214371
		0.3
