chapter four .	capitol . iiii .	1.02692
on the repair of a broken lower jaw .	de restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada .	0.78
when the lower jaw is broken and it is a fracture without an open wound , examine it .	quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua , reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament , e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz , lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera .	0.841304
if it is merely an external fracture , not broken in two but sunken inwards , which is easily recognized , you should introduce the index of your left hand into the patient's mouth if it be a right-hand fracture ; but your right index if it be a left-sided fracture ; and with this , from within , push the concavity of the fracture gently outwards , with the other hand outside , regulating the correction .	e cove donc , si la fractura es en la part dreyta , que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute ; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra , lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta ; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora , am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os ; am aquel decentment equa aquelam .	1.01411
if the break in the jaw be total , into two , traction must be employed , in a straight line on both sides , until it can be set .	e si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas , lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu .	0.75854
if any of the teeth be loosened or broken away , bind those that you hope may be preserved with a gold or silver or silken ligature ; then put wax upon the fractured mandible , and upon that a doubled dressing , and upon the dressing a large and strong splint or a piece of shoe-sole leather , the length of the jaw ; then over that bandage in such wise as you conveniently can and as will conduce to drawing it together so as not to loosen .	e si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio , lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda ; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot , e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat , e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta , o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula ; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio , entro que no es destruida .	0.773319
bid the patient hold himself quiet and still , and let his food be soft broths .	e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat , e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons .	0.735385
if you think there is any change of form at all , hasten to loosen it on the third day ; then correct the change and apply a plaster of mill-dust and egg-white , or of white flour , after you have removed the wax from it , applying soft tow over the plaster .	e si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra , lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia ; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli , am album de huou , o am farina de cisami , pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu , e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon .	0.60801
so long as the plaster sticks on it and the bone undergoes no change of state , let it be and do not loosen until it heals and the fracture mends , for often a fracture of this kind mends in three weeks .	e adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu , e la disposicio del os no es alterada , layssa aquel , que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura ; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas .	0.703704
if during that time an effusion occurs , employ those means of allaying this that we have often mentioned , until the swelling subsides .	e si autra veguada accida apostema caut , lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat , e sia remaugut aquel apostema .	0.698381
if the fracture be with an open wound , examine it , and if one or more splinters have been detached from the bone , gently remove the pieces of splinter with any suitable instrument .	e si la fractura es am plagua , lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias , lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz .	0.740486
if the opening of the wound be narrow , open it up with a scalpel as much as you need .	e si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt , lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat .	0.831818
when you have removed these pieces , letting no trace of them remain , suture the opening of the wound if it is wide ; otherwise apply one of the ointments that are suitable for that purpose and will encourage the growth of flesh over the wound , until it heals .	e aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias , e de aquelas no sira remaugut re , lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla ; e sino , pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela , entro que sia sanada .	0.685936
		0.3
