chapter twenty .	capitol . xx .	0.975
on the reduction of exophthalmos .	de reduccio de la eminencia del huel .	0.708571
when the whole eye is prominent and there is no reduction or impairment of vision , you should get the patient's bowels open . ~~~ then venesect him in the cephalic vein ; then apply cupping vessels to his neck without scarification and draw off by gentle suction ; then put to the eye a poultice made of acacia and aloes and olibanum and sarcocolla ; then bandage the eye over the application with many pads . ~~~ the way to make pads is to take a number of soft rags and fold each into four thicknesses .	quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio , lahoras cove que laxas le malaute , e aprop que·l segues , e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio ; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla , e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils .	0.0277005
prepare a good many . ~~~ then put them one on top of the other as the eye requires ; then bind on stiff bandages over these , tying them firmly .	e la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz , e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs ; e fay de aquels motz .	0.15841
repeat the cupping with suction and without scarification .	e aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat .	0.755769
then take away the cupping vessel and leave the eye bandaged a day and a night .	e aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura ; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio ; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt .	0.435385
if the bandaging slackens during that time , it must be tied properly .	mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat , lahoras cove que sia mot streyt .	0.859322
then remove the bandaging after a day and a night , as we have said .	e aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit .	0.652941
if you see that the eye has receded , good . ~~~ otherwise repeat the applications and pads and bandages and the cupping till it does recede .	e si vezes le huel ja esser redusit , bo es , e sino , lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat .	0.262097
		0.3
