chapter ninety-seven .	capitol . xcvii .	0.93
on the application of leeches . ~~~ leeches are mostly used on those parts of the body to which application of cupping-vessels is impossible , either because of their smallness , such as the lips , the gums , and so on ; or because the part is bare of flesh , like the finger , the nose , and so on .	sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas , per la parvitat de aquels , ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor ; o en membre denudat de carn , ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz .	0.236786
this is the way to use them : you seek some leeches that are in fresh water free of dirt .	e la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas .	0.475544
then you leave them in fresh water for a day and a night until they are hungry and nothing is left in their bellies ; then you purge the patient's body , either by venesection or by the application of cupping vessels ; then you scrub the afflicted part until it is flushed ; and then place the leeches on it .	e aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas , e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas ; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas ; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca ; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu .	0.866609
when they are full they will fall off .	e cum son umplidas e caso .	1.28864
if it is possible to make suction with a cupping vessel , the effect will be greater .	e si es possible succio del loc am ventoza , es mays derier en juvament .	0.94995
but if not , wash the part with vinegar followed by much water ; then rub and put pressure on it .	e sino , lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua ; e sia freguat e expremut .	1.17876
if the blood continues to run after the leeches have fallen off , and becomes an ooze , let linen dressings be wetted with cold water and apply them over the place until the oozing stops .	e si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas , e es aquo resudan , lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja , e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio .	0.756037
but if the bleeding be serious then sprinkle upon the place powdered vitriol or gall or similar styptics , until the haemorrhage is stopped . ~~~ or let split shelled beans be applied to the place and left until they stick there , and then the bleeding will stop .	e si le sanc es multiplicat , lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat , o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas , entro que·l sanc sia abscidit ; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas , e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc , e es le sanc abscidit .	0.398372
if it is necessary to repeat the application , the same leech should not be applied but another one if you possibly can .	e cove , si es necessaria , iteracio de sanguissuguas , quan es possible mudar aquelas .	0.693151
if the leeches fail to stick on , the place should be wiped over with fresh blood or pricked with a needle to bring out a little blood ; then apply them , for if they smell any blood they will immediately adhere .	e si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio , lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc ; e aprop sian pausadas , quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso .	0.750957
when you wish to remove them , sprinkle over them a little powdered aloes or salt or ashes , then they will at once fall away .	e quan voles que cajan , polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat , o sal , o cendre , e cazo tantost .	0.829196
		0.3
