chapter thirty-two .	capitol . xxxii .	0.97
on the sawing-down of teeth growing on top of others .	de la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras .	0.528571
when teeth grow in other than their natural place the appearance is very bad , specially when it occurs in women or slaves . ~~~ so you should examine ; if the tooth has grown out behind another tooth and it is impossible either to saw or file it down , then extract it .	quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga , e majorment quan endeve a las femnas , e majorment a las piuselas venerablas ; donc cove que tu consideras : si dent es nada aprop autra dent , e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu , lahoras radica aquela ; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent , lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma ; e es semblant a morr de porc , e sia feyt de ferr de india de extramitat mot aguda .	0.172811
but if it be attached to another tooth , cut it down with an instrument of this kind .	e sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent , e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz .	0.726087
it resembles a small chisel and should be of indian steel with a well-sharpened end .	e si es dent eminent expausat a limadura , lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de india del qual aquesta es la forma :	0.555758
you should spread your cutting with it over several days on account of the hardness of the tooth and so as to leave the others undisturbed .	e sia tot de ferr de india e·l margua eysament ; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas , am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat , per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga .	0.64528
if the tooth projects in such a way as to make filing possible , use a file of indian iron , shaped like this .	e aprop lineys aquela en la fi , e ratz aquela am alscus razoris .	0.851887
it should be wholly manufactured of indian iron , its handle too , and covered with very fine points to resemble the file used in making needles . ~~~ you should file the tooth with it very slowly and gently over a period of many days so as not to shift the tooth and cause it to fall out ; then finally smooth it and scrape it with one of the scrapers .	e si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua , lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada , e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa .	0.267069
if it be a tooth of which part has broken off and it hurts the tongue in speaking , file it down till you have disposed of the roughness of the break and the tooth is smooth and neither injures the tongue nor hinders speech .		-0.3
		0.3
