chapter thirty .	capitol . xxx .	1.00385
on cauterization of the spleen .	de la cauterizacio de la melsa .	1.5746
when you have treated disease of the spleen by the means that we have mentioned in the section and your treatment is ineffectual , there will be three ways of cauterization , each of which will be correct . ~~~ one is to make three or four cauterizations in a row over the long axis of the spleen like the cauterization of the liver , a figure of which has been given above .	quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio , lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras , las quals totas son dreyturieras , de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge , la figura dels quals ha precedit .	0.374
let there be between each pair of burns a finger's breadth or a little more . ~~~ let the cautery be of the same shape as described above under cauterization of the liver .	e sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes , e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment .	0.467333
do not put pressure on the cautery . ~~~ have the patient's body supine .	e no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri ; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos .	0.41586
the second method is to heat the cautery provided with two prongs , described in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder .	e es autra manieyra de cauterizar , so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz , la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle , e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre .	1.125
lift up the skin over the spleen at the level of the patient's left elbow ; and let the fold of skin lie across the patient's body so that the cauterizations will fall longitudinally .	e sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors , per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos .	0.797325
then push in the two prongs , well heated , till you have pierced the skin from side to side .	e aprop entromet les dos vernimentz , ignitz mot , en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part .	1.03818
then take out the cautery ; and there are four cauterizations .	e aprop extrayt le cauteri ; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris .	0.986538
or if you prefer you can burn with the other cautery , of three prongs .	e si voys , cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz .	0.9875
then dress the site of cauterization after you have allowed pus to run therefrom for many days . ~~~ this is more effective than any of the preceding treatments .	e aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns , quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio .	0.238914
		0.3
