chapter forty-nine .	capitol . xlix .	0.942857
on opening a tumour arising from a bloodvessel , called an aneurysm .	de seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena .	0.496154
when an artery is injured and the overlying skin scars , a tumour very often arises from this ; the same thing happens to a vein : a swelling and a tumour . ~~~ and these are the signs by which you may diagnose whether the swelling and tumour arise from an artery or a vein : if it be from an artery the tumour will be a deep and elongated mass ; and when you press upon it with your finger there will be a feeling of pulsation .	quan arceria es rompuda , e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela , lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema e les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena : quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors ; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz , sentes en lu quays sia stridor .	0.221794
but if it arises from a vein the swelling will be circular and superficial .	e aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors .	0.599026
it is dangerous to make an incision on tumours of this kind , specially in the axilla , the groin , the neck , and in many other parts of the body ; it is indeed highly dangerous , so in these you must avoid treatment by the knife ; also in those in the limbs and in the head it must be avoided .	e seccio sobre aquest apostema es error , e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas , e en les angonars , e en le col , e en motz locs del cors ; e es mot gran , donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada , e aquel que es en las extramitatz , o al cap , cove que sia evitat .	0.968365
but any such that arises from the inflation of the mouth of an artery , you may cut down in the skin over that with a longitudinal incision ; then open up your incision with hooks and dissect away the artery , freeing it from the tissues till it is laid bare .	mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria , scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc ; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria , e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta .	0.694561
then run a needle beneath the artery to reach the other side , and tie the artery in two places with a double thread , as i showed you for the extraction of the temporal arteries .	e aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz , e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs , — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars .	0.865372
then with the scalpel prick the part between the two ligatures to let out all the blood and get the tumour down .	e aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu , e sia dissolvut le apostema .	0.76087
then apply dressings to excite suppuration until the ligatures fall away ; then dress with suitable ointments until healed .	e aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz ; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat .	0.797844
if the swelling be due to a vein that has been penetrated , you should gather up with your hand as much of the tumour as you can , together with the skin ; then pass a needle beneath the place which you have grasped in your hand and run it through , threaded with a double thread , until it emerges at the other side ; then with it tie a strong ligature round the swelling as i mentioned to you on ligaturing the swollen uvula , from either side , with the ends of the thread .	e si es apostema per seccio de vena , lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena , e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma , e fay aquela penetrar ; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz , e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil .	0.728749
if you fear that the threads may come loose , pass a second needle and thread beneath the whole tumour to intersect with the passage of the first needle ; and tie your threads in four places .	mays si temes que extraguam le fil , lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra , e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs .	0.612324
then incise the tumour in the centre to extract the contents . ~~~ then cut away the superfluous skin and leave what has been ligatured .	aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu , lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena , e layssa aquo que de lu es liat .	0.180804
then put on that a pad previously soaked in wine and oil ; then apply the treatment with lint and ointments until healed .	e aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli , e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat .	0.945
		0.3
