chapter forty-four .	capitol . xliv .	0.942857
on cauterization of gout and pain in the joints .	de cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas .	1.36896
when there are pains in the joints from cold humidities flowing into whatever part of the body it may be , and specially when there are pains in the feet , doctors are in the habit of calling that 'gout' .	quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors , lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes , de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament .	0.677386
when gout due to chill has been treated with the various treatments mentioned in its section , and the pains remain , the cautery will remove them .	e donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors , lahoras las remau cauteri .	0.926308
that is , you cauterize the patient with multiple burns around the joint of the foot , after he has been purged .	e es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris . ~~~ e sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu :	0.122487
the cautery should be a middle-sized olivary one , thus .	e si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe , lahoras fay am cauteri de punt .	1.125
if you need to make punctate cauterizations round the front of the foot , use the punctate cautery ; and if the pains go up to the knee or other joints , which often happens , burn each knee with three or four cauterizations on every side with the same olivary cautery .	e si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas , e aquo motas vetz s’endeve , lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar .	0.668023
and if you require to cauterize him more than this , do it , but do not go deeply but only about the thickness of the skin .	e si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris , lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans , sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena .	0.755384
if the pains go up to the hip joints or the back , employ those cauterizations that we have mentioned in their own chapter .	e si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos , lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol .	0.634194
and if the pains are in the hands only , pierce a double line all around the wrists .	e si las dolors so en las mas tant solament , e es apelada suagra , lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo , puncta en aquels dos linhas .	0.630882
if the pains remain in the fingers , pierce them once over each joint and once on the metacarpus .	e si reman de las dolors en les ditz , lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma .	1.07839
and if after some days the pains go up to the elbows or shoulders then cauterize both on each side .	e si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles , lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris .	0.623906
and keep the patient to good habits and taking of medicine ; for if his regimen be good and the phlegm got rid of , he will be cured with this cautery .	e no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas , quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat , dieus ajudan .	0.97613
		0.3
