chapter twenty-nine .	capitol . xxix .	0.921429
on cauterization for pleurisy .	de cauterizacio de plauresi .	0.776923
the ancients mentioned a cauterization for cold pleurisy by means of the roots of the long birthwort , in this fashion : you take the longest you can find of the roots of the long dry birthwort , and of the thickness of one finger ; dip this in oil and light it at the fire ; then burn the patient with one cauterization in the space between the junction of the neck with the clavicle ; and two small cauterizations below the jugular veins , inclining slightly toward the region below the beard .	diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor , e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada , e sia de la grossetut del dit .	0.450607
and two big cauterizations above the nipples in the space between the third and fourth ribs ; and two more between the fifth and sixth ribs , tending slightly toward the back ; and another in the middle of the chest ; and another above the stomach ; and three more behind , namely , one between the scapulae and two on either side of the dorsal spine below the one between the scapulae .	e aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc , e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col ; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi , un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba , e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena , declinant un pauc a las partidas detras ; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz ; et am autre sobre l’estomac , et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras ; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas , e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz , dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas .	0.855096
it is not necessary to cauterize deeply , but let it be a mere hint , in the outer skin .	e no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri , ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra .	0.691948
now one of the ancients mentioned that there were some people who used an iron cautery shaped like a probe , and introduced it red hot into the intercostal space until it reached the abscess itself and evacuated the pus , as we have mentioned under tumour of the liver .	e ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel , e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas , entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania , ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge .	0.794796
but in this perforation with the cautery there is a danger either that the patient may die on the spot or that an incurable fistula may arise at the place .	mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor , quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio .	0.650936
		0.3
