chapter fifty-three .	capitol . liii .	0.921429
on the cauterization of corns , inverted and otherwise .	de cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants .	0.865116
this disease , which is something hard paining the foot , very often occurs in the soles of the feet .	motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau , e es causa grossa , fentrada , la qual ladeys le pe ; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras , so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda .	0.771194
the cauterization in this case is twofold , actual or caustic .	mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor , le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida , e sia de subtils marguas .	0.628737
the actual cautery is to heat a hollow cautery like a vulture's quill , made of iron , narrow of edge , of such a size as to surround the corn all round .	e aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau , e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau .	0.890598
then put it , hot , on the corn and rotate it till the cautery reaches the root of the corn ; and let be for three days to draw the pus ; then apply a plaster of wild mallows ground up with salt , and leave the plaster on one night ; then it may be drawn out with its root .	e leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac . ~~~ e aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal , e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt , quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz .	0.203269
then treat the site of the wound with stimulating salve till it heals .	e aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat .	0.689474
if the corns are not inverted , which usually happens on the surface of the body and particularly on the hands and feet , you should take a cannula made of bronze or iron or made of a vulture's quill , and place it on the corn or wart ; then pour into the cannula a small quantity of caustic solution ; keep your hand on it and rotate it , keeping up a slight pressure so that the edge of the cannula impresses a mark at the root of the corn and the caustic makes its way to the root of the corn . ~~~ let the patient endure the action of the caustic for a while , then remove it ; for the corn may be drawn out with its root .	e si so no-convertitz , e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors , majorment en las mas e les pes , lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua , e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor , e pausa aquela sobre le clau ; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat , e rete la tua ma , e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot , e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau , e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau ; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora , e aprop remau aquela , quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat .	0.27148
treat them in this manner one after another till you have accounted for all of them .	e ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors .	0.590476
then treat the site of them , after eradication , with stimulating ointments .	e aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran .	0.559091
		0.3
