chapter twenty-four .	capitol . xxiv .	0.921429
on the treatment of nasal polyp .	de la curacio de carn nada en le nas .	1.02857
sometimes there arise in the nose various superfluous fleshy growths .	quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes , o a polip peys ; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat .	0.435246
one of these is a thing resembling a centipede ; another , a cancerous growth , stony , hard , and pale in colour ; another again is a soft growth , not pale .	e de lu es carn cancrosa , lapadea , de fusca color ; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca .	0.664646
any of these growths that is soft is not malignant or cancerous .	donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza , cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh , e huebre las nars de lu , e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns .	0.518254
you should make the patient sit before you , facing the sun , and dilate his nose and introduce a hook into these polyps and draw them out ; then amputate what you can take hold of , with a fine scalpel sharp on one side , till you know that all the growth is gone .	e aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo , e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada ; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla , lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa .	0.48807
and if there be anything of them left behind that you cannot cut away , then gently scrape away with any fine instrument till nothing of them remains ; and if the bleeding be too much for you , or an abscess occur , then combat it by suitable means .	mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut , lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove ; o es dels apostemas malignes , lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas .	0.596338
if it be a malignant swelling , then speedily cauterize till the bleeding stops and all the polypi are gone .	e aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi .	0.6
then introduce into the nose , after the incision , vinegar and water , or wine ; and if the nose be free and fluid flow into the throat from it , then know that he is cured .	mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat , lahoras sapias que ja es sanat .	0.480193
but if fluid does not pass through it as it should , you may know that there is a polyp within in the upper part of the ethmoid bone where the instrument could not reach to make incision .	mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove , lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio .	0.440772
in this case you must take a linen thread , rather thick , and tie many knots in it with a space of a finger's breadth or less between each pair of knots ; and let the patient try to get one end of the thread into his nose with a probe or anything he can , after making it into the form of a button ; and let him make a full inspiration till it reaches the cartilage and comes out through the throat .	donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza , e nuza en lu motz nuzes , e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens , e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla .	0.655565
boys at school often do this sort of thing , and it is quite easy for anyone who wishes .	e pus que aquo aura fayt , que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars , e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro , quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas , e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far .	0.422736
then hold together the two ends of the thread , one coming out through the mouth and the other remaining in the nose ; then saw off the polyps by means of the knots in the thread ; continue doing this till you are sure that the growth has been cut off by the knotted thread .	e aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel , una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas , e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel , e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel .	0.644892
then take out the thread and , after wiping away the blood , put into the nose a plug dipped in egyptian ointment .	e aprop extratz le fiel , e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns .	0.855484
do this for three days or longer till the ointment has consumed the remnants of the polyp .	e aprop en la fi de la causa , pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat .	0.591789
then , last of all , insert a lead tube in the nose for a few days till healed .	mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique , usa de aquela .	0.665794
if he need treatment with drying medicaments , use them .	e aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars :	0.275
this is the figure of the instrument for instillation by which oil or medicines are dropped into the nose .	e fay aquo de argent o de eram , la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta , ayssi cum petita conqua , e le meat semblantment .	1.09647
it should be made of silver or bronze like a small lamp , its oil-container open , and with its channel likewise .	e si vols , fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana , e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana , descuberta ; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu , am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas .	0.903226
if you like you may make its spout closed like a reed ; and the oil-container of the instrument can be made covered over .	e aquestz capipurgi es precios : recipe de enforbi de castor , de balayra blanc , de giengiebre , e piletre de safra , de pebre lonc , de escafragia , de epetum de spic ana unc .	1.09277
it has a handle at the end , as you see , to hold it when heating the oil or whatever juice or other liquid you wish .	vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul , e sian faytas pillulas , e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza , e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers .	0.790255
		0.3
