chapter thirty-five .	capitol . xxxv .	0.921429
on the kinds of dislocation that accompany a wound or a fracture or both .	de las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps .	1.16373
when anything of this kind happens and you attempt treatment and restoration , death is a frequent sequel .	quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas , e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu , motas veguadas succezeys la mort .	1.10667
therefore such treatment should be undertaken only by a person that is skilled in the art , has long experience , is dexterous , sympathetic , cautious , and not reckless or over-bold .	e per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma , sino aquel que es savi en l’art , de lonc uzatge , misericordios e pietados , tardiu , no-ardit ni presomptuos ; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament , e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament , sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio , am de la malautia alleviacio , e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa .	0.716527
to begin with he should apply only remedies for the allaying of abscesses and then leave the patient to divine providence , unless , of course , the injury is light enough to give some hope of his escaping death ; in which case you should set out to reduce it at once before an abscess arise .	e adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa , denant que endevengua apostema caut .	0.36701
if the part goes back as you wish , employ the treatment for allaying abscesses and dress the wound with suitable desiccant ointments .	e adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem , lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius .	0.583009
if it be a dislocation with a fracture and there occur splintered fragments in the bone , try to remove them , following therein the instructions relating to the simple diseases we have mentioned before in their place .	e si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas , lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor , e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels .	0.807558
use your utmost diligence ; keep clear of entering upon a course with a dangerous outcome , as i have enjoined on you before .	e guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio ; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu creator , e mays permanent a la tua gloria , e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps .	0.666094
for this will best ensure the continuance of your prestige and safeguard your good name , god willing .	ayssi fineysso las paraulas de albucasim perfieytament de las quals dieus ne sia benezeyt . ~~~ amen .	0.279485
		0.3
