chapter sixty-four .	capitol . lxiv .	0.942857
on the treatment of hernia with varix .	de la curacio de hernia que es de vitz .	1.29062
a varix is a twisted tumour resembling a cluster of grapes , with relaxation of the testicles , which makes movement and exercise and walking difficult for the patient .	vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs , e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute .	1.04568
the treatment of this condition is of uncertain outcome , akin to those conditions just spoken of .	e en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio .	0.750308
nevertheless we must describe the operation for this condition as it was performed by the ancients .	empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers .	0.396253
so i begin by saying that you must have the patient sitting upon a high seat ; then push down the suspensor of the testicles and take hold of the skin of the testicles with your fingers together with the blood-vessels near the penis ; then let your assistant take hold instead of you and draw out strongly .	e dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada ; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos ; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua ; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu , e extenda aquels am extencio vehement .	0.8416
	e aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz .	-0.3
then with a broad sharp scalpel make an oblique incision in the direction of the vessels so that the vessels are laid bare .	e aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas .	0.75618
then dissect on all sides in the same way as i told you for extracting the temporal vessels .	e aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble , e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit , e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor .	0.663158
then run through them a needle doubly threaded and tie at the spot where the varix begins and tie it again where the varix ends , then cut through the varix in the middle with an incision at right angles to the length of the body and draw out the turbid corrupt humidity that has gathered in it .	e aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos , e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas .	0.536543
then dress the wound with the wound dressings usual where you wish to encourage suppuration , so that the vessels nourishing the one testicle may perish ; there is no harm in that .	e aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius , quar no es mal per aquo .	0.716491
but if all the vessels are varicose then you will have to remove one testicle with its vessels lest the testicle be deprived of nourishment through cutting into the vessels ; for it will wither and be of no use .	mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels , lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels , per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels , e que sian estaborits , o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels .	0.413708
		0.3
