chapter twenty-eight .	capitol . xxviii .	0.95625
on incising a tumour of the liver with the cautery .	de perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri .	1.19286
when there is an abscess in the liver and you are anxious to know if the tumour is in the body of the liver or in its capsule : if it is in the substance of the liver , the patient will be suffering from a feeling of heaviness and no very acute pain .	quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu , lahoras si es en la carn del fietge , le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat .	0.637733
but if it is in the capsule of the liver there will be the sharpest intensity of pain and you will see that it has baffled the doctors .	e si es en la tunica del fietge , am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu .	0.554013
then the patient should lie back on his neck ; then mark the place of the swelling with ink .	donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit ; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta ; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag , la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina .	0.642286
then heat the cautery in the fire , this being the cautery resembling a probe , of this form , and with that make one cauterization till the whole thickness of the skin is burnt through , finishing up at the capsule so that all the purulent matter comes out .	e cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida , entro que pervengua al ciphac , entro qu’en yesca sania .	0.582583
then apply the treatment for wounds .	e aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat .	0.76875
this kind of cauterization should not be employed except by one who has a long experience of the medical art and who has frequent practice at dealing with this kind of disease . ~~~ then he can undertake this kind of operation . ~~~ but in my opinion it would be better to pass it by .	e no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat , e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut ; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio , mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos , e es miels .	-0.0097723
		0.3
