chapter five .	capitol . v .	0.995455
on the treatment of tears and defluxions in the eyes arising from within the head .	de la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap .	0.798977
when anyone has a quantity of painful defluxions , acrid and continuous , and you see the eyes wasted and sunken and their sight is weakened and the eyelids are ulcerated and lose their eyelashes ; while deep in the head there may be a vehement and grievous pain with incessant sneezing , then you may know from these occurrences that those humours and catarrhs arise from many deep blood-vessels .	quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz , e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz , e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat , e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels , e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent , lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent .	0.831289
the best treatment in this case is that which follows : you bid the patient shave his forehead ; then you make one incision in the middle of his forehead or a little above , crosswise ( begin the incision from the left temple going toward the right temple ; the incision should be down to bone ; and avoid the temporal muscles that move during mastication ) until the bone is laid bare .	e la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta : que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front , e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front , un petit per la latitut ( e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar ; e sia inscisio entro al os ; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio ) , entro que sia le os descubert .	0.844033
wipe away all the blood with a sponge and separate the edges of the incision with teased-out cotton wool or with rolls of linen ; then bind up with pads over ; the pads should be soaked in wine and oil to guard against an effusion .	exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li .	0.260577
when you undo it , if you see that an effusion has erupted , you should scrape the bone until a growth of flesh begins in it ; then treat with a drying treatment which generates flesh .	e aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut .	0.469481
for example , two parts of wheat flour are taken and of colophonia four parts , and of them a salve is made which may be used to encourage the growth of flesh in wounds of this sort .	e quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit , lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn , e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn , ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o , e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat .	0.775685
		0.3
