chapter two .	capitol . ii .	1.05
on the incision of the occipital arteries .	de inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas , apeladas hilasseysse .	0.690991
when a person gets painful defluxions into the eyes or chest which become chronic , and medical treatment is ineffectual in this case , then section of these arteries will be the most efficacious treatment .	capitol segon . ~~~ quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz , e es antiquat aquo , e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas , lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias .	0.320774
when you decide on section , you should shave the patient's head with a razor ; then rub the place with a rough cloth to show up the artery ; then bind the patient's neck with an end of his garment ; then you will observe where the artery is pulsating ( the sites of both are the depressions behind the ears ) for it is uncommon for them to remain hidden , except in a few persons .	e donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap , e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias , e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap ; e aprop considera on polsa la vena ; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz , e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes .	0.785441
then do you mark with ink over both ; then cut with a hooked scalpel , cutting down to the bone ; the incision should be lateral to the head .	e aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta , e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os , e sia aquo per la latitut del cap .	0.965044
or if you prefer , introduce the scalpel beneath the artery and make a thrusting cut up at it .	e si vols , entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus .	0.994805
the incision should be of about two fingers' breadth .	e sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz , quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil , le qual saut deforo per saut frequent .	0.225889
when cut , the artery gives out a pulsating jet of blood spurting intermittently .	mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment , lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz , e aprop senha am tenta , e fen entro al os .	0.767391
if the artery is not discernible , you should measure three fingers' breadth from the ear , than mark with ink , and cut down to the bone .	e aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc . ,	0.453333
the quantity of blood that should be let is six ounces on the average , but often more blood , or less , is withdrawn ; all in proportion to the strength of the patient and the fullness of the arteries as they appear to you .	e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens , e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu .	0.547778
then examine the wound and if there remains on the bone any part of the membrane cut it off to avoid a haematoma .	e aprop considera la plagua , e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac , lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut .	0.808696
then bind up the wound with a bandage of linen cloth and dress with ointments till healed .	e aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li , e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat .	0.997474
		0.3
