chapter two .	capitol segon .	1
on cauterization of the head ( continued ) .	del cauteri del cap .	0.983333
when the whole head is affected by chronic headache which has for long vexed the patient , and electuaries , laxatives , errhines , oils , and plasters have been applied ; and particularly if he has undergone the single cauterization which we have described , all with no effect , then look well , and if his head is naturally strong of structure and is not weak , and if he feels a vehement frigidity , cauterize him over again a little above the first cautery ; then cauterize him on each frontal prominence with one cautery so as to remove the thickness of the skin and expose as much of the bone as we have mentioned above ; and burn him with one stroke on the hinder part of the head in the place known as the occiput ; but in this cauterization be gentle and do not lay bare the bone ; for thus the patient would have intense pain , different from that of other head cauterizations .	quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat , e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz , e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas , lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura ; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg , lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc .	0.743754
i shall describe this cauterization in its own place .	e aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida .	0.643281
	incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas , — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa .	-0.3
	et alleuja la tua ma en aysso , e no descobras le os , quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap .	-0.3
the cautery for the frontal prominences and occiput must be more slender than that for the middle part .	e yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc , quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap ; e aquesta es la forma de lu .	0.875862
		0.3
