chapter forty-three .	capitol . xliii .	0.95
on incising the larynx for a tumour arising in the throat .	de seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro .	0.52551
the ancients mentioned this laryngeal incision , but i have not seen anyone in our parts who has done it .	diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot , e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta .	0.569279
now here is the gist of what they say .	e aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels .	0.74868
incision should be avoided in those suffering from quinsy , for they will not benefit from it , since all the passages and the lung will be diseased .	mays en les homes haventz esquinencia , cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot , cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui .	0.631707
but in those with an abscess in the mouth , throat , or tonsils , and when there is no disease in the windpipe itself , you must employ laryngotomy to avoid the mischief of suffocation .	mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas , quan la malautia no es en la cana , cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio .	1.14855
now when we wish to undertake this we should incise the larynx under the third or fourth ring of the windpipe with a small incision transversely between two rings , so that the incision may be through the membrane , not the cartilage . ~~~ this spot is suitable for incision , for it is deficient in flesh , and there are no blood-vessels near .	donc cove quan volem aquo , que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot , o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat , que la seccio sia en ciphac , no en la cartillage , e aquest loc es convenent a seccio , quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen .	0.228922
if the practitioner be nervous , he must stretch the skin of the throat with a hook , then cut down through the skin till he reach the windpipe , and avoid blood-vessels if he see any .	e si le metge es pauruc , cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci , e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal , mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa .	0.887197
then let him incise the membrane which we have spoken of . ~~~ you can be certain of having opened the trachea by the emission of phlegm when it is pierced , and by the loss of voice .	e aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat ; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz .	0.263394
then leave the wound open for some while .	e layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps .	0.891429
when the danger of suffocation is passed , bring the two lips of the wound together by the skin , which alone must be sutured , without the cartilage .	donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda , agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua , e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage .	1.06669
then use medicaments stimulating granulation till healed .	e aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat .	0.575641
the author of this book says , the interpretation of this account that we have given is this : when they see that one of the tumours that they mention has obstructed the patient's throat and he is approaching death and is anxious himself to be incised , they resort to laryngotomy so that the patient may breathe somewhat through the wound and his life be saved .	e diyssec albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat , exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute , e le malaute es vengut entro a mort , e le ale de lu es entresecat , e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio , e sia salvat de mort .	0.559859
they bid leaving the wound open till the worst of the disease abates ; its height will last about three days ; then they bid sew up the wound and dress till healed .	e per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia ; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias ; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua , e cura aquela entro que sia sanat .	1.07143
my own experience was this : a slave-girl seized a knife and buried it in her throat and cut part of the trachea ; and i was called to attend her . ~~~ i found her bellowing like a sacrifice that has had its throat cut . ~~~ so i laid the wound bare and found that only a little haemorrhage had come from it ; and i assured myself that neither the jugular vein nor an artery had been cut , but air passed out through the wound .	e aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys , es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo , e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu , e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos , e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit .	0.0683192
so i hurriedly sutured the wound and dressed it until healed .	donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi , e le vent yssia de la plagua , e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada .	0.415385
and no ill befell the maid except for a hoarseness in the voice , but nothing more ; and after some days she was restored to the best of health .	e no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz , e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios .	1.05618
hence we may say that laryngotomy is not dangerous .	e ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor .	0.845455
		0.3
