chapter forty-four .	capitol . xliv .	0.942857
on cutting down upon the tumour which occurs on the outside of the throat , and is called 'elephant of the throat' .	de seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora , e es apelat hernia del golayro .	0.84375
this tumour which is called 'elephant of the throat' is a large tumour of the colour of the body ; it commonly occurs in women .	aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors , e es mot en las femnas .	0.905507
it is of two kinds , congenital and acquired .	e es segon dos manieyras , quar o es natural o accidental .	1.03923
as to the congenital , there is no treatment for it .	e en le natural no es engen de curar .	0.988182
the acquired is of two kinds : one resembles a sebaceous cyst , the other resembles the tumour arising from an arterial aneurysm , and it is dangerous to incise it , so on no account must you apply a knife to the latter kind , except any that are small ; if you try and explore them with a probe and you find they are like sebaceous cysts and not adherent to any blood-vessel , then immediately cut down upon them as you would a cyst and remove them with whatever capsule may surround them , if they are contained within a capsule ; and if not , dissect away the whole accurately ; then treat the place with suitable remedies .	e l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses , e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria , e en aquel es temor . ~~~ e no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit . ~~~ e tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit , e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras , e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas , lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes , e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam ; e sino , lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser , e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat .	0.000626282
		0.3
