on cauterization	de cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio .	1.53125
before we expatiate on the actual operation of cautery it is necessary to mention its advantages and disadvantages and the temperament upon which it is to be used .	am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre .	0.0346437
i say that a discourse on the advantage and disadvantage of cautery is a long one , a subtle learning , a hidden secret .	cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu , e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri .	0.727865
a great number of wise men have spoken on the subject with differing opinions . ~~~ lest i should be over long i have reduced their opinions to a summary .	donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs , e subtil per sciensa , e secret amaguat ; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis , e de lu se son desacordatz , et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor , temen perlonguacio .	0.4377
now i say that the cautery has universal application for every ill constitution , whether organic or functional , with the exception of two : the functional hot temperament and the functional dry temperament .	e donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia , exceptat dos compleccios , las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	0.615816
about the organic dry temperament the ancients differed , some saying that cautery helps in a constitution of this kind , while others said the opposite : that cautery is of no use in a disease caused by heat or dryness ; for fire is naturally hot and dry and it is obviously absurd to treat a hot dry sickness with a hot dry remedy .	en la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero ; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela , e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel , que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat , quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat , e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada .	0.848756
but he who holds the opposite view says that actual cautery may help in the case of such hot dry illnesses as arise in the human body ; for when you compare the human body , humid as it is , with the nature of fire you find the human body cold .	e diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel , que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes , quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc , atrobas le cors de home freg .	0.725888
i myself from much experience agree with this last opinion .	e yeu dic per le sermo de aquel , que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert .	0.932353
however , no one should attempt this operation unless he has had long training and practice in the use of the cautery , and is fully acquainted with the various human temperaments , and the character of the complaints in themselves ; their causes , symptoms , and duration .	mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici , e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas , e las causas de aquelas , e·ls accidentz de lor , e l’espasi del temps de aquelas .	0.84974
concerning the rest of the temperaments there is no reason for fear , particularly the cold and humid distempers ; all medical men are agreed and none differs concerning the utility of the cautery in such cases .	mays en las autras compleccios , no es sobre vos temor , e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas , quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels , e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas .	0.761538
now you should know , my sons , that the actual cautery and its superiority over cauterization with chemical caustics is one of the secrets of medicine . ~~~ for fire is a simple substance having no action except upon the actual part cauterized ; nor does it do more than slightly harm any adjacent part .	e sapiatz , filhs , que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu , so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent , es quar le foc es simple , la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument .	0.346069
but the effect of cauterization with caustic may spread to parts at a distance from that burnt ; and also in the part cauterized it may give rise to a disease difficult to cure or even fatal .		-0.3
whereas fire , on the other hand , on account of the nobility of its nature and its superiority has no such effect unless it is overdone .	mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat , e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit .	0.853725
that has become clear to us by experience through length of service , devotion to the art , and acquaintance with the facts of the matter . ~~~ so i need not prolong this discourse . ~~~ were it not inappropriate to this my book i should relate to you a deep secret concerning fire , the manner of its action on bodies and its expulsion of diseases ; with a reasoned philosophical discourse too subtle for your understanding .	mays le foc , per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat , no fa aquo sino que superfluisca e ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas ; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo e si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc , e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias , am sermo philosophic demostratiu , le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas .	0.153896
know also , my sons , that the ancients disagreed also as to the fit time for cautery , affirming that spring was the best .	e sapiatz , filhs , que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra .	0.951667
myself , i say that the cautery is suitable at all times ; for whatever harm may arise from the season of the operation is utterly outdone by the benefit deriving from the cauterization itself ; especially if the cautery is applied to pains that are severe , grievous , and swift , brooking no delay , because of the fear that the consequences may be more grave than the slight harm from the season .	e yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps , per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat , e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries , fortz e fistinas , las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia , que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps .	0.82895
nor let enter your minds , my sons , the groundless notion of the laity and of ignorant doctors , that the complaint cured by the cautery never comes back later ; do not cleave to this opinion .	e aysso no catz en vostras pessas , o , filhs , aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges , so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps , e pausan aquel consequen .	0.95207
the fact is not as they think ; for the cautery is homologous to the drug which alters the constitution and dries up the humidities that give rise to disorders .	e la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo , quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors .	0.716477
but the cautery excels the drug by the rapidity of its success , the strength of its action , and the potency of its powers .	mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor .	0.950724
it may be that the disease will return at some time according to the temperament of the patient , and the persistence and virulence of the disease ; and from the formation of a mass of superfluities in the body ; from his neglect of himself in acquiring them from food ; and from causes of a similar nature . ~~~ of course , if the disease to which the cautery is applied be a slight one , and in a part only slightly liable to superfluities and humidities , as , for example , the cauterization of a molar tooth for toothache , and the like , then it may happen that the pain does not return ; but that happens rarely .	e es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps , segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia , e la vertut de lu , e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu , e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas ; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz , ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel , possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor , mays aquo se fa en petitz .	0.410422
another common saying is that the cautery is the final remedy ; which is true , but not in the way which they mean .	e mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina , e es sermo dreyturier , no ad aquo que els entendo en lu , quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri .	0.490571
for they believe that after cauterization no treatment , either with or without medicine , will help . ~~~ it means something precisely the opposite : after various treatments have been applied to a certain disorder without success , then last of all we apply cauterization and this proves effective ; whence comes about the saying that the cautery is the final remedy—not in that sense in which it is popularly held by the laity and by many ignorant medical men .	e la causa es en contrari de aquo ; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias , e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso , e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri , e aprofieyta ad aquela .	0.378672
the ancients have stated that cauterization by gold is more effective than by iron .	e lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina , no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges .	0.663908
now they said that on account of the temperateness of gold and its noble character .	e diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr , e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia .	0.942353
they also stated that the site of cauterization does not become purulent , but that is not absolutely so ; for i myself have experience of that and have found that it happens in some cases and not in other cases . ~~~ cauterization by gold is indeed better and more successful than with iron , as they have stated ; except that when you are heating the gold cautery in the fire you are uncertain , by reason of the redness of the gold , when it reaches the desired temperature . ~~~ in addition to this it cools very quickly ; and if you overheat it it melts in the fire , melts and runs , and the practitioner finds himself in difficulties .	e diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac , cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat , quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres , e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero ; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur , no es a tu declarat , quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur , e quar prepara a recebre freg ; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc , e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel .	0.126247
therefore in our own opinion cauterization is swifter and more successful with iron .	e per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio .	1.04658
now i have arranged this book on cauterization by chapters , set in order from the head to the foot , to make it easy for the seeker to find what he wants .	e yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols , et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes , per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu .	0.802189
		0.3
