chapter eighty-nine .	de curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione .	0.3
on the treatment of paronychia and broken nails ; and on the amputation of a superfluous finger ; and the separation of webbed fingers .	panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe , e fort leu nays en les autres ditz , e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada , o es apostemat de apostema caut , o es corrumput , e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla , e fort leu corromp aquela tota , e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent , e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada , e la color de lu es fayta fusca .	1.15221
paronychia is a growth of flesh under the nail of the thumb or big toe ; it may also occur in the other fingers and toes . ~~~ when it is chronic and the treatment of it is neglected , it comes up as an abscess , or corrupts and generates pus until it eats away the root of the nail .	e donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio , lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo , quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso .	0.363406
often it rots it entirely , and often the disease reaches the bone and gives rise to foetor and broadens the tip of the finger and makes it livid in colour . ~~~ when you have treated it with those means mentioned in their place , and your treatment is ineffective , you must excise all the superfluous growth from the nail and then cauterize the wound , for in this case cauterization is a great help .	mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana , e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz , e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela , lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn , e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat , e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut ; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat .	0.293335
but if the bone be healthy and the nail also healthy , and the in-turned angle of the nail has pressed the flesh inwards and begun to stab it and injure it , you should pass a thin probe beneath the corner of the nail that presses into the flesh , and raise it up and carefully cut away that flesh and apply caustic to the remainder , until it is all gone ; then dress with ointments until cured .		-0.3
but if it should be that the disease has already begun to involve bone , that bone should be excised and removed ; for it will never heal while there remains any diseased bone .	mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os , lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas , car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput .	0.582114
and if you see the corrosion and corruption spreading in the finger , amputate it at one of the joints , as has been previously mentioned ; then dress it until it is healed .	e si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit , lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio , e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat .	0.874823
if a laceration or bruising happen to the nail , with violent pain , you should first bleed the patient and then cut away the nail with a sharp scalpel , a swerving cut from top to bottom .	mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio , e endeve en aquela dolor vehement , lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute , e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus , e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla , quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement , e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc ; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor .	0.921711
but be careful not to cut into the nail-bed , for you will give the patient violent pain and it will cause a growth of superfluous flesh at the place .	mays dit ajustat , le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes , fort leu es carnos tot , e fort leu so en lu osses , o fort leu es en lu ungla .	0.445444
then dress the part with sedative dressings .	e alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura , o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz .	1.32564
a superfluous finger growing on the hands of some men sometimes is all flesh , sometimes contains a bone , sometimes has a nail .	mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau , e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut .	0.473466
some of them arise at the root of a finger , or on one of the phalanges of a finger , and the latter do not move , while those that arise from the root of a finger do sometimes move .	e de aquels que son natz carnoses , la seccio es leugiera , e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat .	0.800589
that which is purely fleshy is easily removed ; you cut if off at the root with a broad scalpel .		-0.3
but the treatment of that which arises at the root of a finger is difficult ; you should avoid amputating .	mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura , la curacio es dificil ; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu .	1.24091
in the case of one growing from the finger at a phalangeal joint , you should first cut through the flesh down to the bone with a circular incision ; then saw the bone through , with one of the saws that suit the purpose ; then dress it until it heals .	mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes , cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os , e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo , e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat .	0.628877
as for webbing of the fingers one to another , that occurs very frequently . ~~~ it may be either congenital or from the healing of a wound or burn or the like .	mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi , o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc , o per semblantz , adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural .	0.198602
you have to cut the web away until the fingers are brought back to their original form ; then interpose between them a pad or piece of material soaked in oil of roses , to prevent them from rapidly joining together and to keep them apart ; or you can put between them a thin sheet of lead until the healing takes place as it should .	e aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament , e separa entre aquels , o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove .	0.420974
similarly , if one of the fingers becomes joined to the palm of the hand , cut through the adhesion according to the form it takes , and with proper regard for the shape of the member .	e semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma , lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre .	0.673723
		0.3
