chapter forty-seven .	capitol . xlvii .	0.95
on cauterization for elephantiasis .	de cauterizacio de lepra .	0.669565
those suffering from elephantiasis are sometimes greatly helped by the cautery ; especially that kind that arises from corruption of the phlegm and black bile .	les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament , e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia .	0.720635
when you wish to use the cautery , first look , and if the elephantiasis be in the early stage and you treat it with those remedies advised in the section but it does not abate and is not arrested , and you fear lest the corruption spread over the patient's whole constitution , then give him five cauterizations on the head : the well-known one in the middle of the head ; the second one lower than that , toward the forehead , about the edge of the hair ; and two at the temples ; and one behind , on the nape of the neck .	e donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel , considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen , ni esta , e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu , lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris : am un en le mieg loc del cap , e am le segon pus dejos de lu , eves le front a la fi dels cabels ; e amdos sobre dos corns ; e am un detras , sobre la nuca o servitz .	0.834539
and maintain the application of the cautery a little while till a slight mark is impressed on the bone and the outer table is removed from it , that there be an easy exit for the thick vapours .	e ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio , e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas , per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu ; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit .	0.754299
burn him also one cauterization over the spleen itself in the manner described earlier . ~~~ if the elephantiasis be widespread over the patient and appears obvious , you should give him , as well as the cauterizations described for the head : one at the end of the nose ; two over the cheek bones ; two over the cervical vertebrae ; six over the dorsal vertebrae ; a great one over the coccyx by the last vertebra of the tail ; another above that on the flat of the back ; two over the hip joints , one on either hip ; two on the knees , one on either knee ; two over the shoulders ; two on the elbows ; and two on the upper part of the breast ; and burn him once on each joint of his fingers and toes , and on each ankle and on each forearm .	e si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament , lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap ; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas , e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas , e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col , e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos , e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta , e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas , e am un sobre quascuna anqua , e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh , e am dos sobre les coydes , e am dos sobre les muscles , e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz ; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes , e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes , e sobre les foscils de las suas mas .	0.29227
be careful not to burn the posterior tendons of his heels .	e guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels .	0.688069
he may also be cauterized once on the pubic bone ; another on the cardia of the stomach ; and another on the liver .	e alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac , e autre sobre le fietge .	0.822084
you should know that the more you cauterize the more beneficial and effective it will be . ~~~ you should know also that the patient will not find the cautery painful as a sound man would , since his body is benumbed .	e sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris , tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent ; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor , ayssi cum han les sas , per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt .	0.317296
the cauteries should be of the types of instrument mentioned earlier , larger or smaller in proportion to the size of the limb or joint .	e cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz .	0.632265
then treat the cauterization with powder of bitter vetch with honey , together with the other treatments , till healed .	e aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat .	0.756993
		0.3
