chapter seventeen .	capitol . xvii .	0.964286
on cutting for chemosis and superfluous flesh in the eye .	de inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel .	0.689796
sometimes in the eye of certain people a red granulation grows up and increases so as to block the pupil or nearly so ; or it grows over the eyelids and often turns the lids outward , and it resembles the blossom of the pomegranate .	alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga , e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla , o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra .	0.663931
you operate for this by having the patient put his head in your lap ; then he opens his eyes and you gather up the granulation whole , with suitable hooks , or hold it with tweezers or forceps . ~~~ then you cut away the first bit of flesh and then the next , until you have cut it all away ; and beware of damaging the eye in the course of operation .	mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se ; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo , e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti ; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori , e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio .	0.328729
your incision should be made with the scalpel which we described for the incision of pterygium ; or with small scissors like those with which one gathers up pannus , as shown in the chapter after this .	e sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla , o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol .	0.500046
and when you have finished your incision and removed all the chemosis , fill the eye with powdered salt or instil the red powder or similar corrosive ; and apply to the outside of the eye cotton wool with white of egg to ward off an abscess .	donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn , lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa , o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas , e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut .	0.561735
if there is any chemosis left and blood is getting the better of you and you fear an abscess , then desist and treat the eye with those means for settling a tumour . ~~~ thereafter return to your operation till cured .	e si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut , e temes apostema caut , lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema , e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat , e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia .	0.199624
so must you do with superfluous flesh that arises in the eye . ~~~ but you must avoid treating surgically any eye that is weak , whether congenitally or by acquired disease . ~~~ never set your hand to an operation of this kind till you have seen if the organ can endure such an operation .	mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental , obran am ferr , e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio .	0.00905433
		0.3
