chapter seventeen .	capitol . xvii .	0.964286
on fracture of bones of the foot and of the toes .	de la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz .	1.18558
the heel is never fractured ; but the bones of the foot sometimes are . ~~~ the toes too are rarely fractured ; but mostly they get crushed .	al talo no accideys fractura de tot ; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas ; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura , e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio .	0.257712
if a fracture occurs to the bones of the foot , and you see the bones riding over one another , let the patient plant his foot flat on the ground as if walking .	e si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor , lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant .	0.70279
then stand and put the sole of your foot on the prominent bones and with your foot put pressure upon them and level them to their proper place .	e aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses , e aprop calca aquels , e prem , e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs .	0.792105
then apply a bandage and some tow on top , and put under the inner part of the sole of the foot a small board with two flat heads .	e aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus , e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas .	1.04905
after you have wrapped them in material and so on , bind them tightly to the sole of the foot .	e aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent , pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys .	0.703349
when three days or four have passed , loosen the binding and you will find the bones in position ; whether they have been fractured or dislocated , the operation is ( the same , ) as you see .	e cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre , lahoras tu deslia le liament , quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz , o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz , e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses .	0.812195
if one of the toes be broken , reposition and straighten it in the way that i described for the fingers ; then apply to the broken toe a splint of a length corresponding to the toe and a little wider than it .	mays si alcus ditz son trincatz , lahoras restaura aquels , e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma .	0.655666
then under the sole of the foot put the board that i have just described , and bandage it on firmly .	e aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit , e sia pus lada de lu un pauc ; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada , e strenh aquela am strictura decent .	0.953784
if the broken bones number two , three , or more , then apply over each toe a single splint measured to it , wrapped in soft material , and bind the board on the sole and let the flat portion of each of the two heads extend beyond the end of the sole of the foot , so that it may be held firmly .	mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays , lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon , e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe , e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio .	0.701686
and you must not forget to pay attention to all those contingencies that we have mentioned to you in other fractures ; meet each contingency with the means proper to it .	e es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit ; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove .	0.715974
		0.3
