chapter twenty-four .	capitol . xxiiii .	0.975
on the treatment of a dislocation of the lower jaw .	de curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos .	0.585366
it is rare indeed for the jawbones to be dislocated . ~~~ their dislocation may be in one of two ways : either they may shift slightly from their place and be a little relaxed ; or they may be completely and utterly dislocated so as to be relaxed down toward the breast so that the patient's saliva runs out and he cannot control it ; nor is he able to close his mouth , and he stutters in speaking .	so dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart ; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras : que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio , e so mollificadas un petit ; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida , entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca , e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula .	0.282188
if it be only a slight displacement it will go back in most cases spontaneously without much trouble .	mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca , lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa .	0.442941
but if the dislocation be complete and total it is necessary to set about the reduction of it at once without any delay .	mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida , lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament , e no sia tardada de tot .	0.623636
this is done thus : an assistant holds the patient's head and the doctor introduces into his mouth the thumb of one hand at the root of the jaw , if it be a dislocation on one side , or both thumbs if it be a bilateral dislocation , with the rest of the fingers outside to keep it straight . ~~~ then let him bid the patient relax his jaws and allow them to move in any direction ; while the doctor sets the dislocation , thrusting the jaw until it return to its proper place .	e es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute , e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu , si la dislocacio es de la una part ; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps , si la dislocacio es de doas partz , e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale ; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida ; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc .	0.244813
if the reduction be difficult , especially if it be a bilateral dislocation , administer a fomentation with hot water and oil , so that the reduction of both sides may be facilitated . ~~~ and on no account delay the reduction , as we have said .	e si dificil es la reducio de lu , e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas , lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli , entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot , ayssi quo havem dit .	0.377423
when the reduction and straightening have been done and the patient's mouth closes and is not relaxed , then apply to both sides dressings steeped in wax prepared from wax and oil of roses .	e donc cum retornam e so engualadas , e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada , lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot , e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat ; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols .	1.00605
then bind it up gently , with a loose bandage . ~~~ the patient should sleep lying on his back with his head held between two pillows so that he does not move it either to right or to left ; nor should he burden himself with chewing but should be on a diet of broth of corn starch until the pain is gone and the jaw is firm ; then he may eat whatever he wishes .	e sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos , e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes , per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra ; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa ; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon , entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas , lahoras maugue aquo que vol .	0.177509
let him use it gently ; let him not work his mouth heavily in eating or drinking or yawning until the jaw is firmly knit and healed .	e aquo sia aministrat am facilita , e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio , entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada .	0.752755
if the reduction of both sides is hard when it is a simultaneous bilateral dislocation , and there is no return to the proper position , then thereby in many cases fevers and perpetual headaches occur ; sometimes the patient's belly is loosened and he vomits actual bile .	e si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs , lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua , e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute , e fort leu e vomeys colera pura .	0.873913
when you see this you will know that he is doomed ; in most cases in which this happens death follows in ten days .	e quan tu vezes aquo , lahoras sapias que es perdicio ; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias .	0.758278
		0.3
