chapter four .	capitol quart .	1.02692
on the cauterization of chronic migraine .	de cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua .	0.773529
when you have treated a migraine in the way we have described and with what we have mentioned in the sections on diseases , and the treatment is ineffective , and you perceive that the malady is such that the cauterization we have mentioned before does not suffice for it , either with caustic or with the actual cautery , you should heat an edged cautery to white heat after you have marked the place with a line half a finger's breadth long or thereabouts ; and impress your hand once and maintain the pressure till you cut down upon the artery and reach the bone .	quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent , e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias , e no aprofieyta la curacio , e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc , lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat , pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit , o quays aquel ; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os .	0.795385
you must be careful of the mandibular joint which moves in chewing , that you do not cut the muscle or tendon that moves it , causing spasm .	empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula , la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio , e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela , e que no s’endevengua espasme .	0.760526
have the utmost care of haemorrhage from the artery you have cut , for the occurrence of that is dangerous , specially with one who does not know what to do , having no experience or practice ; it is better to refrain from operating .	e si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza , quar en la abcizio de lu es temor , e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat ; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament .	0.99402
we shall later on mention a treatment for accidental haemorrhage of the artery , in due detail , in its proper place in this book .	e yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra , en le sieu loc de aquest libre .	0.730426
but if you see that this cautery is not enough for this disorder and you see that the patient is of bodily fitness for it , cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have described , and treat the wound till healed .	e si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable , cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat , e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada .	0.783832
if you prefer , employ that cauterization which we have described in the chapter on the extraction of an artery , with the cautery of two blades ; for that is a cauterization better and more effective than this .	e si voys , aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels , e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent .	0.930343
		0.3
