chapter thirty-four .	capitol . xxxiv .	0.95
on incising the ligament below the tongue which is an impediment to speech .	de inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela .	0.663158
sometimes this ligament that occurs under the tongue is natural and congenital ; or it may be accidental , owing to scarring from an injury .	aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays , o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada .	0.935897
the operation for it is to open the patient's mouth , having his head in your lap , and lift his tongue ; then cut that sinew-like ligament transversely till the tongue is freed from its hold .	e la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute , le sieu cap existent en le tieu se ; e eleva la sieua lengua , e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio .	0.944537
if it is hard and nodular , arising from scarring after an injury , catch it with a hook and slit it transversely until the ligament is severed and the knots undone .	mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio , e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua , lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio .	0.65451
beware of making the incision deeply into the flesh , or you may cut an artery there and haemorrhage may occur .	e guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc .	0.543628
after the cutting , let him rinse with rose-water or vinegar and cold water . ~~~ then put under the tongue a pad of linen , which the patient must keep in position at night to prevent the adhesion from forming again .	e aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega ; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini ; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada .	0.199797
if there should be haemorrhage , put pounded vitriol on the place ; and if bleeding still prevails burn the spot with a lenticular cautery of suitable size and treat in the usual way till healed .	mays si accideys flux de sanc , pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat ; mays si le sanc ventz , lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo . ~~~ e aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat .	0.104779
		0.3
