chapter seventy-three .	capitol . lxxiii .	0.9375
on the treatment of haemorrhoids and warts and red pustules arising in the female pudenda .	de la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas .	0.812973
haemorrhoids are an inflation of the heads of the blood-vessels leading to abundant and constant bleeding . ~~~ when haemorrhoids are chronic they turn into warts .	emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament ; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls .	0.241985
i have already mentioned in their place the kinds of wart and their symptoms .	e ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas , e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio .	0.777692
now here i shall say which kinds permit of treatment and which do not .	donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment , lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr .	0.578017
i begin by stating that haemorrhoids and warts in the depths of the uterus that are not palpable are not able to be treated operatively .	mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment , so aquelas que so curadas .	0.356522
those at the orifice that are palpable you can treat .	e cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs , o am drap aspre , e inscideys aquelas am las razitz .	0.886667
so you should get the woman into a cool place and then draw on the warts with forceps or catch hold with pieces of rough cloth , and cut them away from the roots .	e aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio , ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels .	0.711498
then if that cause a flow of blood sprinkle with one or other of the powders that stop bleeding but are not corrosive , such as acacia or dragon's blood or olibanum or the like .		-0.3
then raise her legs up against the wall for a while and then bring them down into cold water .	e aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora , e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja .	0.743249
and if the haemorrhage persist for a long time make her sit in an infusion of sumac and pomegranate rind and oak-galls and the like .	e si persevera le fluxs del sanc , lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz .	0.855556
then take barley flour and beat it up with honey and vinegar , and apply to the back a plaster made of this .	e aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu .	0.889286
and if the bleeding cease , good ; but if not , apply to the loins and breasts cupping-vessels without scarifying .	e si le sanc es abscindit , bo es ; e sino , fay adherir am dos ventozas , e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio .	1.18546
then take wool and dip it in the juice of red cynomorium or plantain or wild eglantine , together with syrup of oak galls , and apply to the place .	e aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc ; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat .	0.779307
and when the swelling has subsided treat the place with ointment until it heals .	mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament , cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment .	0.297794
now red pustules resemble the heads of thyme , and are of rough appearance .	e cura aquel entro que sia sanat .	0.591667
all that appears on the surface should be cut away in the manner mentioned for treating warts ; and dress the wounds until healed .		-0.3
		0.3
