chapter fifty-seven .	capitol . lvii .	0.921429
on the circumcision of boys ; and the correction of their erroneous treatment .	de mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio .	0.655224
circumcision is nothing but a solution of continuity like other wounds : but as it is a result of our deliberate action , and as it is done particularly to boys , we should plan in this case the very best operation , and the easiest way that leads to safety .	circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas : mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat , e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants , es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut .	0.852521
now the ancients made no mention of circumcision in any of their books , since it was not practised in their religion ; but it is something we have acquired by experience .	donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres , quar no n’usan en las suas leys , e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment , la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores ; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla .	0.794118
i have myself seen the common run of practitioners and barbers carry it out with razor and with scissors ; they use a spindle-whorl , a ligature of thread , and incision by means of the finger-nail . ~~~ i have personally tried all these ways and have not found a better than circumcision with scissors and a thread ligature .	e yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs , am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla , quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus , quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas , e roman la tonica pus dejos , e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura .	0.342692
for circumcision carried out with the razor is often eluded by the skin ; for the skin of the prepuce is of two layers ; and often the outer skin is incised and the inner is left intact , so that a second incision is needed , and renewed pain ; while when the circumcision is done with a spindle-whorl you are in danger of cutting the tip of the penis , since the tip often goes into the aperture of the whorl .	e am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati , e es digital , del qual usan les sabatiers , no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril , quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu .	0.389942
as for circumcision by the finger-nail , the nail will often slip off the skin and your operation be spoilt ; or the boy's foreskin may be naturally short , for many are born thus , not needing circumcision .	mays en la operacio am ungla , fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio .	0.482051
i have seen this myself . ~~~ experience has taught me the superiority of circumcision with the scissors and the thread ligature .	e la codena del enfant es breu per natura , e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio , e yeu he vist aquel .	0.304104
for scissors cut evenly , since the upper edge of the scissors is exactly the same as the lower edge ; and so , as you compress your hand , thanks to the correspondence of the two blades you cut equally and simultaneously ; and you make the girdle of the thread like a wall all round the skin of the tip of the penis : thus no error can occur .	mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel , la bontat , experiment descrobic a mi , quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio , per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos ; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz , e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps ; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida , am le qual no catz error de tot .	0.724758
the manner of operating is first to make the boy , especially if he is one who understands a little , imagine that all you are going to do is tie a ligature on the tip of the penis and leave it for another day .	e la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit , que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament , e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia .	0.586814
then amuse him and cheer him as much as you can , according to his intelligence ; then stand him upright before you , not sitting ; and hide the scissors in your sleeve or under your foot and do not let the boy's eye chance upon that or any other instrument .	e aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia . ~~~ e aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament , e no sia ges cezent ; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe , que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments .	0.166594
then with your hand take hold of the tip of the penis , blow into the foreskin , and draw it back till the glans penis is exposed ; then cleanse from it all unclean matter that has collected .	e aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena , e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua , e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia .	0.806235
then ligate the indicated place with a double ligature , and a second right round beneath ; then take hold at the site of the lower ligature with thumb and forefinger , very firmly , and cut between the ligatures ; then quickly push back the skin and draw out the glans penis ; then let a little blood flow , for that is all the better and prevents the swelling of the tip of the penis ; then wipe it with a piece of soft cloth , then sprinkle on it ashes of dried gourds ( this is the best of all that i have tried ) or else fine white flour , which is also good ; then apply on top of the powders a piece of linen with egg-yolk cooked in rosewater , beaten up with fresh oil of roses of good quality .	e aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla , e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament , e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio , e inscideys entre dos liaments .	0.166315
leave this on the wound until the following day ; then dress it in the usual way till healed .	e aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua ; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit , quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo ; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia ; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat .	0.590226
this is the type of scissors most suitable for circumcizing .	la forma de las forfexs a mondificacio , aquesta es la forma :	0.294118
they should be fiat-nosed , sharp , with no bend in them , and with the pivot tempered ; and the length of the handles should be equal to that of the blades .	sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant , que non sia yssit le ram del clau , e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment .	0.657143
now the mistake often occurring in circumcision is for the inner layer of skin , either the whole or the part , to be inverted at the cutting .	mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota , o partida de lu deves la inscizio .	0.491237
so you should at the start draw it out with your finger-nail before the place swell ; then make an even incision .	donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat .	0.498387
and if you are unable to get a hold with your finger-nail then pick it up with a hook and make your incision .	e si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla , lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela .	0.671815
if after three days there still remains some inflation and swelling of the part below the tip of the penis , let it be until the effusion subsides , and then gently peel it away and cut it as best you may .	mays si son passatz tres dias , e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat , lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut , e excorja aquel am fecilitat , e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat .	0.68
be careful of the tip of the penis ; though if any of the tip is cut away that will do no harm .	e guarda te del cap de la vergua , quar no nosera a lu aquo .	0.657071
and dress the wound with stimulating medicaments from among the powders that we described in the treatise on powders .	e donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras .	0.579714
should more of the skin be cut away than necessary and the skin is wrinkled up , that will do no great harm either .	e si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura , e obezeys a las partidas desus , aquo no notz a lu .	0.857895
continue such treatment as we have mentioned , until healed .	e mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat .	0.781633
		0.3
