chapter seventeen .	capitol . xvii .	0.964286
on cauterization of a fistula in the angle of the eye .	de cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel .	0.728205
when you have treated a fistula in those ways mentioned in the sections on diseases , without success , it should be cauterized after this manner . ~~~ bid the patient put his head in your lap ; and let an assistant hold his head in front of you without moving or stirring .	quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio , lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra : comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se , e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap .	0.129625
then place on his eyes cotton wool damped with egg-white or mucilage of psyllium seeds .	e aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu .	0.635798
then heat a cautery shaped thus .	e aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma :	0.857143
it should be hollow and in shape like a fine tube , like an eagle's quill , at the one end that is used as a cautery .	le qual sia conquau , ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor , de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri .	0.697489
and if you wish it may be perforated to the other extremity ; or it can be solid like a probe .	e si voys , sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat .	0.792308
but this hollow instrument will be better for your operation .	e si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta .	0.651724
then press on the fistula if it be open and get the matter out of it and wipe it away ; or if it is not open , then open it .	mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra . ~~~ e aprop prem la fistula si es uberta , e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela .	0.307237
then apply to it the cautery , which should be very hot , and press it in with your hand till it reaches the bone .	e si no es uberta , lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu .	0.818382
while you are burning keep the hand away from the eye slightly toward the nasal side , lest your hand slip or the patient draw away so that you put the cautery into the ball of the eye and destroy it .	e aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit , e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas , per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat , e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel .	0.772425
and if you reach the bone at the first cauterization , good ; if not , repeat the cauterization if necessary .	e donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os , bo es ; e sino , lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos , si mestiers era ; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns , e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat .	1.30812
leave it a few days , then put on cotton wool with butter and treat with hygroscopic ointment till it heals . ~~~ and should forty days have passed and it does not heal , apply a sharp corrosive ointment so as to expose the bone , and strip it as will be explained in the appropriate chapter .	mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat , lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol .	0.174915
another method of cauterizing a fistula is that which some of the ancients mentioned : apply yourself to the site of the fistula and incise it ; then insert into the incision a fine funnel , this being the figure of it , and pour into it a drachm of molten lead ; and keep your hand on the funnel , holding it firm all the time , and do not let the patient move at all , lest the molten lead run into his eyes . ~~~ then you should put cotton wool soaked in egg-white or water upon the patient's eye . ~~~ for the lead cauterizes the site of the fistula and acts as a marvellous cure .	e es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero : enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu : e fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut ; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio , e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel ; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua , quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora .	0.0750343
if the fistula heals by the cauterization and medication we have described , well and good ; otherwise perforation of the nose will undoubtedly have to be undertaken to lead the fistula into the meatus of the nose , by the technique that will come in its own place .	e si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio , bo es ; e sino , lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri .	1.02552
		0.3
