chapter twenty-six .	capitol . xxvi .	0.942857
on suture of nose , lip , and ear , when there is discontinuity from a wound or the like .	de sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz .	0.760948
you should know that when discontinuity occurs in one of these cartilages , treatment of them rarely does any good , except in a few people .	sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages , pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes .	0.547391
when such a thing happens to anyone , look carefully , and if the wound be fresh and bleeding , bring the edges of the wound together with a suture , and dress them till they are healed .	donc cove , quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas , que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc , e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura , e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat .	0.937
if the discontinuity has separated the edges , and both edges have healed , it is necessary to scrape both edges on the external skin till they bleed ; then bring the edges together with a suture and dust over it dragon's blood and olibanum ; and put over the powder a plaster of palm ointment or some other of the regenerative ointments , and leave bandaged for two or three days ; then unbandage and change the medicine , and let the sutures come away of themselves ; and afterward dress with ointment till healed .	e si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas , e quascuna es fayta sana , lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc . ~~~ e aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas , e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat , e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon , o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius , e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres , e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz , e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat .	0.238664
now the manner of suturing is to close the discontinuity , either with a needle , as we describe for suture of the belly , or with a thread as we tell you there .	mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre , o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber .	0.535659
		0.3
