chapter eighteen .	capitol . xviii .	1.01
on fracture of the female pudenda and of the pubic bone and of the male organ .	de fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home .	1.13333
when a woman's pudenda are fractured , make her sit cross-legged , then bend her backwards little by little , being supported from behind .	quan le conh de la femna es trincat , lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada , e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit , e sia tenguda detras .	0.961273
then let a midwife pack the vulva with cotton wool so as to form a kind of spherical packing in the vulva . ~~~ then shake the woman and by degrees elevate the dorsal spine , for the cotton wool will emerge until it is like a sphere at the opening and the fractured bone will be reduced .	e aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto , e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera ; e aprop la femna sia concutida , e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit , quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna .	0.319048
then put a pillow upon her back and when she wants to pass water gently remove the cotton wool so she may do so , then put it back in the same way in which it was put in at the first . ~~~ then she should return to her pillow as before .	e aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu , e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine , e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament , e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier .	0.267021
she should do this for about seven days , then it will be mended .	e fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels , quar aquel es restaurat .	1.02736
if you prefer , take a sheep's bladder and bind a hollow reed to the opening of it ; introduce the whole bladder into the pudenda and then blow hard into the tube so that the bladder is inflated within the passage and the fracture will then be reduced .	e si voles , pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera ; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu , e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh , quar la fractura retorna .	0.764618
then pack with cotton wool and let her wait a few days as we have described , until it be healed .	e aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat , entro que sia sanat .	0.974126
now when a man or woman has the pubic bone broken you can use for the setting and repair of it the method we gave for a fracture of the hip .	e quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat , lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca .	0.631204
the correct practice in these uncommon fractures , which very rarely happen , will be obvious , especially to one who has some experience and understands well this book of mine . ~~~ for the fracture itself will in most cases indicate the correct way to repair it and bind it up , so use your intelligence .	e aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno , majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot ; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu , e donc enten be .	0.317579
when a man's organ is fractured , take a goose's neck and introduce the penis into it ; then let it be wrapped and bandaged and left for about three days until it be healed .	mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada , pren guarguamela de auca , e met la vergua en aquela ; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap , e sia envolopada , e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels , e sia sanada .	0.93973
		0.3
