chapter twenty-one .	capitol . xxi .	0.911538
on cutting for staphyloma .	de la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea .	0.5875
when a rupture befalls the uveal membrane so that it swells and protrudes outside the eyelids looking like a grape , and on this account the man's features are disfigured ; if you intend to cut it away the operation will be as i am about to describe . ~~~ you introduce a needle to the root of the uvea from the lower to the upper segment ; then you introduce another needle threaded with a double thread , from the region of the canthus major where you will perforate it ; and leave the first needle in its place . ~~~ then cut the place of doubling of the doubled thread , and with it ligature that part of the excrescence around the needle and tie it well .	quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea , e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim , e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo , e vols aquo inscidir , lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat , que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus , e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal , e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio ; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula , e strenh aquela mot .	0.062
then remove the needle and apply to the eye wool moistened with egg-white ; and leave till the thread falls away with the growth .	e aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva .	0.604664
then treat the eye with fortifying dressings till the wound be healed .	e aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada .	0.703571
sometimes the uvea is tied all round with a circle of material so that the prominence of the eye is greatly increased . ~~~ then you perforate it with a fine scalpel going to the depth of the eye ; and an albuminous humour will flow out and the eye will shrink and return at once .	e alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran , e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel , e corra la humiditat albuginea , e descen le huel e intra tantost .	0.0615337
then bandage till healed .	e aprop strenh entro que sia sanat .	0.708696
		0.3
