chapter one .	capitol primier .	0.95
in which is given the necessary compendious preliminary information on fractures .	summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium , ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est , antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque .	0.180769
before we begin to speak of the fractures and dislocations of individual members we must , as an introduction to this book , give the general and particular information which compels your understanding and your being versed in it ; both you and anyone else beside who is eager to learn this noble art .	cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo ; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels ; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos .	0.867303
so i say that when anyone has sustained a fracture or dislocation or luxation or fall , you should first hasten to venesect him , or get his bowel open , or both , if there be nothing to hinder such as physical weakness , or unless it be a small boy or a very old man to whom an accident of this kind has happened ; or unless the weather be excessively hot or cold .	e donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement , lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel , o quascu ensemps , si no prohibeys alcuna causa , ayssi cum debelitat de vertut , o es aquel al qual accideys effant , o viel en decrepitat , o es temps de vehement calor , o de vehement freg .	0.830991
next , let his diet be restricted to cold vegetables and the flesh of fowl and kids ; he is to be forbidden wine and rich meat and gluttony and all foods that fill out the blood-vessels , until you are sure that there is no abscess and see no reason to suspect a flux of matter to the place .	e aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz ; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc , entro que siras segurat de apostema caut , e si no temes efusio de materia al membre .	0.84233
then let the patient return to his former diet according to his custom .	e lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu .	0.85
when the broken bone has begun to mend , the patient should be nourished with very nourishing food , fat , strong , having some glutinous property , such as porridge , rice , heads , trotters , the tripe of cows , eggs , fresh fish , heavy wine , and the like ; for on this diet the mending of the fracture will be quicker and better .	e donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat , lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat , ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua , e ris , e caps , e pes , e ventres de vacas , e huous , e peys fresc , e vi gros e semblants ad aquels , e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels .	1.37231
	e sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz , no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor .	-0.3
you should know that fractures occurring in mature and old people cannot join and mend into the original condition , on account of the dryness and hardness of their bones ; though any bones that are extremely soft , like those of infants , may make a union and heal .	e son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres , e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat , ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz .	0.91964
yet nature produces around the bone on all sides something like glue , with a certain viscosity , with whose help it joins , and it binds so that one part adheres to the other and they are linked to one another until it be good and firm as it had been before ; so that there is no impediment to any of its functions .	mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps , entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa , ayssi cum foc al comensament , entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres .	1.02325
it is on this account that the patient's food should be the sort that has solidity and glueyness and thickness , as we have said .	e per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute , viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza , ayssi cum havem dit .	1.02966
you should know that there are as many different types of fracture as there are members .	mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre .	0.456
thus a fracture of the leg bone differs from a fracture of the cranium ; and a fracture of the breast bone differs from a fracture of the bone of the back ; and similarly there are differences among the other parts .	e sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres , quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap ; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos ; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor .	0.73574
we shall give an exposition of each kind of fracture , each in its own chapter and distinguished from the others .	e yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura , expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre .	1.27586
the fracture of each bone also has its own variations ; for the fracture may be a clean break without splintering ; or the fracture may be along the bone , with splinters and projections which may be sharp or may not ; and the fracture may involve a wound and a laceration of the skin ; and the fracture may be a crack .	mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa . ~~~ e son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas ; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas ; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os : e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz , ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure , e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap , e es fractura fissura petita .	0.335002
each kind has its own special technique of setting which will be mentioned in detail , each in its place .	e a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs .	1.05956
among the diagnostic signs of a broken bone are : distortion , protrusion , the aspect of it , and the crepitus when you press on it with the hand .	mota senhal de fractura del os . ~~~ e per aquo es conoguda fractura del os : es tortuositat de lu , e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment , e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma .	0.40927
when there is no obvious distortion or crepitus at the site , nor do you feel movement when you manipulate the bone , and the patient does not experience severe pain , there is no fracture there .	e donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor , lahoras no es aqui fractura .	0.811931
but it is possible that there is a luxation or a slight fracture or a little crack ; so you must not disturb it with any extension or pressure , but apply one of the remedies suitable to the site , such as will be described later ; then bind up gently .	habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura , adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot ; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc ; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil .	0.922112
if the bone is parted and broken in two and there is no fragmentation but a simple separation of one part from its fellow , then you should lose no time in straightening and aligning it before an abscess sets in .	e sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie , cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar , lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut .	1.16189
if an abscess does set in , then let a few days pass until it has subsided ; then gently and skilfully straighten it in whatever way you can .	e si a lu accida apostema caut , lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema ; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen .	0.989983
you should know that the setting or alignment of this is easier than that of a splintered bone .	e sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie .	0.86962
then bandage as will be prescribed .	e aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu .	0.866129
but if the bone is splintered , extension from either side is necessary , whether it be hand or foot ; with your own hands if it be a small member , or with two ropes or with one hand and a rope .	mays si en le os so satagias , lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz , si es la ma o le pe ; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit ; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma .	0.896104
you should place the part on a flat surface in its natural attitude so that when both parts of the broken bone have been extended you can try to restore the fragments to their proper place with all the skill and gentleness possible ; and do your utmost to ensure that the patient experience no pain or distress as you operate .	e sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural , mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat , lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs .	0.714247
try diligently to get one part of the bone fitted in the best form to the other .	e guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio ; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas .	0.446964
at the same time you should palpate and investigate both of them with your hand , and if you find anything wrong then mend it and straighten it to the best of your ability .	e cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel , e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa , rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut .	0.787143
but avoid violent extension or compression which many ignorant people apply ; for by doing so they often cause abscess or crippling in the limb , as i myself have many times seen .	e exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio , ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio , o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas .	0.704826
then after you have exactly repositioned it and bandaged it , keep that limb still and quiet , and bid the patient beware of moving it while awake or asleep , and in his shifting and stirring , and in opening the bowel , and in every activity , to the utmost of his capacity ; and that he should try to let the position of the limb be such that he is free from pain ; when pain or distress is felt in any position in which he has disposed the limb , he should move it to a different position in which he feels no pain .	e aprop annecteys , aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre , e repaus e tranquilitat ; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir , e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio , e deves la sua egestio , e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut ; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor , la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio ; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor ; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual , per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat .	0.958385
at the same time he should try to make that position even and straight , so that when the limb is mended there be no curvature in it . ~~~ as to the way to bandage a broken limb , it is as i shall now describe to you .	e la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti ; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels .	0.239557
you should know that limbs which may be fractured vary in their size and shape .	e de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels , lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil .	0.792246
the strips of bandage for those that are small , such as an arm or finger or forearm or the like , should be soft and fine , while those that are thick , such as the hip , back , or breast , should have broad and strong bandages .	mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba , cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura , quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual , enayssi que en lu no intre macula .	0.94011
for a broad bandage holds fast to a big limb , binding it all round with an even pressure so that no defect may occur .	e aprop comensa , aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio , pausar liament convenient ad aquo , sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys ; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament .	0.701404
then , after you have finished the setting , begin by applying a suitable liniment on soft tow over the site of the fracture , then start to wrap the bandage over the actual site , three or four turns of bandage as the part may require , winding it fairly tight .	e aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura , e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura .	1.06821
then carry on the bandage above the site of the fracture , winding it more loosely than on the fractured place , and continue a little with the bandaging beyond the place of fracture , loosening the tension gradually , until you have taken up a good amount of the sound part .	e aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc , e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit , entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida .	0.969091
then take another bandage and wind it several turns over the fracture and then carry it over the part below the fracture , the tightness and looseness being arranged in the same way that we prescribed for the first covering , of the upper part .	e aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio , e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura ; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus .	1.06262
then put between the bandages enough soft tow or soft rags to correct the curves of the fracture , if any ; otherwise put nothing in . ~~~ then wind over it another bandage and at once lay over it strong splints , if the part be not swollen and effused .	e aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura , si en lu es tortuositat ; e sino , no pauses en lu alcuna causa .	0.404194
but if there be swelling or effusion in the part , apply something to allay the swelling and disperse the effusion ; leave it on for several days and then bind on the splints .	e aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda , e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost , si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut , e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio ; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns ; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas .	0.975408
the splints should be made of broad halves of cane , cut and shaped with skill ; or the splints may be made of the wood used for sieves , which are made of pine ; or of palm branches ; or of brier or giant fennel or the like , whatever wood be at hand .	e sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza , e be formada saviament ; o sian de fust de pi ; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura :	1.01176
the size of each splint should be of this form and shape , except that the splint that is placed on the fracture itself should be a little thicker and broader than the others . ~~~ as to the length of the splint , it should be greater or less as suits the fractured part . ~~~ figure of a splint .	empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas , e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat ; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura ; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura , e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes , e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura , es mendre la strictura .	0.152227
then bind over the splints another bandage just as tightly as you did your first ; then over that tie it up with cords arranged in the way we have said , that is , with the pressure greatest over the site of the fracture and lessened as you move away from it .	e cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat , e sian de li mol ; e si les fils so grosses , ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort , e es error gran , quan catz la strictura fora equalitat .	1.05925
the cords should be of medium thickness , of linen supple of quality .	e eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz , quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles , e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit .	0.906897
for if the cords are too thick , such as i have seen ignorant people use who made their cords of twisted bands of linen , that will be a grave error , for moderate tension with these is impossible .	e si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas , lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio .	0.749774
nor are fine threads suitable either , for with these you cannot achieve sufficient tension .	alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua , e accideys disrupcio en la codena , e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat .	0.834996
between splints there should be a space of not less than a finger's breadth . ~~~ if , after bandaging , the patient is hurt in the sound parts by the ends of the splints , then put a little soft tow or carded wool under them until they no longer hurt him thus .	e sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia ; la qual causa es quar le membre , quan es gran , no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays , segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut .	0.329924
as for the case of a fracture accompanied by an open wound , it will be mentioned in a special section on its own .	e aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les antics restauravan , les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio .	1.2602
you should know that not every fracture should be bound up with splints on the first day ; that is , when the part is big you should not apply splints until five or seven days after , or more , depending on when you are satisfied that there is no effusion .	manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura , convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz , quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg : e es que prenguas de polvera de moli , e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli .	1.11462
this is a description of the plasters that the ancients used for repair , applied to a fracture , dislocation , or sprain .	e comfeys aquel ayssi cum es , sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou , e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil ; e aprop usa de aquela .	1.33248
description of a common simple plaster for the repair of fractures , suited to most constitutions , particularly for women and children , because in it there predominates neither hot nor cold .	autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio : recipe de assafetida , de lapdanum , de acacia , de enula , e migrach , que es razit de milgraner salvage , de totz ana drac .	1.00588
take mill-dust , that is , the fine flour that sticks to the walls of a mill as the grindstone moves .	. x . ; ~~~ de mirra e aloen ana drac .	0.0107143
pound it as it is without sieving , with egg-white , to a medium consistency ; then use .	. v . ; ~~~ alochil ana drac . ~~~ . xx . ;	-0.113043
description of another plaster for the repair of a fracture , luxation , or dislocation : take ten drachms each of pulse , gum-mastic , acacia , elecampane , mughath , and sukk ; five drachms each of myrrh and aloes ; twenty drachms of tamarisk and twenty drachms of clay of armenia or asia minor ; all should be pounded fine and mixed with water of tamarisk , or with eggwhite if the patient be of a warm constitution ; then use this plaster , which is excellent for uniting , quickly repairing broken bones , and suits most people because of its mildness .	totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada ; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre , quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament , e confereys a motz homes .	0.920563
description of another plaster valuable for a fracture or sprain : let there be taken ten drachms each of mughath , pulse , and white marsh mallows , five drachms each of myrrh and aloes , six drachms of acacia , and twenty drachms of armenian clay .	autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio : recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac .	0.875543
let them all be well beaten up and passed through a sieve and made into a paste with water or egg-white and used .	. x . ; ~~~ de mirra e de aloen ana drac . v . ; ~~~ de acacia drac . ~~~ . vi . ; ~~~ de bol armenic drac . ~~~ . xx .	-0.0928571
description of a plaster for dislocated joints or bones , soothing the accompanying pain , and for a crack or fissure of bone : let unwashed wool be taken and soaked in a decoction of oil and vinegar and applied to the place .	totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio , e sian cribellatz , e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat .	0.941255
now this plaster has no power of repair but it is outstanding for reducing effusion and dispersing pain .	manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs , e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras : sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc .	1.36705
description of another plaster for the repair of a broken bone : let there be taken the leaves of the hard fig and of the wild poppy and both be beaten up together and a plaster made of them while still fresh and damp .	mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio , de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament . ~~~ autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat : pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge ; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor .	0.404317
description of another simple plaster used when a fracture is mending and you wish to disperse residual swellings : take one part each of marsh mallow root , chamomile , violet flowers , and flour of vetch ; pound it all and make a paste with decoction of wine , if the part be not inflamed .	manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema : recipe razitz de altea , de camamilla e flors de violes , de farina de ers , de totz ana partida . i . ;	1.16911
but if it be inflamed make it up with water of fresh coriander or plain water , and use .	sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi , si·l membre no es scalfat .	1.33773
description of another plaster stronger than the former for resolving , used if a hard swelling arises as the bone sets : let there be taken equal parts of each of marsh mallow roots , linseed , fenugreek , melilot , sweet marjoram , violet flowers , and chamomile ; they should all be beaten up together and made into a paste with willow infusion or sweet water or wine , according to whether the part is inflamed or its heat has subsided .	mays si es scalfat , lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu . ~~~ autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier , quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre : recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li , e de balaustia , e mellilot , majorana , flors de viol , de camamilla , de totz ana partida i engual ; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi , tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu .	0.450906
now hippocrates in his book did not mention any application for the repair of a fractured part except a wax plaster made of wax and oil , nothing else .	mays ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa ; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat .	1.14435
he prescribed that it be of a consistency midway between thick and thin .	mays a gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra , enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas .	0.45082
galen , on the other hand , thought it good to apply to the broken limb , when it is mending , things which have a certain power of drying , with some heat , such as myrrh , aloes , olibanum , and the sort of thing we have mentioned .	manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor : recipe migat , de cezes , de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel , e de altea , e sal , partidas enguals ; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz , e sia fayt emplastre .	1.19503
description of a plaster valuable for debility and pain : let equal parts of each be taken of mughath , chickpease , minced human hair or birds' feathers , marsh mallows and salt ; grind it up and pass through a sieve and make into a paste and use as a plaster .	mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada , es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc , lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns .	0.625352
as to the length of time the bandages should remain on before being loosened : you should keep an eye on the patient and if he suffers no pain or itching or any shifting of the broken bone , then they should not be loosened for a number of days ; but if he experiences at the place a violent itching or a disturbing pain or swelling , then hasten to loosen them and make no delay ; and remove the plaster .	e si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio , lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora , e osta le emplastre de lu .	0.761738
then you must take a soft cloth or a soft marine sponge and dip it in tepid water and bathe the place until the itching subsides and the pain settles ; then let the limb rest for an hour ; then apply to it raw wool soaked in oil and vinegar or oil of roses , and bandage it on for one night until you are sure there is no effusion and the swelling of the limb has subsided and the pain has gone .	e pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida , e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza , e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada ; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora ; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat , e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut , e que repause la imflacio del membre , e sia remauguda la dolor de lu .	0.937871
then put the bandage on again gently , and a light plaster ; do not bind it up as you did at the first but go gently with it until it heal .	e aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra , e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat .	1.01147
if you see that the effusion , inflammation , pain , swelling , and other symptoms are totally gone , and you need to plaster and bandage it , then repeat just as you did at first .	e si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot , e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura , lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment .	1.07995
but if none of these things that we have mentioned occur , then do not loosen it until after three , four , or five days or a week ; sometimes it may be left up to twenty days , depending on how the limb appears to you , as we said , until the fracture be united and the flesh over it be near to joining .	e si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas , lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o . vii . ;	0.698182
then bandage more tightly than before , and increase the heaviness of the patient's food as has been mentioned .	e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre , ayssi cum havem dit , entro que la fractura adhereys , e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel .	0.920973
if you see the place of the fracture getting more dry and thin than it should , you may know that nourishment is being prevented from reaching it ; so foment it with tepid water each time you loosen it ; do this every three days , and ease the bandaging somewhat .	e lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota , e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute , segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu .	0.90931
this action makes nourishment flow to the limb and it will quickly heal . ~~~ what some ignorant bone-setters do is to break the bone again if at first the repair is not as it should be and has mended crookedly .	mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove , lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel ; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel ; e sia aquo en totz tres dias ; e alleuja la strictura un petit , e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment , e es sanat leugierament .	0.483145
this operation of theirs is mistaken and dangerous ; if it were right the ancients would undoubtedly have spoken of it in their books and would have used it .	mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament , segon que cove , e es restaurat segon tortuositat , es error segon la operacio de lor , e temor gran , e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat .	0.705112
but i have not found a trace of it in a single one of them ; and the right course is not to use it .	e yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far , per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa .	0.911875
		0.3
