chapter six .	capitol . vi .	1.05
cauterization of the twisted mouth .	de cauterizacio de turtura .	0.716
the twisting of the mouth which is curable with the cautery is of that nature which arises from phlegm , as we have already noticed in the sections on sicknesses .	turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma , segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias .	0.554421
but cauterization is to be carefully avoided in that type which is due to dryness or spasm of the tendon .	esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi .	0.596739
when this kind of deformity has been treated with electuaries , errhines , and gargles , and your treatment is ineffective , you should use three cauterizations : one at the root of the ear ; the second a little below the temple ; and the third at the junction of the lips .	quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes , e no comfereys la tua curacio , lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris : la i deves la razit de la aurelha , e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar , e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias .	0.877027
let your cauterization be on the opposite side to the affected side , for the relaxation will arise in the side which seems normal .	e pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta , quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana .	0.84662
the form taken by the cauterization is that you burn him a little below the frontal prominence , on a level with the upper tip of the ear , and also on the temple the length of the thumb ; carry the burning to a depth of about half the thickness of the skin .	e la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap , e en le templar autre , la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous , e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena .	0.948058
the shape of the cautery .	e aquesta es la forma del cauteri , e es specia del cutellari , la forma del qual es denant mesa .	1.25065
it is a variety of the bladed cautery such as has already been described , but is rather more slender as you see .	mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas ; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc .	0.416703
its blade should have a certain thickness .		-0.3
then dress the place with what we have mentioned till healed .	e aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat .	0.496154
		0.3
