chapter twenty-five .	capitol . xxv .	0.888462
on cauterization of the axilla .	de cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori .	0.535714
when the head of the humerus is dislocated on account of the synovial fluid or when it does not remain in the correct position after the dislocation has been set , so that this becomes a regular occurrence—it is set and then dislocates with the least movement , as we have ourselves seen ; you must first set the luxation , then make the patient lie down on his back or on his sound side ; then with the fingers of the left hand lift up the skin of the axilla if the joint has dislocated downwards .	quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar , e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve , ayssi cum nos havem testificat , lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio , e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa ; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra , si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz .	0.60855
then heat a cautery provided with two spits in this manner .	e aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps ; e aquesta es la forma de lu :	0.944308
then with that burn through the fold of skin till you have perforated to the other side , getting four cauterizations .	e aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz ; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris .	0.642819
the cautery may be of three prongs and then the form of the cauterization will be six burns .	e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta ; e aquesta es la forma de lu :	0.548048
the prongs should be of the fineness of a probe . ~~~ this is the figure of the cautery with three prongs .	e alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris . viii .	0.215217
sometimes there is added yet one more so there will be eight burns . ~~~ put on the burns leeks well pounded with salt ; then keep the patient absolutely quiet so as not to move the joint for a time till it gains strength .	e aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal , e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat , e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat .	0.263895
if the dislocation has gone upwards , which very rarely happens , then cauterize him above the shoulder with one good claviform cautery or with multiple punctured cauterizations . ~~~ thus the joint will gain strength and the humidity will disappear and the patient will be cured .	e si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo , lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan , quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat .	0.367434
		0.3
