chapter eighty-one .	de sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas .	0.371053
	emorroydas so segon dos manieyras , quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos , o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim .	-0.3
on cutting and incising piles that are bleeding , and the treatment of fissures .	e de aquelas so petitas e grans , e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una , e so motas , e so fora·l cul , e en las extremitatz de lu .	1.61912
haemorrhoids are of two kinds : either internal , resembling red bubbles or grape-seeds , small or large , with blood perpetually flowing , and they may be single or multiple ; or they may be external , round about the anus .	mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat , de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla , e so segon la color del cos .	0.508511
external ones are for the most part fairly dry ; a little yellowish fluid or blood constantly oozes from them , and they are of the colour of the body .	e la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu .	0.754116
the treatment of internal piles : bid the patient open his bowel and bear down until the anus opens out and the swellings are disclosed to you ; then quickly take hold of them with hooks or with your finger-nail and cut them off near the roots .	adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla , e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz .	0.336333
if the hook does not retain its hold on them because of their humidity and softness , then cut them with a piece of rough material or a rag of goat-hair , or draw them out with your fingers and cut them off ; and after excision sprinkle some caustic powder on to act instead of the cautery ; or cauterize them as previously described in the book on cauterization ; then dress in the usual way until healed .	mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas , lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana , e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz , e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio , per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri ; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar . ~~~ e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas .	0.147236
but if the anus will not open out for you then give a slightly corrosive enema so as to wash out what is within , and then , the anus will open out quickly when the patient bears down .	e si le cul no obezeys a egressio , lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita , e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem .	0.818019
now the treatment of external piles is easy and simple : take hold of them with your finger-nails or catch them up with a hook and cut them away ; and treat as before mentioned until cured .	mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul , lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera , e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla , o que prenguas aquelas am unci , e inscidas aquelas , e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas .	0.523926
but with the patient who refuses excision with the knife , this manner of removal should be practised : thread a twisted thread into a needle , then draw the piles upward and run the needle through the root of each , from one side to the other , and wind the ends of the thread round beneath the needle as it lies crosswise , and bind the pile firmly ; then knot the thread and remove the needle .	e aquel que avoreys inscizio , cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra : pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus , e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part , e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha , e so latitudinalment ; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort , e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha .	0.928109
do this with each pile , but leave one not destroyed so that the superfluous blood may flow from it .	e fay aquo a totas , e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes , per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela .	0.956208
then apply to the anus a piece of material soaked in oil of roses or wax ; apply it and bid the patient lie quiet ; then leave him until the piles fall away .	e aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot ; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause .	0.87521
when they fall away , dress with ointments and the usual dressings until healed .	e aprop layssa aquela entro que caja ; e quan es casuda , cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat .	0.913235
the treatment of fissures : these often arise from dryness of the faeces and from constipation .	de curacio de fistulas . ~~~ motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura .	0.0960317
if they become chronic , and medical treatment is unavailing , you should scrape them with the edge of a scalpel or with your finger-nail until they become soft and the upper layer , that prevents healing , is removed ; then dress until they mend as they should .	e cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina , lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus , la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio ; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas .	0.734309
but if they do not heal , repeat the scraping more strongly than at first until they bleed freely and become raw ; then apply dressings and they will heal .	lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas ; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas .	0.704037
		0.3
