chapter one .	capitol primier .	0.95
on the cure of hydrocephalus .	de la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz .	0.382418
this disease occurs most commonly in infants upon delivery when the midwife grasps the child's head roughly .	sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat .	0.689813
it also sometimes happens from some hidden and unknown cause .	e alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda .	0.777358
i have never seen this disease except in very small children ; and death very quickly overtook all those that i have seen ; therefore i have preferred not to undertake operation in these cases .	mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz ; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort , e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels .	0.615162
i have seen a child whose head was filled with fluid and daily growing in size , until the child could not sit upright on account of the size of his head , and the humidity increased till he died .	e yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit , e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap , e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort .	0.669711
now this humidity sometimes collects between the skin and the bone ; sometimes it collects beneath the bone and over the membrane .	e aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os , o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac .	0.728882
the operation is thus : when the humidity is between the skin and the bone and the swelling is small , an incision should be made in the middle of the head , transversely .	quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc , lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut , e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat , e aquesta es la forma del spatum :	0.69988
the length of the incision should be about two thumb-joints , so that the humidity may flow out .	e donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major , lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra :	0.675
this is the form of the scalpel . ~~~ if the humidity is more copious and the swelling greater , make two intersecting incisions to this pattern .	e si la humiditat es dejos le os , senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat .	0.303151
but if the humidity is beneath the bone—and the sign of that is that you will see the sutures of the skull gaping on all sides , the water manifestly yielding when you press in with your fingers—you should make three incisions in the middle of the head , in this pattern .		-0.3
after incising , draw out all the humidity ; then bind up the incisions with pads and bandages ; and over the bandages foment with wine and oil till the fifth day .	cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra :	0.0132353
then loose the bandage and dress the wound with lint and ointments . ~~~ and do not forget to bandage the head lightly ; and feed the patient with a dry diet with little fluid , until the part is strengthened and healed . ~~~ another pattern of incision is to see where the tumefaction and collection of fluid is apparent .	e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat ; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols ; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia , e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz , e strenh le cap am equalitat ; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat .	0.258119
for sometimes it is greater in the posterior or anterior part of the head , or to the right or to the left . ~~~ therefore make your incision where the tumefaction and dropsy are apparent ; incise that place in whatever way you can .	e es autra manieyra de incisio , que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua , quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii , o en la partida denant , o en la destra , o en la sinistra ; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua , e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible .	0.346059
be careful not to cut an artery lest you cause haemorrhage and the patient die of that haemorrhage at the same time that the humidity is evacuated .	et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat .	0.714715
		0.3
