book two	comensa la segonda partida .	-0.3375
on incision , perforation , and venesection , and wounds and the like	de incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants .	1.09507
in the first book i spoke of all those diseases for which cauterization is of value , either the actual cautery or that done with caustic medicines ; and of their reasons and causes ; also the instruments and the shapes of the cauteries .		-0.3
this i set out in chapters , from head to heel .	aquestas son paraulas de albucazis .	0.672321
in this book i shall proceed along the same route so that it will be easy for the inquirer to find what he is looking for .	ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent , e las occasios e las causas de lu , e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris ; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes .	0.636735
but before i begin this you ought first to know , my sons , that in this book there is more risk than in the first , which treats of cauterization .	e yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa , per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo , lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat .	0.733918
wherefore in this matter there should be greater circumspection .	e denant que yeu comense aquo , cove , fils , que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio .	0.513876
for in the course of the work of which this book treats there often occurs an effusion of the blood upon which life depends , in the opening of a blood-vessel or the incision of a tumour or the perforation of an abscess or the treatment of a wound or the extraction of an arrow , or in the incising for a calculus or similar cases ; all of which are accompanied by uncertainty and fear ; and in most death will supervene .	e per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela , quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz .	0.42938
so i warn you against undertaking any case in which there is any element of doubt to you ; for in the exercise of the art you will be mobbed by all kinds of persons with all manner of afflictions ; some being so weary of their sickness that death itself is a relief on account of the extent of their sufferings and the length of their miseries , their illness being so settled as to presage death .	e de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort . ~~~ e yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio , quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias .	0.0437019
some will lavish their wealth on you and enrich you , in the hope that they may be curable , when their disease is mortal .	e de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort , e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia , e per longuesa de la malautia de lu , e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort .	0.946465
you should not assist any of this kind who approach you ; let your caution be stronger than your greed and desire for gain ; and do not embark upon anything of this kind unless you have positive knowledge , which you judge adequate , about the way of bringing the patient a good outcome .	e de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta , tu esperant am aquel sanetat , e la sieua malautia es perniciosa .	0.595161
in treating every patient be prescient and foretell the means whereby health may be restored to him .	e donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra ; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat ; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos , e al qual perve successio lausabla .	0.725015
that will help you to obtain renown , glory , fame , and praise .	e usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida , quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria , de lausor e de gloria .	0.954808
may god inspire you , my sons , with his guidance , and grant that you hit the mark and succeed ; for it is in his hand ; there is no god but he .	o , filhs , dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio , quar aquo es en la sua ma .	0.954907
i have arranged this book in sections as i did with the previous book on cauterizations , from head to heel ; so you will the easier find in it what you seek .	e yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris , de la cura del cap entro als pes , per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat .	0.691451
		0.3
