chapter fourteen .	capitol . xiv .	0.957692
on setting a fracture of the femur .	de restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa .	0.866667
the femur is often broken , and this is readily discernible , for it will rotate forwards or backwards .	le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana .	0.784219
it is set by binding a bandage above the fracture and another below , while the patient lies flat on his face . ~~~ then each assistant should make an even extension in his own direction , by the bandage .	e la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura , e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara .	0.419133
this is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone .	e aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat , quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os .	1.23238
but if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh , you should tie on a soft bandage of wool or something similar , at the root of the thigh toward the groin , so that extension may be applied above , and another bandage below the fracture .	mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa , lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh , per so que la extencio caja en sus , e le autre liament dejos la fractura .	1.0014
likewise if the fracture is near the knee the bandage should be near the knee , so that extension may be made downwards .	e semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh , lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol , e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos .	0.728485
then the doctor should straighten it out with both hands until he has reduced it to the pattern of the natural form and the bone unites neatly .	e aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio ; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura , si no accideys al membre apostema .	0.626563
then you will have to apply the plaster and bandage if there is no effusion in the limb , but if there is an effusion leave it for a few days until the swelling has gone down , then resume your treatment .	mays si accideys en lu apostema , lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat , e aprop retorna a la tua curacio .	0.783051
as to the bandaging , you should wrap a firm broad sash two or three times round the fracture , leaving some over ; then bind the leg up so that the heel is brought to reach the root of the buttock .	la strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta : cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura , e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas , e remaugua de lu superfluitat ; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa .	0.979747
then pass a long cord in the space between the thigh and the leg , low down near the knee , and let the ends of the cord come up on either side , then bind the rest of the sash over the leg and the thigh .	e intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos , e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz , e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda .	0.833
then apply splints to the thigh at the very site of the fracture and put one of the splints on the leg-bone .	e aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas , e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba .	0.884091
then pack soft material in the space between the leg and the thigh to make the bandaging even .	e aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols , per so que sia coagulada la extrictura .	0.846154
then start with three or four turns of a strong bandage in the middle over the site of the fracture , and as you get away from the site of the fracture bind lighter and softer and looser .	e aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre , e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura , la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha .	0.852318
then turn to the two ends of the cord which you previously passed between the thigh and the leg , and with the cord bind the adjacent splints above , then carry the ends downward until you end up at the great tendon of the foot and with them bind also the extremities of the splints at the other end so that the bandaging will not shift from its place .	e aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe , e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc .	0.664099
then let the bandaging remain on as long as no pruritus or abscess or effusion or anything of that sort happens to the limb ; but if any of these occur loosen it quickly and put right whatever has taken place , in the manner we have often mentioned .	e aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel , don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels ; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas , adonc cueta te am desliament de lu , e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop , segon que havem dit motas veguadas .	0.590565
if there be a penetrating fragment of the bone , you must reposition it if you can ; but if not then cut down upon it and remove it and treat the wound in the sort of way mentioned previously , until it heals .	mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua , lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla ; e sino , fen sobre lu e remau aquel , e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat .	0.803775
this fracture of the thigh is sometimes bandaged without bringing the leg alongside with splints , in the way we spoke of for the humerus and the forearm .	e alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas , ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras .	0.695238
but setting after the former manner does not cause the patient any lameness ; whereas if the femur is set alone without binding the leg to it the patient will inevitably be lame for always .	mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio ; e si es restaurada sola , otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba , lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps .	0.55894
you must know that the femur knits in fifty days or a little more or less , according to the different constitutions and other circumstances .	e sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en . xl . ~~~ dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens , e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios .	0.205697
		0.3
