chapter sixty-nine .	capitol . lxix .	0.942857
on castration .	de castracio .	1.02692
castration is forbidden in our law and i ought therefore to make no mention of it in my book . ~~~ but i must speak of it for two reasons .	sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada , mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre ; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras , de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela , que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys ; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas , ayssi cum de motos , e de bocs , e de porcs , e de semblantz a las bestias .	-0.164887
one reason is that it should be part of the doctor's medical knowledge when asked about it , and that he should know how to treat anyone whom it befalls .	e donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras : o per atrissio , o per fissura a seccio .	0.509091
another reason is that often we need to castrate certain animals for the sake of the benefits that accrue from them , such as rams , he-goats and cats , and such animals .	mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio , la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan .	0.621274
so i say that castration can be performed in two ways : either by contusion ; or by opening up and cutting away .	e aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament .	0.676027
the method by contusion is that we make the animal sit in warm water until his testes are relaxed and become soft and pendent ; then rub them with your hand until they are so loosened that they are no longer palpable .	mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio , cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra .	0.427618
as to castration by open operation and excision , the animal should be held and pressure put upon the scrotum with the left hand .	e aprop lia le suspensori , e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso .	0.806656
then tie the spermatic cord and with one incision cut down upon both testicles so that both are brought up out of the scrotum .	e aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat .	0.495455
after dissecting them away cut them off ; do not leave any of the coverings upon them except the thin membrane covering the vessels .	e no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa , sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes .	0.475137
this manner of castration is better than the contusion method , for contusion often leaves something of the testicles , and the animal desires to couple .	e aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio , quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt .	0.607475
then dress the wound until healed .	e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada .	0.98
		0.3
