chapter seventy-four .	capitol . lxxiv .	0.93
on the perforation of eruptions occurring in the uterus .	de perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre .	0.55
from time to time there occur in the womb various kinds of tumour , such as cancer and the stony tumour and ulcer and abscess and gangrene and fistulae and varicosities and cracks and warts and inflamed tumours ; all these diseases i have mentioned , with their varieties and their symptoms , in the appropriate section .	motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre , ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas .	1.09684
but now in this treatise we must mention an inflamed tumour of the kind where there is a collection of pus , and the manner of its opening with the knife .	e yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas , e las curacios de lor en la divisio .	0.864069
	e cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania , e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr .	-0.3
you should inspect it , and if the pain of the tumour is acute from the outset , with pulsation and inflammation and fever , and , if it is visible , you see that it is red , then do not be in a hurry to open , but treat it with applications helpful for suppuration till these symptoms have subsided .	adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre , e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment , lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu , e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz .	0.75619
then you should get the patient to sit in a chair having a double seat , lying back .	e lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas ; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre , e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas , e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols , e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient .	0.860294
she should put her feet together upon her abdomen , with the thighs apart and the arms joined under the knees and bound together in a suitable manner .	e aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre , la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop .	0.658871
then the midwife should sit on the right side and employ the instrument for opening the orifice of the womb , which will be described later .	e cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna , e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute .	0.818719
when you are going to use this instrument , you should measure with a probe the depth of the womb so that the instrument be not introduced beyond this measure lest the patient be harmed ; if the instrument be longer , pads should be put over the rim of the cervix to prevent the passage of its whole length .	mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre , lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre .	0.374874
you must put the screw that runs in the instrument , in from the top and hold the instrument while your assistant turns the screw until the entrance of the uterus is opened .	e cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre .	0.636519
when the abscess is exposed , and on manual palpation is found to be thin and soft , you should make an incision at its head with a broad scalpel .	e cum appar la excitura , e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh , lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat .	0.912561
and when all the matter is evacuated you should place on the wound a soft wick soaked in oil of roses or green oil with some styptic quality , and let it come outside from the incision into the cervix uteri .	e cum la sania es evacuada , lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat ; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre .	0.633837
over the area of the uterus and pubes there should be clean wool soaked in an infusion of mallows .	e pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas .	0.706349
then after two days dress with a suitable ointment until healed .	e aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat .	0.652448
sometimes also both the wound and the uterus are washed out with a douche of honey and water , then of a decoction of liquorice root or long aristolochy ; then go back to the ointment .	e alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel , e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua , e aprop retorna al enguent .	0.909579
but if the lesion be hidden in the depths of the womb then you will have to abstain from operative treatment but carry out treatment as spoken of in its place .	e si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada , lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr , habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio .	0.472587
		0.3
