chapter fifty-six .	capitol lvi .	0.9
on cauterization in haemorrhage arising from a cut artery .	de cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria .	0.543316
very often there occurs bleeding from an artery which has been cut either by an external wound or in opening an abscess or in cauterizing a part of the body and so on , and it is difficult to stem .	tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo , o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre , e alor semblantz , e es dificil remaura aquel .	0.682729
when this happens to anyone , quickly apply your hand to the mouth of the artery , putting your forefinger to it and closing it properly till the bleeding ceases under your fingers and nothing comes out .	donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo , lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria , e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit , e que non yesqua .	0.647115
then put in the fire several olivary cauteries , small and large , and blow on them to make them very hot .	e aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz , per nombre motz , e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz .	0.980233
then take one , small or large according to the size of the wound and the site of the opening of the artery , and bring the cautery down right on the artery itself , after promptly removing your finger , and hold the cautery upon it till the blood ceases .	e aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria , sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit , e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc .	0.807742
but if it bursts out after you have removed your finger from the mouth of the artery , and the cautery has cooled , promptly take another of the cauteries which you have ready in the fire .	e si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri , lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz , e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit .	0.699246
continue doing this , with one after another , till the haemorrhage is stanched .	e guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es , e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia .	0.822794
mind you do not burn any nerve which may be there , so that another calamity afflicts the patient . ~~~ you should know that when there is arterial haemorrhage it is impossible to stop it , especially when the vessel is big , except in one of four ways , to wit : by the cautery as we have said ; or by division of the vessel when it is not completely divided , for when it is cut through the ends of it contract and the bleeding is stopped ; or by a strong thread ligature ; or by the application of styptics with tight bandaging .	e sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc , lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc , e majorment quan l’arteria es gran , si no am una de quatre manieyras : o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem , o am extraccio quan no es extrayta , quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc , o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura , o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc ; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent .	0.201536
but those who try to stop bleeding with ligatures or cloths , or by the application of caustics and the like , never stanch it by these means , or at least very rarely .	mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz , no comfereys sino tart .	0.678006
and if this happen to anyone and there are available neither doctor nor remedies , let him at once apply his forefinger to the mouth of the vessel as we have bidden and close it firmly till the blood is stanched ; and pour over the wound and over the artery , without removing the finger , water as cold as possible till the blood thickens and congeals and ceases to flow . ~~~ and meanwhile one should be considering what kind of cautery or medicine is indicated .	mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina , lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit , e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua , e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut ; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat ; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat .	0.237673
		0.3
