chapter sixty-seven .	capitol . lxvii .	0.95
on the treatment of the rupture that occurs in the groin .	de la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars .	0.503497
sometimes there occurs a rupture in the groin as we have said , and the part protrudes .	alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit , e emineys le loc .	0.795833
no portion of the intestine descends into the scrotum ; or if anything it will be only a tiny portion and will reduce at any time .	e no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius ; e si deyssen , aquo es pauc ; e retorna s’en en totas horas .	0.928006
but if it goes on for a long time the rupture in the membrane increases until the bowel and omentum descend into the scrotum . ~~~ it arises from a stretching of the membrane in the groin , as we said ; the membrane stretches and then relaxes and the place swells .	mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo , es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac ; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit , la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut , e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys .	0.20753
its treatment by the cautery is as i have already described .	e la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu .	0.957014
sometimes also it is treated with the knife in this manner : with the patient lying back before you , make an incision three fingers wide , transversely across the swelling of the rupture which projects .	e alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra : e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas , e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz .	0.725755
then perforate the subcutaneous tissues so as to expose the white membrane that lies under the skin alongside the rupture .	e aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert .	0.457703
take a probe and place it upon the projecting part of the fascia and push it back into the depths of the abdomen .	e aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac , e prem aquel al preon del ventre .	0.759259
then sew together the two swollen portions of membrane over the end of the probe and suture the one to the other .	e aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac , e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre .	0.662097
then take out the probe . ~~~ on no account make the incision into the fascia nor touch the testis nor anything else , as i taught you on the subject of treating the intestinal hernia .	e aprop extratz la extremitat del ray , e no inscidas del ciphac de tot , ni no extenda le huou , ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal .	0.279531
then dress the wound , and when the stitches come apart remove them and bandage the wound again until it is healed over . ~~~ for the membrane will draw together and the rupture will not come out again .	e aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas , e cum inscideyses les fiels , mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada ; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura .	0.349024
but the cautery is better at this spot , for it is safer .	e cauteri es milhor en aquest loc , quar es pus propda a salut .	1.06739
		0.3
