chapter sixty .	capitol . lx .	1
on the extraction of the stone .	de extraccio de peyra .	0.695
we have already in the due place reviewed the different kinds of stone and the medical treatment of them .	nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas , e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica , e les senhals de aquela .	1.06477
i mentioned too the difference between stones arising in the kidney and those arising in the bladder , and gave all the symptoms of them .	e havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma , e seccio .	0.621882
i also mentioned the kind of stone to which manipulation and incision are appropriate .	e la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica .	0.657857
this is in particular the stone arising in the bladder , and the sort impacted in the urethra .	e yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio .	0.891176
i shall now give a short description of this with a clear explanation and summary . ~~~ now i say that a vesical calculus most frequently occurs in boys .	donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz ; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat , e apar en aquela arena ; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua , e motas veguadas pen , e aprop es dressada ; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels .	0.456847
among the symptoms is that the urine passed out of the bladder is of a thin consistency like water , and sand appears in it ; and the patient keeps on rubbing and playing with his penis ; and often it hangs flaccid and then is erected ; at the same time many of them get a prolapse of the rectum .	e es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans ; e es dificil curacio en les viels .	0.47449
the cure of boys under the age of fourteen years is easy ; but the treatment of old people is difficult ; and that of young men midway between the two .	mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels .	0.0673469
and the larger the stone the easier the cure ; with a small stone the cure is otherwise .	e de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera ; e si es pauca , es contraria ad aquela .	0.995833
when we undertake treatment the patient must first have an enema to empty his bowel completely ; for sometimes the faeces prevent the calculus being found when it is looked for .	donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela , cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels ; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu .	0.875246
then the patient should be taken by the feet and jarred to and fro and shaken downwards to bring the calculus down into the neck of the bladder ; or else let him jump down from a height a number of times .	e aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica , o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas .	0.785467
then have him sit down upright before you with his hands beneath his thighs , to make the whole bladder incline downwards .	e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat , e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu , per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos .	0.958824
then examine him and palpate him externally .	e aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo .	1.3
if you feel the stone in the empty place , immediately hasten and cut down upon it .	donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi , lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu .	0.764861
but if there is not the slightest sign of it to the touch then you should anoint with oil the forefinger of your left hand if it be a boy , or the middle finger if it be a fully grown young man , and introduce it into the anus and search around for the calculus , until , when it comes under the finger , you can work it slowly towards the neck of the bladder .	e si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament , lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra , si malaute es enfant , o le dit miga si es jove complit , e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul .	0.552222
then press upon it with your finger and push it outwards toward the place where you wish to make your incision .	e perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit . ~~~ e converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica .	0.313276
and bid an assistant squeeze the bladder with his hand ; and bid another assistant raise the scrotum with his left hand and with the other hand stretch the skin under the testicles away from the place where the incision is going to be .	e aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit , e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio .	0.421864
then do you take a lancet like this and make your incision in the space between the anus and the testicles , not in the mid-line but on the side of the left buttock ; and cut down upon the calculus itself , keeping your finger in the anus and pressing it outwards .	e comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma ; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus , e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius , en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio .	0.788092
the incision should be oblique , wide externally and narrowing inwards down to dimensions allowing the exit of the stone , not larger .	e aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu :	0.231762
now you may press with the finger that is in the anus upon the stone as you make the incision , and it comes out without difficulty .	e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius , no en le mieg loc , abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra ; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul , e sia fayta seccio transversa , per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla , e no major , quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio , e es foro-getada ses defacultat .	0.524492
you should know that sometimes there are stones which have angles and edges , on which account their extraction is difficult .	e sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers , per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo .	0.779804
some are smooth like acorns and rounded , and these come out easily .	e de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan , e es redonda , e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment .	1.21579
but in those cases where the stone is rough and angular you should slightly increase the incision .	donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger , ajusta en la fissura .	0.676684
then if it still will not come out you must then resort to a device— namely to catch hold of it with strong forceps having an extremity like a rasp , to get a tight hold of it so it shall not slip out ; or else introduce beneath it a narrow instrument with a crooked end .	e si no es ayssi foro-getada , lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel , o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment , la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra , e no evasesca de lu ; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat .	0.736351
and if you then cannot get the stone out , widen the incision slightly ; and if there is any bleeding stanch it with vitriol .	mays si tu no podes sobre aquel , lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit , e si tu veus flux de sanc , abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat .	0.802614
if there should be a number of stones first push the largest of them into the neck of the bladder , then cut down upon it ; then push a smaller one down after it ; and do the same if there be more than two .	mays si la peyra es mays de una , lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica , e aprop inscideys sobre lu ; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo ; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas .	0.970833
but if the stone be very large it is foolish to make a great incision down upon it ; for the result is that the patient either dies or has a chronic urinary fistula because the place will not heal at all .	e si es peyra mot gran , lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio , quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas : o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla , per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat .	0.648725
try rather to manipulate it so that it protrudes ; or else attempt to break it up with the forceps so that you can extract it piecemeal .	mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada , o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas .	0.500772
and when you have completed the operation pack the wound with frankincense and aloes and dragon's blood , and bind it up and apply a pad soaked in olive oil and wine or oil of roses and cold water , to reduce the swelling .	donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio , lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago , e strenh aquel . ~~~ e pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi , o en oli rozat e aygua frega , per so que apostema caut sia cedat .	0.316429
the patient should lie flat on his back and the bindings should not be undone before the third day ; and when they are undone foment the place with plenty of oil and water .	e aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col , e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia .	0.603861
then dress it with palm ointment and basilicon ointment until it heals .	e cum aquel auras desliat , embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli , e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat .	1.06651
if an increasing and cankerous abscess occur in the wound , or anything similar such as clotting of blood within the bladder , with stoppage of the urine ( which would be signified by the urine being accompanied by blood ) pass your finger into the wound and remove the blood ; for if it lies in it it will lead to sepsis and necrosis of the bladder .	mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut , adhust e corrosiu , e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat , e per lu es la hurina prohibida ( e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina ) , a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc , quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio .	0.893662
then wash out the wound with vinegar and water and salt , and apply whatever treatment is suitable for the case until it heals .	e aprop lava la plagua am vi agre , aygua e sal , e am opposicio a tota specia , am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat .	0.975165
also at all times during treatment his hips should be bound and kept together so that the medicaments applied to the place may not be disturbed .	e cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc .	0.682418
now if the calculus be small and be impacted in the opening of the urinary passage , preventing the exit of the urine , treat it with the means i am about to describe before you go on to make your incision , for often i have found this treatment suffice without incision ; i have experience of this .	e si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua , e es ficat en lu , e eyssement de urina es prohibit , lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio , quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio ; e ja yeu e esproat aquo , e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut , del qual aquesta es la forma de lu :	0.932739
you take a drill of the finest steel , of this shape .	de triangulada extramitat , agut , ficat en fust .	0.838312
it should be triangular at the point and sharp , with a wooden handle .	e aprop pren fiel , e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica .	1.15474
then take a thread and with it bind the penis beneath the calculus to prevent the stone from returning to the bladder .	e aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua , perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra .	0.709006
then introduce the iron of the drill gently into the meatus until the drill reaches the stone itself , and then very very gently revolve the drill upon the stone with your hand , and try to perforate it , till you pierce it through to the other side .	e revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit , e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar ; quar la urina tantost es absolta .	0.583957
then the urine will at once be released .	e aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua , quar aquela es trinquada , e es foro-getada am la urina , e le malaute es sanat .	0.882353
then , with your hand outside the penis , squeeze the remains of the stone , and they will crumble and be washed out by the urine and the patient will be cured .	mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela , lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra , e autra fiel desus la peyra .	0.915303
but if this treatment is not possible for you on account of some impediment , then tie a thread beneath the stone and another above ; then make an incision down upon the stone in the penis itself between the two ligatures , extract it , then undo the ligature and clean away the blood that has clotted in the wound .	e aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras . ~~~ e aprop extratz aquela . ~~~ e aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat , le qual es fayt en la plagua .	-0.0282609
the purpose of the ligature beneath the stone is lest it return to the bladder ; and the purpose of the one above it is that when you loosen the ligature after removing the stone the skin may fall back into place so as to cover the wound .	e no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra , sino per que no retorne a la vesica , e l’autre liament desus sino , quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra , la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua .	0.758212
on this account , when you tie the upper ligature , you will have to raise the skin so that when you have finished operating it may go back and cover the wound as we have said .	e per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus , que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus , o que retorne deves le tieu compliment , e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit .	0.911129
		0.3
