chapter seventy-eight .	de extraccio de la segondina .	0.995455
on extracting the afterbirth . ~~~ when in a confinement the afterbirth is left behind , you should bid the woman hold her breath then make her sneeze with ptarmica , with your hand holding her mouth and nose ; and if it come away thus , good .	quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament , lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale , e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi , e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu , e si per aysso es defora eyssit , bo es .	0.293043
but if not , then take a pot , pierce a hole in the lid , and put in it herbs that will open the womb , such as pennyroyal , rue , anise , chamomile , artemisia , cassia , and centaury , some or all of these remedies , submerge them in water , and place on the fire .	e sino , lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre , ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea .	1.07818
then fix a silver tube to the hole in the cover and bring the other end into the orifice of the womb and hold it in position so that the vapours may reach the body of the uterus .	totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola , e pausa aquela sobre le foc .	0.347617
then let her sneeze , as we said , and the afterbirth will quickly come away .	e aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre , e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre .	0.752381
but if , after this treatment , it still remains and does not come out , then tell the midwife to dip her hand in oil of sesame or mucilage of marshmallow and introduce it into the vulva and search for the afterbirth , and when she has found it , to take hold of it and very gently draw it until she bring it out .	e aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit , e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat .	0.309357
but if it be adherent to the depths of the uterus , then let her piss her hand in as we described until she find the afterbirth ; then let her draw very slowly and gently lest by violent pulling she cause a prolapse ; and she should slowly move it from side to side , left and right ; then let her increase the traction , for then it gives way to the pull and is freed from its adhesions .	mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida , lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea , e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina , e cum aquela auras trobada , lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre , lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat , e quan aura trobat la segondina , extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement .	0.579144
if the uterine opening be narrowed , we have earlier mentioned the treatment by induced sneezing and that of the pot and herbs .	abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat . ~~~ e aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio , quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia .	0.256579
but if it does not come away by all the means we have described , beware of treating her roughly with repeated traction .	e si la boca de la mayre es coartada , nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas .	0.773814
whatever of it comes out of the opening should be tied to the woman's thigh , and then syringe her with tetrapharmacon ointment ; for that will cause putrefaction in a few days and it will loosen and come out .	mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas , lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio , mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna , e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon ; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada .	0.618797
however , when it necroses foul odours arise from it that ascend to the stomach and head and these cause harm to the patient ; so she should have suffumigations appropriate for this .	mays quan se poyreys , es de lu elevada mala audor al cap , e al estomac , e aquo ledeys la malauta ; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo .	0.880986
one of the ancients tried suffumigation with nasturtium and dried figs .	mays alcus dels antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas .	0.71799
the form of instrument for suffumigating a woman for retention of the menses and of the afterbirth and the like .	forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina :	0.56526
it is made of lead , resembling a funnel , or it may be made of bronze .	sia fayta de veyre o de eram .	0.233333
its narrow extremity is introduced into the pudenda and the wide end is put over the fire , and the suffumigation is produced on the hot coals .	e sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc , e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc .	0.912864
keep it there until all the fumes are gone , and repeat once .	e tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra .	0.834857
		0.3
