after finishing for you , my sons , this book which is the part of knowledge dealing with medicine in its entirety ; and having made it as clear and explicit as possible , i thought it well to complete it for you by adding this treatise which concerns surgical operating .	o , filhs , pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre , le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina , per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu , e per las exposicios de lu , e per las declaracios de lu , es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat , le qual es partida de la operacio am ma , so es cyrurgia .	0.81874
for the skilled practitioner of operative surgery is totally lacking in our land and time ; so that the knowledge of it is on the point of being blotted out and its remains lost ; and there is nothing left of it except a few traces in the books of the ancients ; where , however , it has been so corrupted by the hands of scribes , and subjected to error and confusion , that its meaning has become obscured and its value diminished .	quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada , entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu , e le vistigi de lu es ostat ; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels antics , les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art .	0.737989
therefore i decided to revive this art by expounding , elucidating , and epitomizing it in this treatise ; and to present the forms of the cauterizing irons and other operative instruments , since this is an adjunct to explanation and a vital necessity .	e es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio ; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio , e per preparacio de lu , la qual causa es necessaria .	0.873975
now this is the reason why there is no skilful operator in our day : the art of medicine is long and it is necessary for its exponent , before he exercises it , to be trained in anatomy as galen has described it , so that he may be fully acquainted with the uses , forms , and temperament of the limbs ; also how they are jointed , and how they may be separated ; that he should understand fully also the bones , tendons , and muscles , their numbers and their attachments ; and also the bloodvessels , both arteries and veins , with their relations .	mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps , es quar la art de medicina es longua , e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels , e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor ; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses , dels nervis e dels lacertz , e·l nombre de aquels , e la egrecio de lor ; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas , e dels locs del eyssiment de lor .	0.846032
and so hippocrates said : 'though many are doctors in name , few are in reality , particularly on the surgical side . '	e per aquo ditz ypocras que am u nom es mot , mays en l’obra petit , e majorment en la art de la ma .	0.822078
we have already spoken of this in the introduction to this book . ~~~ for he who is not skilled in as much anatomy as we have mentioned is bound to fall into error that is destructive of life . ~~~ thus i have seen many laying claim to this knowledge and boasting of it , but having neither knowledge nor experience .	mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre ; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia , no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes , ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels , quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment .	0.056542
i saw an ignorant doctor incise a scrofulous tumour in a woman's neck ; and he cut certain arteries in the neck so that the woman bled until she fell dead before him .	quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna , e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu .	0.993651
and i saw another doctor presume to take out a stone from a man of advanced age . ~~~ the stone was large ; he rushed blindly at the task and extracted the stone and with it a piece of the bladder itself ; and the man was dead in about three days .	e vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat , e la peyra era gran , e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua , per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort .	0.449757
i had myself been previously called in to extract the stone but from what i saw of the size of it and the condition of the patient i judged that the outcome would be so .		-0.3
i saw another doctor who had a regular salary from one of the high officers of our country for medical treatment .	e yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela , e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira .	1.03154
there had occurred to a negro boy of his a fracture of the leg near the heel , together with a wound ; the doctor rushed in , in his ignorance , and bound up the fracture , over the wound , very tightly , with pads and splints , not allowing the wound to breathe .	e vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia , e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu ; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia , estrayssec la fractura , sobre la plagua , am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura , e no layssec a la plagua espiracio .	0.943755
he then let him go as he wished and then dismissed him for some days bidding him not to loose the bandage . ~~~ eventually his leg and foot swelled and he was close to death .	e aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers , e aprop le relieg , e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament ; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz , e pervenguet a perdicio .	0.265018
i was called in and made haste to loose the bandage , upon which some ease and reduction of the pain followed .	e yeu fuy apelat a lu , e aparelhegui a desliar le liament , e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors .	1.14167
nevertheless , gangrene had already taken hold on the limb and i could not hinder its progress ; it . ~~~ continued to extend in the limb until he perished .	mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre , per que no pogui refrenar aquela , e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric .	0.202475
and i saw another doctor incise a malignant tumour ; after some days the place broke out in open ulceration , thereby adding to the misery of the patient .	e vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros , e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias , entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu .	0.970161
for a cancer that arises from a melancholic humour should never be touched by the knife unless it should happen to be in a part of the body which may be removed thoroughly and in its entirety .	la qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic , lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot , sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat .	0.424476
wherefore you must know , my sons , that operative surgery is divided into two parts , namely , where operation is associated with the health of the patient , and , on the other hand , where it is for the most part fraught with danger .	e per aquo , filhs , necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios : so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut , e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios .	0.693464
throughout the following book i point out wherever i have described an operation that is accompanied by fear and danger .	e yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor ; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel , per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar .	0.743583
it behoves you to be wary and to shun such , lest the ignorant have an opportunity to reproach and slander you .	e donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat .	1.01703
show , then , caution and care for yourselves and gentleness and perseverance for your patients .	e usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio , e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio , e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer , per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca : quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria , e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz .	0.857724
take the best road that leads to health and a happy outcome .	gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios :	0.225
illnesses that are very threatening or difficult to cure , leave alone .	“no mediquetz malautia mala , per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz” .	0.728571
purify yourselves of anything which you fear may cause doubt as to your religious life and your secular life ; for this will perpetuate your good name and will elevate your fortunes in this world and the next .		-0.3
for galen once said in certain of his admonitions : 'do not treat mischievous maladies lest you get the name of mischievous doctors . '		-0.3
i have divided this treatise into three books : ~~~ book one .	e yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols .	0.290426
concerning the actual cautery ; and cauterization by caustics .	comensa la divisio del libre , e primier de la primieyra partida .	0.845455
it is divided into chapters set in order from the head to the feet . ~~~ the shapes of the instruments are shown and the iron cauteries and all things necessary for operating .	le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes , en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris , e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio .	0.223102
book two .	la divisio de la segonda partida .	0.383333
concerning incision and perforation ; blood-letting and cupping ; wounds and the extraction of arrows and the like . ~~~ the whole is divided into chapters in order ; and illustrations of instruments are given .	le segon capitol , de siccio e perforacio , e de ventosas , e de plaguas , e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas , tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz .	0.497819
book three .	divisio de la tersa partida .	0.668182
concerning the setting of bones ; dislocations ; the treatment of sprains and the like . ~~~ this is similarly divided into chapters set in order from head to feet , with illustrations of instruments .	le tertz capitol , de restauracio e de dislocacio , e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels ; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes , e de las formas dels instrumentz .	0.414581
		0.3
