O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, dear children, I have completed this book, which is the last of medical knowledge, its fulfillment, and have finished it through its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I completed this with a treatise, which is a part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And since the work of hands is closely guarded in our region and unknown everywhere, the knowledge has decayed and become obsolete, and there is nothing left of its strength but small descriptions in ancient books about what the hands have done.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity, and thoughts are closed, and knowledge is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I want to revive this treatise by ordering it according to the method of exposition and explanation, and bringing together the forms of cauterizing instruments and other tools used in the work, with adjustments to their declarations and preparations, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine has declined.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who would intervene in this matter must be well-versed in anatomy, as Galien says, to the extent that he understands the judgment of members, their shapes and connections, and separations; and has knowledge of bones, nerves, veins, and the number of their movements, and from where they emanate.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And Hippocrates says that ignorance is death, and knowledge is life; especially in the art of healing.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the beginning of this book that he who is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, risks making errors and misleading others; as I have often seen many of those who intervene in this science without knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a great wonder that affected the abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, affecting the arteries of her neck; so much blood issued forth that the woman died in the woman's hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another wonder where a stone was extracted from an elderly man's bladder, and the stone was large; it carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and the man bled internally for three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone; I knew well that if it were cut, he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another wonder, taking care of the duke of our land who had a broken leg and a wound from the fracture; the skilled surgeons, full of ignorance, tightened the fracture over the wound with strong ties, leaving no space for the wound to heal, and left it like that; and he commanded him not to unbind it; and so it was until the leg was completely swollen and painful and came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to unbind the leg; and when I heard it dislocated, it was completely at peace and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But every way of corrupting it was already confirmed in that member, and could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread throughout the member until the whole member was destroyed.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another wonder: the abscess, which had been healed, burst open again, and then became inflamed due to the evil nature of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For the ulcer, when it is free of melancholic humor, one should not apply iron unless the part is in a position to remove entirely what is corrupt.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, dear child, it is necessary that you know that the art of healing is divided into two parts: that is to say, work involving danger in many ways; and I will show you in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Therefore, be careful that the foolish gaze cannot speak ill of you; take up your weapons in courage and begin with your sick gently but firmly, using the best method so that by God's grace you may be saved and happy; banish diseases filled with grief through health; put away your weapons of doubt and have faith in yourself so that you can pass from this world to the next, full of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in none of his warnings: "Do not take any ill disease too seriously, lest you be called a fool.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cautery and medicine-based cautery, and it's ordered from the head down to the feet; and about the forms of instruments, and the tools for cauterization, and everything that's necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and the use of suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter also orders and describes the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar conditions; it ordains the use of the main joint up to the point of healing, and the shapes of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus, remembering the work, it is appropriate that I describe the qualities of aid and the potential harm of each condition.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and potential harm are the most extensive and subtle knowledge, and these secrets are revealed; and many wise ones have spoken of them and agreed upon them; and I will content myself with their words, as I fear lengthening this discourse.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery helps universally for every complexion where it has material, whether it is hot or cold complexion: that is to say, a hot complexion with material, and a dry complexion without material.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In a hot and dry complexion, there is material, they devised no remedy but said that cautery is great help; and others said the contrary: that cautery is useless for illness coming from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be treated with heat for a hot illness through warmth or dryness; and he who says the contrary states that cautery provides great help to hot and dry illnesses that come into the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture with the color of fire, you perceive the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	Because I have found this to be true through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in any case, no one should attempt this except he who has tried it and knows through long experience the chapter of cautery, the diversity of the dispositions of men's bodies, the causes of their ailments, the remedies and the passage of time; for other constitutions we have only fear, especially for cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all of them marvelled and agreed to the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, child, that cautery uses fire in a way that is the essence of healing, and indeed it is much gentler than cautery with burning medicines.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and it does not come from outside unless it touches the hot member, and it does not harm any other member by itself.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Burning medicines travel from one member to another, and bring diseases of great suffering without healing; but by chance, fire, because of its heat and the goodness of its substance, does not cause harm if it is used in excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And because I have found it by experience and through the long service and study that I have devoted to this art, and in accordance with the truth of things; and for this reason, I excuse the length of my words, as I do not wish to disclose the secret that lies within fire and the quality of the work, how it drives diseases from the body, as the philosopher demonstrates; consider it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, my son, that they agree on the time when cauterization should be performed and chose prayers to recite.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, because the pain causing harm is removed by the help of cauterization; especially when cauterization is for necessary and urgent pain, so that no greater evil comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear child, as they do who are unwise; for the disease that is healed by cautery has no return, and thus it should be; but it is not like what they care for, because cautery is only a medicine that changes the complexion, dries up the humors that cause pain, and acts more quickly than other medicines because of its power and authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And another powerful thing is that the disease comes according to the complexion of the sick person and the place of the illness and its power; and excesses accumulate in them through the acquisition of foods and similar things, except when cautery is administered where there are few excesses and moisture, as in cautery for pain and similar conditions, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last of medicine, and that's true; but they do not believe that cautery has any value after medicine, because when we administer remedies for any disease and they do not help, then we resort to cautery, and it is effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it is clear that cautery is indeed the last of medicine, not according to the opinion of the unwise crowd.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that gold cautery instruments are more effective than iron ones, and they only spoke of fire for the quality of gold and the excellence of its substance; they said that the heat of cautery does not cause corruption, but I have tried it and found it to be true in no way for any man; and gold cautery is worth more than iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And even when you heat the gold instrument, you are not sure if it is heated through by the color of the gold, and as soon as it cools down; and if it is heated too much, it becomes damaged; thus there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this, we use fire cautery because we have equipped it with our tools for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Therefore, I have ordered this chapter in the beginning so that the way to find it is more clear.
dou cautere olivaire	olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	Cyst cautery should be applied to moisture and coldness on the head, and it is effective for conditions caused by a disease known as "soda," and due to many humors that descend from the brain to the limbs and ears, and because of frequent dreams, toothache, throat pain, and especially for diseases arising from cold, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the patient is purified by a solvent medicine that cleanses the head, either the third or fourth degree of heat, according to the virtue and endurance of the patient's condition; and then the head should be re-covered with the medicine.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make it sit crossed in your hands, and place both of his hands on each side; after that, put the root of your palm against the root of his nose between his two fingers; and leave it there until your middle fingers meet. If blood flows, then heat up the cautery called 'olive', which has this shape:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	Mark the bone with ink, and repeatedly lower and pull your hand in turning; then gently lift your hand, and check if you see the bone emerge; and if not, repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you. Afterwards, take some string and put moistened and soft cotton inside, and place it on the wound, leaving it for three days; after that, cover it with butter-moistened cotton; and leave it until the burning is gone; finally, treat the wound with the ointment called 'tetrafarmacy' as long as it remains healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And they say that the older a wound is, the more it bleeds; and for this reason, one must act quickly.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say that one should not allow the cautery to burn off any part of the bone, and then remove what is burned from the bone, and it will heal.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And another advises that one should not allow the cautery to burn for too long, and push so hard that the bone is depressed as wide as a woman's womb, so that the humors can be discharged; and the wound should be left open for a long time; afterwards, it should be cleaned and bandaged.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cautery do not seem good to me in every case, except for those in which there is no fear; and I think I should leave them, because the joint is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other members; and even when the patient's joint is weak by nature, the first appearance of cauterization seems safer and more mobile to me, and from this, I act accordingly.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	from the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When chronic pain in the head comes and lasts for a long time, patients should use herbs and pills called "cough drops", and purgatives for the head and eyes, and compresses; and if one performs the cauterization we have mentioned above, it is of no avail.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care if the patient's shoulder is of strong nature and not too frozen; then cauterize it from below, as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After cauterizing each corner of the shoulder near the bone, as we have said before, and cauterizing the middle part called "vasselz," which is where the suction cups are placed, hold your hand lightly so as not to see the bone. The patient feels much greater pain from this cauterization than from others, and I will speak of it later; it is important that the cauterization of the corners be more precise than that of the middle part of the shoulder, and this is its form:
dou cautere dou chief	For fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in a part of the head there is sudden pain, and the disease extends to the oil (or possibly referring to inflammation), and the condition is purged with medicines prepared according to specific methods, and all other treatments mentioned in the division of illnesses do not help, then perform cauterization according to two methods, that is, using hot or cold applications.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauterization with hot applications involves pricking a sweet almond, removing the shell and the flesh (or possibly referring to the nerve or tissue), and then making an incision at the place of pain in such a way that you can replace the almond under the skin; and when it is replaced, hold it firmly and tightly for twelve hours. Then loosen it and treat the wound fiercely with salt, leaving it like this for two or three days, and then apply cotton soaked in butter until the healing process begins.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment with herbs, as long as it is healthy; and if you see that something similar to what I have written about burning medicines occurs, then follow the proper treatment of these burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery is done according to this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the fire cautery with this tool:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head is shaped like a clamp with a small concave area, and in the middle there is a slight appearance; place it on the painful limb, hold your hand, and twist the fire slightly until half of the thickness of the heart is burned; then remove your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is harmful, and let an abundance of blood flow out.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing cotton in awe of the wound, and keeping it on the skin for three days; then he moistens it with butter, and continues to treat the wound with care until it is healed; if you wish to cauterize this migraine with a cautery called 'cultellare', be sure not to cut the artery in this migraine which is not old.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When treating migraine as we have previously discussed regarding the divisions of illnesses, and if beneficial treatments with cauterization recommended earlier do not help, then you must heat up the cautery called 'cultellare' until it is white; sign over the suffering wound a line half an inch long, and move your hand once, so that you do not cut the artery or cause bone damage; guard against the mandible becoming mute when chewing, ensuring the nerves only focus on muteness and spasms do not affect the patient; be wary of blood clotting in the artery after it has been cut, which can be especially frightening for those unfamiliar with this procedure. Leave the task halfway done. But I will tell you how to prevent blood clots once the artery is cut, and show you in this book where it is mentioned.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not suffice against the illness, and the patient suffers, cauterize again with fire both as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healthy; and if you see fit, apply the cautery from our chapter on the extraction of the artery, together with a cautery having two blades; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	about the pain in the ears due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is pain in the ear due to cold, and various solvitive medicines and other remedies as we have mentioned in the previous section have been tried without relief, then use this cautery called "point," which is shaped thusly:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After puncturing the entire diseased ear, or both ears if pain holds in either, and pulling slightly upwards from the root of the ear after marking the spot of the joint; take ten points around each ear; then heal the joint until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	regarding mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	The torture that requires cautery is limited to those that involve fluid movement, as we have mentioned in the sections on disease; and do not perform cautery on areas that have recently been dried or affected by nerve pain.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	As you treat this kind of torture that stops flowing from the flow of water and purging from the head and gargarism, and if it persists, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little below the temple, and the third at the joint of the two lips; and place the cautery in the area that opens to healthy skin, burning half of the heart's base. This is the shape of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it resembles the cutting tool we have described before, but it is a little more subtle, and the knife should be slightly thicker; after curing it, treat the wound as I have said before, ensuring it remains healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, but it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauterizations: two on the temples of the head, and one on the forehead, and one on the lever called 'vassel' as we have previously mentioned, and no cauterization on the mouth of the stomach; and treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	De litargie" translates to "on altar stone
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, it is necessary to give the patient large years (possibly a type of herbal preparation) to cleanse the mind; then, after washing the head of the patient entirely, place on his occiput the plaster of mustard, as written in the treatment of plasters; and this is the method of cauterization: if he does it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is sound thus, good; but if not, make three cauterizations on the inner side of the thigh, going down to the bone, and leave two broad spaces between each cauterization; treat it as the others, and if you notice any swelling, and the patient suffers, make a cauterization in the middle; and if necessary, two others on the two horns, and treat until it is sound; this cauterization is called 'olivare', as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of cold from the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleaned with earth and water as we have said before; then wash the patient's head, and make a cauterization between the chief and each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the collarbone; and if you need it more, and the skin is moist and the patient suffers and the disease is severe, make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; leave them until the hardest heart is burned, and then remove your hand. After that, treat it until it is sound, and this cauterization called 'olivare' as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cautery unless they are phlegmatic; first, the brain must be purified with years and other treatments as we have described in the chapter regarding the sick who suffer greatly from taking medication.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot endure it, make them gargle and chew to purify the brain often with good meats; then, place the head in the middle of the water, and perform cautery as we have said before, and cauterize the veins and each horn; and if the patient is weak and suffers greatly, perform cautery as I have mentioned to those with paralysis and softening of the limbs, on the spine and neck, and use olive cautery according to the manner I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is sick, perform a subtle cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When, due to melancholy, there are excessive or corrupt moisture and a thick flux, then perform cautery with hot irons as we have said for those who have paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if, due to melancholy, the excessive fluids turn into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink by which his brain may be purified, as it is described in the section above.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After removing the patient's head, make the cut around it well-made, just as round, placing it back on the head; and keep the patient's face crossed and firmly held from all sides; then apply the dressing, and use butter made from old goat's milk; and heat it gently over fire so that he can bear it; afterward empty the circular space inside the head, leaving it to cool; and do this for the patient once a week with another good treatment, until he is healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or, if you need to cauterize it, make several small punctures throughout the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cautery moistens the skin even more; then apply cotton soaked in butter and gelatine.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eyes come first as signs of the symptoms I mentioned in the previous division, then begin and have the patient drink something purifying for the head, keeping away from all moisture, and taking sweats or baths several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After instructing them to rest their head, have them perform a cautery over the head, and also cauterize both temples if the eye pain radiates from there together, or separately if it is only in one; be careful not to damage any veins or arteries under the heart while performing the cautery, making it as long as the width of the temple; guard against excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood emerging, stop immediately as you have been taught.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and the careful incisions how to extinguish it; and never should one cauterize or burn the bones from behind.
dou cors des larmes	the two parts of the eyes
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes have been old and habitual and are in the veins, removing the arteries that appear from the bottom of the head; and one sees that it is a cold superfluity of phlegm, then do the cauterization as I said at the beginning of this treatment descending to the eyes: I cauterize between the eyes, and II cauterize on both temples, and II cauterize beneath the bones from behind; and if more is needed, cauterize carefully over the eyebrows with all small cauterizations.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Let the body weep tears within the eyes.
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat it according to what we have said in the previous section, and it does not benefit, then give the patient three warm cups of a mixture of olive oil and nitre; after warming the head, perform cauterization in the middle of the cautery with an olive oil cautery; and make two cauterizations with the cautery called 'clavilis' on both sides of the jaw, slightly below the teeth; and be careful not to cover the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called 'clavilis':
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the skin is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery which is called "olive.
de coi ci est li forme:	Due to which the shape is:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that the cautery on both sides of the wound is as long as the wound itself, do not release your hand until the third part of the skin is burned, according to the manner I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hairs that remain unburned
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	No time does it happen that the hairs of the skin turn white, and they prick the skin, and one performs cauterization according to these two methods: that is to say, with fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then place the patient in a healthy position; next, draw on the paper of each hair a figure as large as the full moon, and it should be the beginnings of the sign among the hairs; then apply moist cotton dipped in egg glue and musk from pistachio to the skin, and heat the cauterizing iron whose shape is as follows:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the affected area a few times, burn the surrounding skin gently; and the signs of the work's health are that you see the skin retreat, and the hairs stand on end at the tip of the oil; then remove your hand and leave it thus for three days, then apply moist cotton in butter until the burning is gone; after that, treat with ointment as long as it remains healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if the hairs grow back, and the skin becomes softer, then restart the cauterizing on that same area as before; and if the hairs are burned, cauterize it again while the skin remains raised to its natural state, and is even, and the hairs do not prick into the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The medicinal cautery with burning herbs instructs the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; then make a parchment mold of the leaf of myrtle. Take French soap and bright charcoal, each in equal parts, grind them together finely, and apply it diligently so that it does not cool down. Place the prepared mixture on the form of the myrtle leaf and put paper over the affected area. If the illness persists in one oil only, then perform the procedure on both sides; place cotton moistened with oil underneath, and let the patient's affliction be in your healthy hand, displaying it over the remedy, pressing gently and slowly whenever the patient feels a stinging from the medicine, for it will sting like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your body.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the infection has passed, then raise the limb from below, and watch if you see the paper lifting as it would lift by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, apply more medicine to the limb, but make sure your work is even and your fingers precise; then place a moist cloth with butter on it over the affected area until the pain is alleviated, after which cure the limb with the treatment called 'dyafenis' or any other suitable ointment until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you have to take care of yourself, guard your work carefully so that it does not deviate from the treatment at all.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterward, and the hairs prick in the oil, repeat the treatment on that place which has been softened with the paper, just as you did before; then cure it until it is healed; this is the form of the fuel (or poultice) with gentle care.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the conditions of men are diverse in size and strength, and according to your circumstances; do not deviate from the right path for those who have the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	On the treatment of a fistula by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have discussed regarding diseases, and your treatments do not benefit the patient, then it is necessary that you perform cauterization on it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head on a healthy surface; then, with your hands, hold their head still in such a way that it does not move or wiggle its head; afterwards, apply moist cotton soaked in wine or pear juice over the wound; after that, heat up the cauterizing iron until it is hot. Position the iron near the head, shaped like a quill, so that it touches the wound; if you see fit, point it from one side to the other, and if you prefer, make it resemble a tent; nevertheless, whatever shape it takes, this part of the process is crucial for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula, open it and drain the pus and dryness; if it closes again, work on it further and remove the bowels; then place hot cautery over the affected area, holding your hand steady above the cautery near the inflamed part of the oil, so that your hand does not cause harm; and apply the cautery to the fat in the oil, and dry it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you start the cautery near the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If that does not work, repeat the cautery one more time, and if necessary, do so again after three days; then apply moistened butter cotton to the affected area and continue treatment with a healing ointment until it is healed; and if forty days pass and it is not healed, apply a corrosive medicine as needed until the bone is exposed; and follow this according to what comes in your chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that no one from the old days spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Understand the fistula, and locate its source; then apply a subtle heat to it, thus taking on this form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and it makes the quantity of a drop of blood; and hold your hand with the heat firmly, and do not let the patient move at all, so that the blood does not flow to its place; and one must put on the wound clean moist cotton in order for healing or otherwise: the blood quickly leaves the fistula and heals in a marvelous way.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If this does not work, it is necessary to administer heat or cold, and bring the fistula back to the body according to what is appropriate in its specific place.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cracks appear in the lips, called "poil," especially on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these wounds as we have mentioned in detail, and the treatment does not benefit, then use a small surgical knife according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And apply the ointment to these wounds until it reaches the bottom; afterwards, treat the area with a healing wax until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess forms in the throat's root or uvula, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it causes putrefaction and swelling and becomes a fistula; then treat it as we have said in detail, but it does not help. Then you must perform cautery according to the size of the fistula; after opening or perforating the fistula, keep your hand on it until the heat has reached the bottom, and do not remove it until it is completely healed; and repeat this once or twice, following the treatment we have described for wounds, until it is healthy. If it heals in this way, that is good; if not, you must expose the area and remove the corrupt bone, as you will find described in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	no movement of the joints
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and treatment with medicine is ineffective, then place the patient's painful tooth in a healthy environment; afterward, apply the hot cautery to the area from which the tooth will come, in this manner, as you would place a cane over the tooth; and apply the hot cautery firmly, holding your hand until the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth; then remove your hand and repeat the cauterization according to your desire; afterward, have the patient fill his mouth with salty water and hold it for an hour and rinse thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way, the tooth that was moving is firmly set, the soft gums are restricted, and the moisture is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	about the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain arises from cold, or there is a chill or fever, and the remedies of medicine are ineffective, then it requires cautery according to two methods: butter cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Butter cautery is performed by pressing melted butter into a copper or iron spoon, then wrapping cotton around the tip and moistening it with the butter. It is applied to the aching tooth and held there until it cools; this process is repeated several times until the pain-relieving effect reaches the root of the tooth. If the butter becomes too cold, it is reheated over a hot iron until the fire reaches the gum around the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	He applies the fire cautery, making it such that you press a piece of iron or steel into it, and if it's thick enough, the fire doesn't reach the patient; afterwards, he heats the cautery, from which its shape will form, places it on the tooth, and holds his hand until the cautery cools down; do this often, as the pain will subside that very day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in the heat of this cautery, and then suck on a hot coal; and this is the shape of the cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery where you wish, according to your ability; and it is the form of the bone.
des scrophules	of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula is of cold moisture and is not obedient to medicine, then heat the cautery with this after it forms, so that it has openings for the fumes to escape from the cautery to the other part. Place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice, as necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to its quantity, and leave it like this for three days. Then apply cotton moistened with butter until the burning is gone. After that, treat the wound with oil and bandages until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the bone:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture conquers the channels of the body, especially when it arises from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be first relieved by solvent medicines; after this, they should have fire cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful not to go near the throat, and only gently apply heat.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After this, they perform another cautery at the joint of the collarbone above the spine, and these cauteries that are called "claws" from which we have the form before; and treat the limb as we have said above until it is healed.
de la toust	Of the toast (or perhaps referring to a burned area)
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and any illness of the pores are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or chills, and it is an old illness, make two cauterizations on the strong parts of his body; and another cauterization between the two limbs; and this cauterization called "clavile" according to the shape mentioned above.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make a cauterization by pricking all the cauterization called "poins" from which the shape is as mentioned above in the illness of the ears; and the points can be up to 30, or even more inside.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After the cure, the shoulder should be treated according to what has been said above, and the cautery should be performed in three stages according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because the cautery is lighter, make three copies of this.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterward, remind the patient of his pain on his back and side; afterward, ease the pressure inside the wound with your left hand's finger; if the joint is misaligned internally, apply the heat of the fire gently where it forms.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	And cauterize the wound as deep as it penetrates to the side, and the shape of the cautery should be four cauteries; and for this reason, cautery is made with a cautery having three prongs, so that the shape of the cauterization consists of six cauteries; and the nerve corresponds to the subtlety of a needle, and it is the form of the cautery having three prongs.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never should it be adjusted on this nerve, for which there are eight cauterizations.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying the cauterization, place crushed silk on it; then rest the patient, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it becomes dislocated from above, small things happen poorly, then cauterize on the thick lower part of the bone, or many cauterizations in sequence.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	Because the joints are closed, and the moisture is dried and healed the patient.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and moisture in the stomach drain it of its color, causing increased catarrh, and despite usual remedies, it does not benefit, then it is necessary for the patient to rest on their back, extending their legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	Then make III cauteries deep under the knife, each with a width equal to that of a finger, and drive in the cautery; perform two cauteries on both sides, making the shape of the cauterize marks at three angles, ensuring there is enough space between them so they do not adhere together as they heal; make sure the cauterized marks are deep enough to penetrate both parts of the heart, and the shape of the cauterize marks should be as described without any distortion.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you need to cauterize with a large flame in the stomach according to this form, and whoever has fear of this cautery cauterizes by poking and marking on the stomach at one point according to the amount that you see; then cauterize across all the cautery that is called 'point'.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the condition that we have discussed above, as long as it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver experiences pain from a cold and moisture and excessive flatulence, as long as it is deprived of its natural condition due to superfluities; and the patient is treated as we have said in divisions, but it does not help, so it is necessary that the patient be cautious about his head; and there are three signs of cautery according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, expelling the humors, laying or cutting the veins where the pain comes from; and there should be a distance between each cautery equal to the thickness of two fingers; and the cautery should be long in the body, without pressing too hard with your hand over all the cautery; and it should only burn the middle part of the heart, and the patient should keep his legs straight and relax his arms; and if he cannot do that, he should lie down, extend his legs, and ease his breath; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you wish, cauterize these wounds with a knife, if you are subtle and wise in the art, but be careful not to burn the whole heart, for you would cause severe damage to the entire body; and it should not reach boiling, as the hearts are very delicate there, and only the wise can see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you need to know if it is within the liver tissue or in the peritoneum: if it is within the tissue, the patient feels moderate pain; but if it is in the peritoneum, they feel severe pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this cure requires the patient to rest on their head, it is necessary that the patient be comfortable and at ease; then apply the signet over the joint where the abscess is, and afterwards warm the cautery which resembles a spear, from which comes this form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize with the cautery until the veins are burned, and a pustule appears, as long as the infection is completely healed; after the cure, follow up according to the treatment of wounds, as long as it is healthy; and it is not advisable to use this cautery except by those who have studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and whose hands these illnesses have never corrupted.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then it can be daringly operated on, but I still think it is better to leave it.
dou cautere de pleuresin	The cautery of tears" is not a standard medical term in medieval texts or any
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one must perform a cautery on tears with the root of an aristologe (a type of plant), and in this manner: take a long root of aristologe, as large as you can find, dry it, and make it as long and as thick as your arm; moisten it in oil, hold it over the fire, and cauterize (apply the hot root) between the eyebrow and the eyelash, and small cauteries downwards in the part beneath the beard; also cauterize between the fifth rib and the sixth, slightly declining behind; and cauterize across the midline of the lower body, and another on top of the stomach, and between the shoulders, and along both sides of the lower ribs beyond the deflected point. Do not press your hand down, but hold it open as if smelling something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And they say that no old man should use fire cautery like a razor, scorching it and placing it between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess; and suddenly there is great pain, as we have said of the abscess in the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this case, there is fear or the sick die now, and a fistula forms that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse according to the divisions of treatments mentioned, and it does not benefit, then they resort to three ways of cauterization that are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Remove the dislocation in such a way that you make three cauterizations, or four, following the length of the bone, according to the shape of the cautery of the fire that we have mentioned above; and do not rush your hand over the entire cautery, and let the patient be wary on his back; and another way to cauterize is to heat the cautery with two nails, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and soften the core located in the bone, where the patient's pain comes from the left side, and raise the elevations by which you soften the core according to the core, according to the length of the body, and the cauterization should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After you have drawn out the two flames until the bones are pierced on the other side, then quickly remove the cautery, and thus you will have four. And if you see that the cauterization is complete at three nails, do not cauterize the entire cautery at three nails.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure when it has been putrefied for a long time, then this should be moved more than the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	Dyshydration" is the English translation for
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not indicated for the dehydrated, except in the manner called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	If your treatment according to the methods we have mentioned in sections does not benefit the patient, then you should perform four cauterizations around the anus, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the heart, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in the groin; and these cauterizations should be close to the affected area.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the cautery open for a long time to allow pus to drain, and never allowing treatment of the patient after the cautery; then healing will hasten, and the two intentions (or sides) will be healed together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the stomach should be like the claw that we have shown above; and for the back, it should be olive-shaped, according to what is set forth above.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of stones
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the stones are swollen in a hydropsic patient and are filled with yellow urine, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; and gently hold your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And don't enter too deeply, so as not to damage the citrus tree, and perform the cauterization according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After that, make two cauterizations on each leg, at the tip of a sharp knife; and perform the cauterization longwise, one on the inside of the knee joint and the other outside, along the leg; and leave the cauterizations for a long time without dressing, so that the wound heals; then treat the other wounds as we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the wound
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the pain in the stomach comes from cold and moisture, and the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by any remedies; then you see the patient suffering greatly, despite having a strong constitution, and you perform a severe cautery on the stomach as previously described in the cautery of the stomach, around the navel with thin cauteries, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see an abundance of moisture and the patient is suffering, perform a cautery on the wrist, and cauterize each part, and several small cauteries on the stomach to alleviate the great pain, as the cure is beneficial when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	Of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are of long standing and consist of corrupt, cold, moist humors, they are treated as we have said in the divisions, but they do not benefit from cautery: make three incisions along the spine of the back, starting from below the muscles and moving upwards in a triangular pattern, and one incision at the anus; if you think that the stomach is cold, the meat is not cooked, and there is bloating on the face, then apply a hot cautery to the stomach as mentioned above, and another to the liver, and yet another to the heart, using a cautery hammer; leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, reset the shoulder as long as it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you deal with the fleshiness (thelul), if the cautery appears too sharp, then set it on fire over the entire affected flesh; leave it in that state until the heat has reached the vein, thereby alleviating the pain. Repeat this once or twice, and if there is much flesh, cauterize each part as we have said; then apply beneficial remedies as long as they remain healthy; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on a hard surface, it will be more helpful.
de plaie mal curee	From the badly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, as we shall relate in its place, such a disease arises that it can only be healed by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When no vein is fistulous, but it becomes inflamed and discharges putrefaction and corrupt moisture, you must try all possible subtle treatments, and be sure to know the entire extent of its power.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery that seems sharpest, insert it into the fistula according to the amount of the attempt's penetration, and repeat the cautery until the corrupt and putrid flesh is burned once, or twice, or three times, depending on the amount required; be careful not to burn the sensitive nerves and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	He should pierce the fistula into the bladder and intestine, taking care of these passages, and do not make a fire where it is meaty, and think that it is not poisonous; afterwards cure the passage as long as it remains healthy, and if the passages are closed, know that the passage is completely sound; and if the materials are not removed, know that the passage is too narrow, and the bone is corrupted at its base; and thus, as we will say of this in its place.
de la maladie des reins	Regarding the disease of the kidneys.
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When the pain of kidney stones and heavy urination comes and does not allow a woman to urinate, then it is necessary that you perform cautery on the kidneys from both sides with the cautery knife that we have mentioned above; and if we cauterize them in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a row, and this will bring greater relief.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from pressure and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then perform a cauterization on the upper part of the bladder where the urinary opening begins, with the fingers, both right and left, making each cauterization as long as a thumb; also perform a cauterization at the back, if necessary; and make the cauterizations in the shape as described above.
de la marris	of the stomach
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the wound is cold and moist, and does not allow any healing, and the flowers of the wound are corrupted and their healing is delayed, then one must make three cauterizations around the wound, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder, and two cauterizations on the back; and these cauterizations should be made with a clamp, as we have said.
de la hainche	de la hainche" translates directly to "of the spine
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moisture descends to the spinal column and for this reason it cannot move from its place, and the symptoms are that the leg appears shorter than the other when measured together; and there is found a weak back department, it is necessary that you cauterize the patient above the spine in a circular cauterization, marking in front of the spinal column around the area as it turns, so that the spinal column is within the circle; and the cauterization should be like that which was done on the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present for you, do three cauterizations of the olive oil, and let these cauterizations be as perfect as all the others; and heal it as soon as it is cured.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes from the back, and it is due to cold and moisture, and the patient is cured as we have said in the previous section, but the cure is ineffective, and the illness is long-standing, then you should purge the patient of heavy humors, such as bad pills or other similar good pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	Afterward, he performs cautery; and the method of cautery is according to two manners: that is to say, with burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is performed in many ways, of which one is: you cauterize along the ribcage, making three triangular cauterizations according to this form, ensuring good depth and width, with each cauterization spaced approximately two fingers apart, and they are olive-shaped. Never perform cautery directly in the middle of the chest, for there should be three according to this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, cauterize with the hot iron the circle that we have spoken of in the dislocation of the spine; but do it in such a way that the circle encloses the entire spine, and all the edges of the heart are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the method used in sciatica when the pain is confined to the spine and does not reach the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if the pain reaches the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations at the place where the patient feels the pain, and one on the top of the ankle; the cauterization should be cut with a knife, and burn the thick parts of the heart; and if the patient feels that the pain spreads to either foot or near it, cauterize there three times or four in the spot where he feels the pain, which is called the "point.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the pain is so intense in the knee and extends to the thigh, make a cut with a sharp or circular instrument, and be very careful in all your cauterizations that you do not leave them too long, lest you burn the nerves and large arteries, and cause the patient more harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who have cauterized the ankle of the foot, leaving it until the leg was completely swollen, and the foot as well, pierced and corrupted throughout the foot.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After an abdominal treatment, he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, apply cautery to one and the other according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise ones say about the cautery of the joint, which is the way, take a piece of iron, as thick as a new dime, or slightly thinner, and make it twisted and turned in such a way that there is a distance between one twist and the next, approximately the size of a thumb; and the twists should be on both sides, and they should look similar, and use a well-made iron, and this is its form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heat it until it is completely red and oozes pus, then place it on the affected joint of the patient, and turn to the healthy side; apply cautery once again, and leave it for three days; then make a poultice with butter, and keep the wound open for a long time; after the dressing cure, as long as it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we should use this cautery little because of the pain it causes, and we should see few who use it; yet these are good cauteries, which the patient can endure, and where they are most needed.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The hot medical cauteries are made by using an instrument to cut a slit along the edge of a plate, which is either of iron or steel, attached to a long handle. It should be about as thick as a finger, open at both ends, and joined together in this manner.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After that, place the hot plate of the cautery on the patient's healthy side, and quickly place your hand over the plate; then pour between the two circles of the hot awl, which is heated over the fire for a little while, and leave it for an hour, allowing the patient to feel the heat and burn.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it has a true burning sensation just like fire; and when the burns have passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the affected area gently, leaving it for three days, applying butter until the blackening from the burn disappears; and let it be in this state for three more days after the treatment of the wounds, as long as it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, use the instrument with gentle pressure according to what you did for the hand, increasing it gently; and this is the method of hot awl, which I have written about in the treatise on rectifying medicines.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, both in equal amounts, crush them together, and put them into a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Where it has a small opening for the tip of a knife to enter; then place this pot into another well-sealed pot and add alkali and lime, stirring gently until there is a thick paste on top, leaving it so until the liquid in the sealed pot drains away. Then take all that liquid and pour it over the lime and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And thus it becomes very beneficial and is used in many medical works and cautery for other limbs, as it acts like fire, and with other medicines such as fennel, aniseed, and lime with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a treatment by which an honourable man was cured of the pain in his back and sciatic nerve, and the swelling, and says that no other cure was done, and he was healed completely once this treatment was performed, and he bathed as he teaches below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he says to do this in such a way that you press the fresh and dry niter (sodium nitrite) into a fine powder with some fat, and apply it to the back and thigh and leg where the pain is, and wrap it; and leave it for three hours or according to the amount of pain the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter a bath until his body is slightly warmed, and make the water enter his eyes, and it will remove all the pain and heal him.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such medical cautery unless after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's hair, it provides great relief; and the cautery should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take lint and grease it with old oil, and apply to the fossa between the big toe and the other called the 'fossa'.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After taking a piece of dry goat horn, heat it in the fire until it becomes charcoal, and place it on the cloth, leaving it until it stains; repeat this process, and do not stop doing so as long as you think it is necessary for the pain to cease; and this method of cauterization is called "goat horn cautery.
de la dolor dou dos	of the painful back.
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain arises in the back, whether from sudden impact or excessive blood let, or due to the presence of cold, expanded-seeming matter, none of these signs warrant cauterization, except for the one stemming from the infusion of cold material.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after the patient is voided of foul pills or other similar things, that one makes incisions on their back, where the pain persists, in three lines marked with a cross, and on each line make V cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cauteries should be made according to the cautery called 'point'; and if you see fit, make III cauteries or IV at the middle cautery following this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This illness often strikes small children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a tight throat when they swallow, and pain; and you will find in the lower back a severe pain that radiates to the other joints.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this, and you witness its cure, cauterize it with fire according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So the cauterization should mark every part of the wound equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, cauterize around the wound with fire, marking two or three lines, and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After the cure, hold the limb as healthy as possible according to what we have said, and be sure not to apply cauterization to any numb areas that are affected by nerve damage.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of joints is due to moisture that has spread to each member deeply, and when the pain comes suddenly, they call it "podagra" properly, and when it is from a cold cause and cures with no medicine, then it is cured by cautery in this manner: make a number of cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and let the cauterization be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary to prick on the face of the foot, make a cauterization at each 'point'.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, it happens often that he gets cauterized on each knee with three cauterizations or four of each part, using olive oil; and if you need more, do so, but don't hold your hand too tightly until the expected heart's heat is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and back, administer the cauterization that we have mentioned in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make two incisions around the fingers; and if there is no pain in the thumb, make incisions on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the wrists or shoulders, cauterize each part, and do good governance for the patient and apply medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you govern it well and purge the flux, it will be healed by God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the dislocation from joy (or satisfaction)
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When dislocation occurs in the shoulder and the bones descend into the armpit, it is new, and you should know that when you attempt to cure it, nothing must disturb that day; he should consume things that leave the stomach empty so that the bowels can descend from his belly. Then place him on his back between your hands, command him to keep his breath until the bones are healed, and rearrange them at your leisure, fixing the dislocation on the bone of the wrist, and make a sign on each side like half of a circle above the body; then heat the fire with this shape:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as it is white and it sheds scales.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then realign the bones to their proper place; and have the attendants hold his hand so he does not return to the previous position; and stretch the patient's legs, placing pillows under them, and apply pressure with your hands; then take the cautery tool in your entire hand, holding it straight, and apply it until you reach the bone, and if you do not touch the bone on the first attempt, repeat this process several times until you do; be careful that the joint does not pop when performing the cauterization; do not burn him; and ensure that the patient does not die or suffer any other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that if you do not go close to the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cauterization of children be subtle according to their size, and of adults also large according to their size; after three days, treat the wound with butter until the scald is healed; afterwards, cure other injuries until they are clean, and lay the patient on his back for forty days until the wound is well sealed; and it is necessary that his movements be limited for a long time, so that the boil does not appear when he goes to his room.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, apply a well-made bandage and leave it for another forty days; and have good rest, working little and guarding against too much drinking and eating, and excessive laughter; and by following this instruction, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And now I will describe the treatment for cutting in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the stomach
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other stomachs and are recognized, and you see that they no longer grow, hold the cautery near the wound according to its size, burning it a third of the way through; after treatment according to what we have said; and no one among the ancients has said that it should be cauterized with a three-angled cautery in this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the place of the fracture with a sign of a cross and make a line along its length above the break, and another one extending from it, and hold your hand over the entire cautery area.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the initial treatments are lighter and more gentle.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain arises in any limb, whether from strain or injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and medicinal treatments are ineffective, then it is necessary to cauterize the affected area using a cautery instrument known as "a point," and the cauterization should be done according to the length of the limb, its smallness or largeness, and its strength or weakness, and the position of the twists and the intensity of the pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If the patient is healthy after the first cauterization, that's good; if not, start again with a new cauterization on another part of the body, as it often happens that the part closest to where the treatment was performed needs another one, so you should perform cauterizations until the patient is healthy.
de meselerie	It appears that your request is incomplete or missing context. 
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	These issues are never helped by cauterization, especially the illness that arises from the putrefaction of fluids and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Do not burn the sight, be wary if the disease is in its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, do not let it remain or linger, and doubt not that the corruption may spread throughout the patient; then make cautery on the head: first on the new growth, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and on both horns, and behind on the crown; leaving your hand such that the cauterization reaches the bone, and until the skin breaks out so that the vapors from the thick humors can escape; and cauterize the mouse according to what is appropriate.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if the malady is spread everywhere, and it appears manifestly, then you must cauterize these parts of the body with the cauteries we have mentioned on the head, and cauterize first near the navel, and second on the spine down the collarbone, and six times on the spine down the back, and one time on the hip joint and another on the side of the pelvis; and also on the elbows and on the tender parts of the toes, and each joint of the hands and feet, and in the pits of the hands; and be careful not to burn the nerves that are on the last toe joints, and never cauterize on the bone of the wrist, or on the bone of the stomach, or on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more you perform cauterization, the greater the aid it provides and the better the outcome; and know that the patient feels no pain from cauterization as a healthy person would, because the body is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauterization be great and small according to the members and joints, as you will find in the manner of the irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment, apply a poultice of meal with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling appears in any member and is cured by medicines, oils, and bandages, but it is not completely healed, then make cautery on the member according to its size and the severity of the condition; and the cautery should go slightly into the hope of the heart; then treat with poultices until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And never should cautery be performed on the hand, foot, or back, at the end of a nerve that affects the member, and thus if the swelling is removed; nevertheless, no one should attempt this unless they are knowledgeable about the members and the passages of the moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	Of albars (or 'albaras' in Old
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is ignited, and the medical art has no effect, then cauterize with a hot iron, according to the extent of the wound, until the white (scab) is removed, and it changes color; then apply a cure of flour, beans, lentils, with rose oil, plantain leaves, collicon juice, and alder bark, each in a separate part; mix them together, wrap them in a cloth, and keep them on the wound until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of a cancer by cautery.
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When cancer appears in its early stages and you wish to arrest it, cauterize it with a cautery that seems circular, encompassing the entire area around the cancer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	Yet wise men say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the cancer; nevertheless, this does not seem good to me, as I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen it work successfully; and a more right thing is that it be cauterized around, with a cautery called 'circular', as we have said regarding many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	from the flesh that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When anyone has a disease called "adubelati," and they do not want to die, either because of the excess it causes or due to the great age of the ill person and their weakness (that is, too much), and they have little blood, or because of time; and you see them hastening to die: then cauterize around with many small cauterizations by pricking; after which leave them alone.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced throughout with cautery, make the cautery so hot that...
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	Place your hand in the middle of the disease called 'adubelati' as long as the cautery has pierced the heart, and make the cautery such that the patient feels no pain, in a way that the course of the decay is halted.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	Heal the fire with iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of disease is called "corrodens", which is nothing other than a rotting of the member, as it attacks the members just as fire does dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a member that can be treated with fire cautery, then heat the cautery clamps both very small and large, according to what is suitable for the member or the disease; after cauterizing from all sides until you have reached all the corruption, and leave nothing of it, so that everything that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then leave it for three days, and apply oil to the cauterized member, rubbing it until all the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption is gone.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of wounds that cause pain.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if after three days there is no healthy growth, it is good; and if not, repeat the cautery on the limb that has remained stuck in a corrupt state.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this method is sometimes effectively cured with a strong medicine instead of fire cautery; however, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already described the use of a strong medicine in the previous section: take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	From the particles which come as pieces.
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that a particle, due to some defect, is born with a disease called "close" according to our understanding, and it is a great fault that hurts the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this disease is according to two manners.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, the fire cautery, and the hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	For the fire cautery, take a heated knife also as if it were a feather of a fowl, and make it from good iron to the extent that it can pierce the nail from all sides, and have thin margins; then place it hot on the nail, and turn your hand completely around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail; leave it thus for three days until it begins to produce pus; then make a poultice of bitter alder leaves ground with silk, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will break off and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then clean the wound with hot water until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are moved by heat, the body's strength is often broken, and this happens many times in the hand and foot, then it is necessary to apply a hot water cautery; and it is done thus: take a rod of iron or steel, or a file, and place the nail and the rust on it, that is, verrucas; and put the rod around it so that it covers everything, then add a little hot water, and hold your hand firm, and press your hand while turning it so that the edge of the rod reaches the base of the nail, and can find the hot water path all the way to the base; and allow the patient to bear the bite of the hot water for an hour; then leave it as it is, and it will come out from its roots completely.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	First, do one after another, until you release all those who are in the body, then treat the wounds that cause pain.
li cure dou trembler	It cures the fear of shaking.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When anyone shivers from cold or quartan fever or any other ailment, it is necessary to perform four cauterizations or five on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each spine; and one cauterization on the fish, and one on the stomach with an olive cautery; if this stops the trembling and hastens the healing from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	from pus-filled pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Never is it apparent through external defects or pus-filled pustules that come from deeply corrupted, putrid matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	it is necessary to act at first when they appear that one makes cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery with birch bark, from which the point is taken to the fire, or with long root of aristologue, or with lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And never should one cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow worse forward, but are broken off the excesses from which they come, and are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	as the artery is cut off
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many serious consequences arise from the blood of an artery that is cut at a wound, or during the incisions into an abscess, or when cauterizing a member, and similar things; it is a very painful thing to endure.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Nevertheless, if it happens to anyone, apply your index finger quickly over the vein wound, and pull very strongly until the blood stops completely; then take several small and large olive oil cauterization tools, as hot as possible, and place them on the wound. Then, according to the size of the wound, pick up a lot or a little salt, and with your finger hold the artery in place where it is cut, and place the cautery over that vein, holding it until the blood stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if a sudden sneeze occurs while you are raising your arm above the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, quickly take another from the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And continue to apply them one after the other until the wound is healed; and be careful not to burn the nerve, and let no further harm come to the patient; and know that when the blood flow from the artery cuts off, it cannot be well healed, especially if the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have mentioned: either by cautery, or extraction when it has not been treated, or tightly wrapping with strong thread, or applying medicines that have the power to stop the bleeding; and bind it and hold it firmly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever eases the pain by tightly binding the patient with cloths or placing hot objects on him, or other similar things, does not benefit but rather makes it worse.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to someone who does not have any suitable medicine, he should put his two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press firmly until the pain subsides from the wound and the vein; and do not move it, but apply cold water often as it becomes very cold until the blood is frozen and thick and numb; and prepare remedies in advance for what he needs cautery and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	We begin the second book of surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about every illness in which it is necessary to use fire cautery or burning medicine, along with the applications and causes and instruments and shapes of cauterization; I placed that chapter on the most important parts up to this point, and now I will proceed to this chapter by the same path so that you may find it more easily than if you were to search for it elsewhere.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, before I begin, it is necessary for you to know that this chapter involves more risk and danger than the first one on cauterization; therefore, greater care is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	Because many ways of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	if they come from such who were so afflicted with their illness that they died shortly due to the severity of what they found in their illness and the magnitude of their suffering; and of these one should be afraid.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And there are those who give you their attention and say: "Wait, I am blinded"; and the disease is terrible.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	You should not give your consent to those who come to you with such methods, but place greater emphasis on your honor than on their self-interest, and act prudently, not foolishly, regarding what you are certain of, and what you can safely acquire; use prophecy and guidance in treating your patients, so that health may be restored; this will help you gain a good reputation, glory, and lasting fame.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear child, our lords grant you good understanding and integrity, and if you seek the holy inspiration from his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I have ordered this chapter for you, in devising by chapters, according to what is before or the chapter of cautery that I have devised from the head down to the feet, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	chief filled with water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	You know that this disease comes very often in children at birth, and when the child's head is too tightly stretched, no one knows the reason why it happens.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease except in children, and to all those that I have seen, death hastens; and for this reason, I think it is better to leave the work in parts for treatment.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw children whose joints were filled with water, and the head swelled each day so that it could not be supported; and the moisture was so great that it became a wound, gathered beneath the bone on the inside, between the heart and the bone; and the work is such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, so you make a wide cut through the head; and it should be as long as necessary for the moisture to flow out; and see here the form of the spatum (instrument):
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess larger, then make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the openings of each side of the head widely gaping, and there is a sharp, strong discharge when you press it with your hand inside, and it does not return, then you must make three cuts in the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture deeply.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After loosening the cracks in bandages and powders, and applying wine and oil, leave it thus for up to five days; then remove it, and treat the wound with bandages and compresses, and continue to stretch the limb equally, and give the patient dry meat from a bag of moisture until the member is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another method of incision is that you observe or measure the size of the abscess and the alignment of the water; for it never appears in front, nor behind, nor on the right, nor on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Measure then the abscess and the fullness of the water, and cut according to your ability; and beware not to block the artery; and quickly let out the blood, so that the patient does not die from slow bleeding and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of the flame cautery, 
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When a person has a disease called "cataract" either in one eye or both, and the disease is old, and medicinal treatment does not help, then the final remedy is cautery to close the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you see the patient turn their head back, rub the affected area with a rough cloth until the arteries open, then gently pull the skin away from the patient's body, checking where the vein is located, and ensuring the lines of the tendons are behind the ears and properly exposed. Then mark the lines of the tendons, and cauterize both using a sharp instrument, going deep into the flesh, making sure to do this across a wide area on top of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, turn the spatula under the artery and cut through the cloth above, cutting as well as it needs to go through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, it bleeds continuously from above.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open by touching, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of space of three fingers, then tie it with a thread and make it go up to the bone; and what amount of blood should be put inside is six parts, or perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can withstand and the flow of the artery. Then examine the wound: if it remains on the bone without pus, cut and tie the wound and apply treatment until it heals.
de emigrainne	from migraine headache
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migraine comes with catarrh, due to moisture in the eyes and sockets, and ancient exhaustion and similar conditions, and all medical treatments do not help, then we must drain the arteries of the eyes and apply heat, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extracting them is that the patient pulls out the hairs from their temples, and locates the artery which opens in the temple, as it opens well with its beating, and is very deep that no one who is not expert can reach it; and if it is reached, then the patient gently extracts a small piece of cloth, then rubs the area with a coarse cloth, and applies hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula with this shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	then scrape the skin gently until you reach the artery, then hold it with pincers and separate the threads that bind each part; if the artery is thin, turn it at the tip of the hook, then cut off that piece according to the quantity of two joints.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, it will not heal completely without pain at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out the blood from the veins of six, until three; and if the artery is large, it is necessary to tie it with two pieces of strong silk thread so that pus does not come before the wound heals, and no complications arise; then cut off the excess between the two threads at that very moment, and if you see fit, cauterize the wound with a cutting instrument until the joints are cut; this is the moving part, if the patient has no fever and is of hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cautery is aid to finish moisture: therefore it is of greater aid against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries, one should fill the space with thick cotton and place several well-made bandages; and when they are removed, take care to apply dry medicines that create heat, and bandages, as long as the wound is clean; and if the artery bleeds heavily while you work, hasten to stop it with cautery, or use vitriol and press with your hand so that the wound is cleansed; and if you do not have this at hand, place snow on the wound until the bleeding stops, and then apply cold water as needed, and pull as is appropriate; and what is more mobile and lighter in the extraction of the artery is to cauterize the vein with this cautery cutting from both sides, but the cuts should be well spaced to retain heat for a longer time.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too tight, they hold less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have between the two blades a considerable space, and then, when you have sealed the two eyes, place the hot iron until it reaches the bone, and open the vein in two places; and they should be spaced apart between the two joints, because this cautery is not properly joined everywhere; and this is the form of the cauterization:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes descend into the veins that are on top of the head, and no medicine helps, you see the face of the patient contort, feeling as if from a chill, and the skin becomes cold and moist so that the hairs of the eyelids fall out, and the eyelids become scorched by the heat of the tears, then this cure is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called it the "old cure," and for the patient with this condition, you should pluck the hairs from the forehead, then make three incisions on the forehead evenly according to its length; one incision is as if it goes all the way down to the nose, and the others are two on each side of the forehead below the eyelids, taking care not to cut into the arteries that are on either side of the eyelids. And keep your hand away from the continuation of the jawbones, making each wound about three times across. And have a piece of sponge and cloth to wipe off the blood, then use the sharp spatula part as shown:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is made on the temple down to the second incision; and scrape all the heart that lies between the two openings to all the satisfaction that is above the bone, then make another from the middle incision down to the other second, and then extract this spatule.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you insert the instrument called "cultelei" into the first opening, and it is very sharp on one side and soft on the other, this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	and place the sharp side towards the opposite direction of the heart, and the soft side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle opening.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the veins that descend from the neck to the last, until the incision reaches the heart; then make another cut in the middle, reaching to the other side. Then extract the blood evenly and press the wound to remove it; place a piece of dry cotton in each cut and cover them with moist cloth soaked in wine, oil, and ash, and ensure that no abscesses form. On the third day, loosen the bandage and administer a strong infusion of water, then apply basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other remedies to cure wounds, until he is healed.
dou reume des eulz	when the veins return to their original state.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	If any catarrh comes that is accustomed to affecting the eyes, and you see them red and small, weakening sight, and burning papers; and hair falls out, and it feels as if there is a sharp pain in the head, and the patient sneezes, then know from these symptoms that this matter and catarrh do not come from only one cause, but rather from many veins, and the cure for it lies in addressing those.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And instruct the patient to press their forehead, then make a deep cut between the eyes, and another one wide enough to insert a finger.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	Starting from the cut on the left temple to the right temple, make an incision reaching the bone; move your hand away from the nerve of the temples that moves with blinking; when the bone is exposed, wipe all blood with a sponge, and then separate the two edges of the cut and place old cotton on it; then cover it with moistened linen cloths; afterward, wrap damp cloth soaked in wine and oil over it, and keep it from becoming infected. When the bone is healed, it is important to rub the bone gently until new tissue begins to form, then apply drying substances that prevent infection.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of wheatflower and three parts of chalk, mix them into a plaster; and apply it to these wounds to draw out evil by all means.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	ear infection
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Anything that causes an ear infection is one of the four things: grains, animals, mineral stones, or similar objects; seeds like beans, peas, or other such things; or anything flowing and moist like water and mud.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When anything that is not shaped to fit the ear, like a stone or other object, enters the ear and does not grow in the ear, it should be exposed to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see a stone, and it exudes any drop of violet oil or oil of myrrh, then it is ready for extraction; and it causes clearing of the nostrils, and stops up the nostrils when sneezing occurs, and places pieces of cloth or wool inside the ear, and pulls the ear towards the top.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times this treatment causes fever; and if it does not cause fever, then it is ready for extraction with delicate pincers, the shape of which is as follows:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out with the pincers, that is good; if not, it is ready for extraction with a very fine, small hook; and if it still does not jump out, make a chain of iron and press the top of the chain or any hole in the ear firmly, and fill it with some wax so that the air cannot enter with the chain; then treat it carefully, because many times this causes fever as we have said; and if it doesn't work in this way, take a lot of care in doing it, and use a pointed instrument if necessary, and put some cotton inside; then press the clot on the stone or any object, and extract it.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not depart from all the things that we have said, hurry to split the ear in such a way that the abscess hardens and the spasm subsides; and the manner of the incision is as follows: first make the patient with the cephalics healthy, extract the blood according to its strength, then place the patient between your hands and return the ear to its original position, making a small incision at the base of the ear where the fat or tissue is attached; let the incision be like a crescent moon until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck it into your mouth; and the cure as long as it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if there are grains present and they swell, then perform extraction; but if it cannot be extracted, then apply a delicate spatula according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and so forget the incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not attempt this if you think the grain is moist from earwax, having made many attempts; then extract it with subtle pincers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case that a chunk is extracted from the ear, it is advisable for the patient to use frequent sneezing and fill the ear with fine cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And lay bandages on that same ear, whether the chunk is inside or out.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If she jumps for this reason, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If the bone does not come out, take many thin pieces according to the length of your thumb and lightly heat them over fire; then insert the patient into an opening or perforation in their ear, and try from another side, and strike with another piece on the piece inside the ear; continue this process of piece upon piece until the blood has completely drained out, and thus it will come out entirely; and if you see fit, take a thin wire, insert one end into the ear, and heat the other gently over fire until the thinner wire is burnt; then make additional incisions with other wires until the blood drains completely, as we have said before.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	During the extraction of an animal, if it is small-sized, like a bug or something similar, treat it as we have said in the previous section; but if it is large, one must use pincers for its removal; and this is the easiest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	When dealing with worms that have infested the ears, if you treat it as we have said in the previous section and the treatment of distillations, but the cure is ineffective, you should examine the ear under sunlight. If there are no visible worms, use fine pincers to remove them; if they still cannot be seen, take a stick and carefully extract them using the shape where they are located.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it should be narrow from below and wide from above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And then apply the most subtle suction in the ear according to the amount of suffering of the patient, drawing out all the air from the eardrum; do this often until all the pain disappears.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not come out, obstruct the eardrum with cotton as I have mentioned before; and if they do not protrude as we said, administer distillations that the ancients have tried in treating worms, and you will find them detailed in the section on distillations; and distil your oils and medicines into the ear using all these instruments, forming them as you see fit.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And take a fine blade of silver or steel, sharp at the small openings, and over them for distillation; and to press within the distillation with a well-made brass instrument, and if you see fit, take a razor and wrap it tightly around the tip with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever you wish from your medicines into the jar, and let the jar be in the ear; then insert the razor entirely into the cotton and press your finger firmly until the oil is distilled or slightly heated from the ear; and let the patient smell it, and make sure the distillation is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	ear candling
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born with any perforation in their ears; and the same thing happens to adults due to a blow or an arrow entering the ear, and this obstruction never fully closes in the ear unless one can see it; and sometimes the perforation becomes closed, but not completely.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	When the obstruction fully closes, if one cannot see it, it is a matter of poor healing in various ways, and in this case, you should place the patient's ear towards the sun; and look inside. If you see the inflation clearly, you will see that this is due to the swelling and shape of its contents.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And make cuts and incisions all around, front and back, so that the ear is not damaged; if the pain is from a wound or a bone in the ear, hold it with fine pincers and gently pull until the whole bone is extracted.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	If the incision is deep in the ear, take a fine and sharp razor, heat it slightly over the fire, and then apply it to the wound in the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the incision causing great pain in the ear, make a slight perforation, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then insert into the ear a plug according to the width of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Keep the bandage on as long as the wound is fresh, or take a cloth and moisten it in rosewater, and sprinkle vitriol powder on it; and if you notice the ear is swollen, it is necessary to remove the bandage and replace it with another moistened cloth in cerate made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then treat it as long as it is clean.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the onset of swelling occurs, immerse a sponge and wrap it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments to remove the swelling caused by distillations.
de la char des papieres	Of the work of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Always know that when papers come in moist and dry, it is necessary to extend them with tongs and pincers, taking care to cut off a piece of spatula from their roots; then place the crushed glass over them.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if, after peeling, the cautery is performed with a delicate lenticular cautery, and the cauterizer after the incision moves; and often they repair themselves, since nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not grow back.
de la gresle	from the frost
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times come to paper certain things that seem greasy in their form and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "grandine," which is a gathering of great moisture on top and bottom of the paper; the work is as follows: take care if the grandine becomes silent from one side or the other, and it is a light thing to know; then make them wide, scrape gently from each part, and take hold with pincers, and cut.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper slightly, it does not harm the patient; and if the split is great, if the gathering has a stitch, treat it as long as it remains healthy; and if it is small, do not make much effort, because the stitches will soon return and cause trouble.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the pain is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper and the pain will grasp it with a squeeze, and the head and neck press from both sides; but if the paper is moved by incision, it causes no harm; and when the pain is cut away, wash it with salt water and heal the place that caused it until the patient is cured.
de la graisse des eulz	from the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Xerophthalmia is a fat that is embedded in the layers of paper-like skin over the eyes, and it occurs more often in children than in adults, causing great pain to their eyes. It leads to cataracts forming in the morning, preventing them from bearing the light of the sun because tears flow constantly. Due to this, they keep their eyes closed at night and sleep on them, and the skin beneath their eyebrows becomes moist from the tears, appearing swollen and covered with a film of fat that opens up in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the joint with your fingers and feel the pain between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of performing this procedure is that the patient places his head in a healthy position, then takes a linen cloth and prepares a tent-like structure according to the amount of blood from each part, placing it on top; and presses with his fingers on both sides so that the blood collects within the circular area, making a groove with a sharp spatula, no wider than the wound made in a vein, and makes the skin completely smooth; and in various ways, more blood may come out from the groove, forming like a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Take therefore a whole piece of cloth between your fingers over the wound, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread; and be careful not to press into the fissure, do not go all the way to the oil, or you will tear it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the fissure does not open at first, slightly widen it until it opens; then extract as we have said, and apply moist cloth in hot water, and place on the wound, and twist gently.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And for such men who grind and put on anything to corrupt the moisture that is lingering.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it as long as it is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it turns to a hot abscess, treat the wound with soothing remedies as long as it is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow abnormally on paper (or perhaps the skin), they become irritated, causing as much harm as those that are by nature, and lead to conditions like tears in the paper (or skin) and molting, and white spots; this is due to the destruction of the hair follicles. The cure is through four methods: cauterization with fire, ague medicine according to the chapter on cautery, or by incision and stitching, or using bands, as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You should place the sick person's head in your healthy hand, then turn the paper from oil on your left hand; if it turns, that is good; if not, push an needle through all the threads above; and take care to cut the hairs at the edge of the paper or where they grow out, cutting them all along the entire paper, and turn it against the razor. Then make a cut in the paper, beneath the adjusted hairs, from the large tear to the small one; then extract the thread, and place beneath the paper a small piece of cotton and cloth, and sign on the paper a figure of a cross, as if from a sprig of myrtle, and nevertheless, it is important that the figure be according to the quantity you lift with the paper, which is measured in all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if you take a sharp knife and cut a great quantity of paper according to how soft it is; then make a small slit along all two lines that you have marked, and begin with a large tear from the corner to the edge, making one cut in each of the two angles, then remove the flesh entirely; join the two edges with a single stitch using fine wool thread, and dry the blood, wiping away any surplus thread on both sides with anything sticky. If this is not done, leave the stitches and thread for three or four days, then treat the wound without stitching using drying and constricting substances, because the paper revives when the wound heals and the stitching holds it together, but the stitch moves (as the ancients say), which causes pain; and if in another way: you mark the paper with a shape similar to the seal of myrrh, as we have described, at three points according to the form shown here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut off what overcomes the small forces equally according to the shape that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the pincers, and the matter is not equal, take a needle with thread, and tie it around the edge; then take another thread beneath the large wound, and the third thread beneath the small one, and bind them equally between your fingers; then gently lower your hand equally, and remove all the skin you have marked, as we have said; then sew together the two edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed; and if an abscess forms at your incision, soothe it with soot or similar soothing remedies; and sometimes the paper-like skin becomes detached. It is necessary to use what we have said about the incision; but stitching in both directions is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment for the cramp (or spasm) is as follows: and it is that you turn the paper and make it inside according to what I have said, then make two strips of it by art, also thin and long like the paper and wide enough with a spatula; hold both parts where you hold the limbs; then assemble them gently on top of the paper from the oil, pull the two strips from the formed parts; leave it like this for several days, and the muscle that is restrained will die, shrivel, and waste away until it disappears.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is delayed and the muscles have strength, then treat it while they are healthy; and when the wound is healed, and if lifting the paper does not cause any hair to grow back, then make the strips according to this figure and this amount of length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work involves inserting a fine needle and threading it with soft, thin silk thread; then gathering the fragments together and tying them gently, making the length of the threads one palm's length. Next, arrange another thin silk thread swiftly and tie the ends loosely. Place the patient's head in your hand, and let the operation be revealed as it is a delicate one. Because the needle should pierce the skin just below the root of the hair, adjusting it to the natural skin, until you pull the thread from above the hair. Then extract the hair all the way up to the surface of the paper with the silk thread, and if there are one or two or three or more hairs, insert your hand until the hairs are completely detached from the paper along with the natural skin.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hair does not come out with the pull, you will pull the hunt out by the root along the entire thread that you have ordered, until the hunt is completely pulled out from the opening and you see it through the eye of the needle; then you will pull the hunt and the thread, and close the eye and leave it for one or two days, until the hair grows back in its place and the scar heals. And if the hairs are small, accompany them with a long hair from a natural horse, and raise them along with the one you leave, until they become elongated and then remove them.
de la porriture de l’oil	regarding the impurities of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this illness called "aleacrati" or putrefaction comes upon the body, it can be in two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it occurs suddenly from wounds, or cutting, or cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the manner of performing this operation is that you open the wound, separate the edges, and place linen strips inside, binding them until the wound is healed; and it does not suit that you use in the treatment of it things that dry and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the illness returns worse than before; but it does involve softening things, such as fenugreek; and rosewater of water or linseed cooked, and oil of garlic melted in either eye, and wraps around a bandage, and treats it thusly.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the true value of your cure lies in being careful that it does not adhere to the shape it once was; and this work that we have mentioned is not only a remedy for this illness, but prevents it from returning to its previous form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the matter that comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This illness, which is dislocation, is truly called "axacrati," it is both natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wounds, incisions, cauterization, and similar things; and the outcome of this chapter is such that if you prick a needle into it, the thread doubles up, and you insert it into the flesh, piercing from the left eyelid to the right, so that the thread passes through both sides of the eye socket; then the socket becomes closed over the entire needle, and the cover is wide at the spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper returns according to what is necessary, that is good; but if not, take a razor and insert it into the fissure, turn the paper, and make two cuts on either side inside the paper; and let the edges of these two cuts form two angles of the incision you have made, so that when they are brought together, the shape resembles a letter with no "griesche" (a medieval writing error); then remove the paper, according to how much its edges are aligned, from the side facing the flesh, and adjust the two irregular parts, stitching them with a thread of wool; finally, apply the treatments we have mentioned regarding mollifying medications and bandages until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the illness arises from cutting or stitching or cauterization, then you should make an even cut beneath the skin and between the hair follicles, following what has been said above; then separate the two halves of a single cloth, as I have mentioned; and one must perform the work according to the nature of the illness, for it varies greatly in form, and skilled physicians devise various means to restore its natural shape; and the patients themselves, according to what they need for treatment and instruments, in different dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	The phrase "dou soudement de la papiere" does not have a clear or direct
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suture is done in the following way that the paper above is smooth with white oil, and cannot move nor perform its natural functions, then you must insert the tip of a razor under the paper and lift it gently; stretch it like pincers until you remove what is sharp on the delicate spatula, not too harsh or too shallow, so that the patient does not suffer from a spatula that is too harsh or bleeds oil; make your incision lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and all of it heals, making no salty water in the oil, nor do you raise it with sour water, nor use collyria; then place between the paper and the oil a cloth of linen, and on top of the oil lay moist wool in abundance; after the third day, continue to use collyria and things that heal until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	from the nail of the finger
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	You know that the nail has two manners: it is nervous and resembles a hard, smooth stone, and another which is not nervous but resembles white, frozen moisture, that when you touch it with iron and care for it as if with pincers, no one can; and both resemble beginning towards the great toe, and grow little by little until they cover the entire sight, all the light, and the movement of the finger.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	The method of incision is as follows: the patient places his head in a healthy position, then opens the fingers; holds a piece of paper in their hand, then curls the nail like a small pincers and extends it upwards; takes an needle, threads it with a horsehair, or a goat hair, or cowhair, and ties a strong thread to it; doubles the tip of the needle slightly and pierces it through the nail, all the way to the thread, and binds the nail with the thread, extending it upwards; then shaves off all the hair around the nail base, close to the cuticle, using a very fine spatula, and leaves the natural skin or cuticle intact so that by the incision, no tears come to the habitually moistened skin; and never extends the nail beyond the joint only, and with thread as we have said; then it is shaved off, leaving all the soft tissue around it, which is the shape:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And ensure that the scalpel does not touch and tear the flesh, and that the cut is not pierced; then, after making the incision, drop a little bit of crushed silk into the oil, and make a collar of litargyre (a type of metal), and leave it until the next day; then treat it as it should be until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	If the nail is not nerve-related and you cannot insert the needle, or the nails do not enter, this condition often requires treatment with medications; as I have mentioned in the previous section, if you see it covered with oil on the patient's skin, take a light scalpel according to this form.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And remove the nail from above gently, and if you see that it is softening little by little and the reason rushes, let it drip from your mouth into a collar made of collyrium (a medicated eye drop) prepared with lithargyrum and a red string, and close the eye until the next day; then repeat the other work according to this same procedure, until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing in the eye contradicts you, such as a hot abscess, then apply it and treat the hot abscess first until it is healed, and then continue with the work as before, until it is completely cured.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh causes harm in the eye through great damage, suspending it at the corner and cutting off a part but not all, so that tears do not come; then a red liquid distills into the eye which is made from lithargyrum.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that is born on the iris
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Some men are born without any red flesh on the iris, covering it and pressing it against the whites, resembling a pink rose petal; and this is so harmful that the patient must place their head in a healthy position, then open the eyes, and gently pull all the flesh attached to the eye with suitable instruments, and support it strongly. Then cut off the first piece of flesh, shaving it all down to the edge until the end, taking care not to irritate the eye during the operation; and use the spatumile for incisions, as we have said for nail cutting and small forces to remove the sebaceous matter, just as the shape demonstrates after this chapter. Once the incision is complete and all the flesh removed, apply either ground glass or any corrosive medicine that distills the red liquid, and place a piece of cotton cloth over the hot aperture with an egg white to ensure it stays warm; if nothing remains and the condition seems severe, leave the oil and treat the hot aperture with soothing remedies; then return to your task as long as it is healthy, and so you perform all similar operations.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nonetheless, you must pay attention to the treatment of each weak oil along the natural path; and on the accidental path, through force of iron; and do not put your hand into any of these works as long as you see that this member suffers from this work.
des voines des eulz	veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	These are the red veins that are covered over the eye, they take away from the sight's work and weaken the eye every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Skill is therefore in the first place that you look at the eye, where it is inflamed, swollen, and there is no other disease outside of the inflammation; then take these steps: instruct the patient to place their head in your healthy hand, then suspend these veins throughout the entire circle according to your knowledge, and make the incisions delicate and double according to this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And there should be two incisions made by degrees in the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then, you must gently pull these veins, wiping away the blood hour after hour, until you remove them completely from the flesh; be careful not to pierce the oil with the edges of the spatulas, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, being very zealous in your task so that you do not stop until the veins are gone. And when you have done this, distil green and red cologne into the oil to corrupt what is left behind from the blood.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	If you are unable to remove all of them in that hour, make a poultice over the oil with soothing things for the pain of the joints, and leave it for no more than a day until the pain is eased and the hot abscess is assured, then begin again according to this manner as long as it is healed; and this is the form of the veins:
de la fistule de l’oil	From the fistula of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	He considers them "fistulas": when you treat it with cautery and strong medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, there is an infection within that you must drain from the abscess where it is located, removing all moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and blackness, take all the instruments mentioned here and shape them; it is called the "sharp end", and it should be made from iron from tip to root, and pointed like a limet in this present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place the corrupt bone back in its position, then twist it between your fingers and press with your hand until you feel that the corruption is gone; do this several times, then return the joint to its normal position using drying medications.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the joints are fused and it seems that the bowel is also fused and remains in that state for 40 days without renewal or abscess formation, and no adverse events occur, then it is healed; if not, there is another way to reopen the fistula through a cut according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron and medicines, and when it is uncovered, take care that the iron has three angles, and the blade should be thinned as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the clean bone of the arm, and remove your hand from the blood, then return to all the rest until it pierces through the bone and the patient feels pain because the veins are closed if he keeps his hand on his nipple; and afterwards, return the limb to dry medicine as I have taught you, and when the charring and hardening of the bones has occurred, check for improvement at the nipple; then it is a lighter matter for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the opening of the vein
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the veins are completely open and do not cause disturbance to the nipple or any reduction in strength, it is necessary that you keep the patient; then apply a poultice of mullein, aloe, frankincense, and sarcocolla, and then squeeze out the oil, and apply the poultice on bandages and cloth; and the manner of the cloth should be to fasten enough soft cloths in threes upon each other, and then place one over another according to the need of the vein; then squeeze it from above with a firm bandage, and repeat the application of the poultices for sucking without causing injury; then remove the poultices and leave the oil squeezed for a day and night, and if it becomes softer, it is good; if not, continue the poultice, cloth, bandage, and sucking until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	the sudden rupture of a veil
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the veil, it opens and lets out little pieces like grains of resin, which is a sight to behold. If you see this, take action immediately. Insert an aiguille (needle) at the base of the affected area, just below where it joins the upper part, then insert another needle where there is a double thread in the lower part. Pierce through and leave the first needle in place. Cut the double-threaded section and wrap some clean, moist cloth around it, tightening it well. Remove the needle and apply more medicated oil as needed until the wound heals. Keep the veil covering the wound on all sides with a circular piece of cloth until it has healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the joint appears well-formed, pierce it with a fine instrument that comes through the oil, remove the white moisture and lower the limb, and it will enter again soon after; then extract it as much as it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the bow of the oil (or, possibly, "from the source/origin of the oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called "alcunnati" is not merely from the bow gathered in the oil, resembling severe descending, but it is not severe; and the manner of the appearance of the work is such that you make the patient sit on a seat equipped and straight, then take the head between your hands from two sides, and move it until you see the bow come above your limbs; then insert it firmly, and let the light neither descend nor disappear, and have the patients look at things as they usually do; if it does not subside, know that it is severe, and if the bow's descent is not equipped as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you let the patient rest in your care, then take the delicate spatula and make incisions in the thick skin of the conjunctiva with the edge, until the bowel is exposed; and once it is out, drip hot clear water mixed with honey or hot water with fennel seeds boiled and mixed with honey, and treat it with another remedy as long as it is healthy.
des aigues de l’oil	des aiges de l'oil" translates to "from the waters of oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have similar waters in division, and what needs to be pierced; do so according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	You should place the patient's hands in yours, one crossed over the other, away from direct sunlight, and bind them tightly with healthy oil; then take the instrument called "almagda" in your right hand if the patient's thumbs are on the left, or your left hand if their thumbs are on the right; then insert the tip of the instrument under the skin along the thickest part of the olive branch towards the inner corner of the eye, and twist the instrument called "almagda" firmly, and move your hand until it pierces through the skin in the corner of the eye, and feel that the almagda reaches the empty space; and you should measure the length of the almagda to be equal to the exact measurement of the space from the plum to the end of the darkness; this is the olive's crown. You will see the bone on the paper due to the clarity of the horny skin, then place the instrument up to where the water is, and press it through one way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he feels the pain descending now, if he sees the patient before him and the instrument in his hand.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting for a little while, then feel the pain returning along the second path, apply force with the instrument, and if it is deeply embedded and does not rise up, gently extract it by turning your hand back and forth; then immerse again in warm water for some time.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then apply hot oil or any other moist oil (rosin and wax in abundance), and wrap it with clean oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, place a warm compress with plenty of heat.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the plug cannot enter the oil due to its hardness, as there are some people with too hard of joints, it is necessary that you press the instrument called "alberit," from which this shape is:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Then pierce only the conjunctive tissue gently, and do not go too deep, but make the opening subtle, then insert the plug as we have said; and at the completion of the work, prepare the patient for sleep with a comfortable position, on his back in a dark place, and restrict all movements, applying light foods, and do not let him move his head to the right or left, and tie him according to his condition for three days. Then release him in the same dark room, test his vision, and make him see nothing, and then apply the bandage again for seven days; and it is not appropriate that you perform this at the time of treatment or after incision now, but rather ease him, because sharp pain rises suddenly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	If an abscess forms, you should open it on the seventh day and apply the remedies that soothe the abscess; when it is soothed, release the pus and place a cloth over its face to cover for some time, and then return it to that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	Then leave the house little by little and let it heal in stages; and know that no disciples should interfere with this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from Iran who told us that in their peaceful land, they make an extract from a certain plant that sucks out water, but I never saw anyone doing this in our land, nor do I read about it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of almand, for he who does not know them will see them, and they should be pure gold.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the tip of this same instrument be very fine, and the rear part at a 90-degree angle.
de la char sor le neis	of the wound on the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	No wounds should ever be allowed to heal in an awkward position, which can result in them resembling snakes due to the pressure; and if there are any such wounds with beautiful flecked or smooth healing, they will turn into bones of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In this case where the pain is chronic and not acute, you should place the patient between your hands facing the sun; open their nostrils, pour the medicine into those which are blocked, and treat them forcefully; then hold what you can sustain with a delicate, thin instrument from one side, as long as you know that part is completely healed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains anything that cannot be covered, open it with all the delicate, light instruments until nothing is left; and without delay, perform the operation as necessary; and for abscesses of a malign nature, hurry and cauterize until the pain is completely alleviated and all parts are healed, then apply heat or cold (or wine).
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If he opens his mouth and moisture comes out to the tongue, knowing it is healthy; and if moisture does not come out as it should, knowing there is something stuck in the bone above, preventing the instruments from cutting, then you must push a thick flax thread inside his teeth with your hands, leaving some space between each tooth, and place the patient's foot in a warm position, squeezing it gently until the moisture comes out through the teeth into the mouth; and children often do this at school, and it is a light task for whoever wants to do it. Then hold the jaw coming through the mouth with one hand, and the other jaw coming through the nose with the other hand, following each other as we who are in thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do as much as you know to clean the corrupted wound, then treat the child, wipe away the blood, and apply Egyptian ointment, and put it back on the wound as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments have corroded all that is left of the corruption; then place a bandage on the wound for no more than a day, while it heals, and if there is a need for dry medicines, use them; this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, with which one distills oils and medicines into the wound.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be of silver or gold, resembling an open lamp, like a pipe, and direct it thus; if you see, make a closed pipe, and let the tools be full to purge the head; and have many at hand for the head to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	Of the pain near the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times, near the nose, there appears a disease called "telul", which swells and grows very large, making it a sight to behold; therefore, it is necessary that you remove it at the beginning, and clean out the bone entirely, then apply heat or the burning medicine; and if you delay removing it until it becomes large, be careful not to touch it with iron, for it is an abscessed joint, and when you remove it, great harm can come to the patient. If the abscess is soft, without much redness or poor sensation, then remove it carefully, but if it is firm, red, and painful, do not attempt to remove it, as it may cause further damage. The patient should be drained of pus and the joint treated with drying and restraining methods.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	as long as the nails are cut and smoothed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	You know that when the continuation of a cartilage structure is damaged, it benefits no one.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore necessary to do the following when this occurs to no one, if you consider that the wound is fresh and filled with blood; then adjust the two lips with a single stitch, and treat it until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated on both sides, it is necessary to scrape all parts of their core while they are healing, then bring the two lips together with a single stitch, tighten them, and apply dragon's blood powder, and burnt incense; and place over the powders a piece of strong or other adhesive plaster, and leave it until it sticks by itself, then treat with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of sewing is such that you join the fabric together: either with needles, as we have said in sewing the belly; or with thread, as I have made known to you.
des apostemes des levres	abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At home, there are often hard abscesses in the lips, resembling small grains, both smaller and larger; then you must turn the lips and cut each one open, taking them as pincers and scraping each part; then use a hot compress after the vitriol incision, until the wound is stained; then apply cold from an ice pack, and cure the wound with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	from the disease of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often, a disease of the gums, which the ancients called "albulus," occurs; it is necessary that you hold it with pincers and cut off the root, allowing the bowel or abscess to drain; then apply powdered vitriol or other drying and constricting powders; and if the gum returns after the incision, this happens again and again, sometimes even after cauterization; if it does not return after cauterization, these are the shapes of the instruments used for cutting.
des sordens	from the obstructions
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	No teeth are ever aligned at the top of the jaw, inside the mouth between the gums, which are ugly and rough; and no tooth is black and yellow and decayed until corruption reaches the gums, and they stink. It is necessary that you make the patient hold still between your hands, and his teeth should be in your lap, and clean out the teeth or gums that are visible, as long as nothing remains; and so do with black, green, jaundice, and other types until they are clean. If what is at the root of the problem is removed in the first attempt, it's good; if not, repeat the process on the second and third day, until everything is clean. Be aware that teeth require various instruments to clean them, according to what the work shows, because the tools used to remove teeth have different shapes than those used between teeth. These shapes and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	You should take care when treating a toothache that you do not delay drawing it out as much as possible, for no one should ever make an excuse for not doing so, as it is a very precious substance.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then, when the patient is constrained from drawing out the tooth, it is important that you are certain about the tooth's position.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the patient pleads for relief, thinking that the tooth is infected, and has it drawn out; but this does not relieve the pain until the infection is extracted, as we have learned with these patients; and when you are certain about the painful tooth, you should scrape around the tooth with a sharp spatula to protect the gums from all sides; then use pliers to move it gradually in small increments, ensuring they are well-positioned, and then firmly hold them; place the patient's chin between your knees, holding the tooth firmly so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out, take none of these instruments and push it gently from each side, and move it as you have done before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is broken and missing, it is necessary to fill the empty space with cloth, either in the socket or the gap; and if you tighten it gently with pliers, so that it does not break upon extraction; and it is very important to work skillfully around the gums to remove the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be very careful not to break it, and if a part breaks off, return the fragment to the patient, who will experience greater pain due to the evil of the root than at first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And be wary that you do not act as do the ignorant healers, who in their haste and boldness break the bones at every turn, and do not take heed of what we have said; but they bring on great illness through their chatter, or because of the bones they break, as we often see; and when the bone is dislocated, wash it with wine or oil and silk; and the bleeding that ensues, which often happens, apply vitriol poultice; and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, with which to mute the bone first, should be long and thick-handled, not bending when you pull out the tooth; and these are their shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be strong members so that they do not bend when pulled, and well-made of iron, and toothed for proper movement.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains stuck when pulled, it is necessary to place a moist cotton ball or butter on it for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the eyes are moistened, then apply the pliers known as "algefri", which make the teeth look like they are being cared for; and they should be made inside just like a file and this is their shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to emerge from these claws, then it is necessary that you uncover the flesh all around the root, and place the instrument called "alethal" (i.e., a plier), which has this form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And if it is very hard and does not break, and the root jumps out, that is good. If not, use all the instruments, whose forms are as follows:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses this instrument with two edges, its form is:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are used in the reasoning of teeth, and this instrument that resembles large pliers, whose shape is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	This instrument should be sturdy so it does not break, and be aware that many instruments for teeth exist; and also other instruments, which are not mentioned. The most skilled surgeons invent their own tools, according to the specific work and illness at hand, as there are many diverse diseases for which no instrument was created in the past. If one breaks or becomes useless due to a fracture or another issue, and he needs an instrument suitable for the task I have described, then he should use gestures to convey the shape:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And they should be large and well-holding to hold the bone, that it does not escape, but can hold and remove; and then return the limb to suitable medicines for this, and if there is decay in the bone, small or great, use all these instruments.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural shape of the body, and its form is ugly, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know if the tooth has grown after the original one and is not in its proper place, and cannot be filed or smoothed. Then extract it. And if it grows alongside the other tooth, take this instrument whose shape resembles a small beak, and made of sharp steel.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And take a small and sharp knife in both hands each day for the pain of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that it can be filed, file it from one side as its shape allows.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	It is also done like the filing of metal for making needles; file the tooth little by little with your hands every day gently, until it stops moving; then, in the end, with no rasp, the tooth is too sharp and it cuts the tongue, so you must file its roughness until it becomes even, so as not to cut or damage the tongue.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth hurts
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth aches, whether from impact or pulling, and the patient cannot bite down without pain, he should be treated with constricting medications, but this is ineffective. If it needs to be restrained, use a gold thread, for silver wire turns green and decays, but gold never changes; and ensure the thread is neither too thin nor too thick, according to the space between the teeth. If you need to align the teeth, take the thread and tie a double knot between the two healthy teeth, then place the gum tissue between the loose teeth, as many as there are, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then repeat the covering and gently but firmly pull until it does not move anymore; and ensure your plier is at the root of the aching tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then cut the bones with a pair of pliers, assemble them, and reconnect them between the healthy tooth, and place it so that the tongue does not bleed; and then leave it as tight as it can be until it heals, and if it loosens, the thread will unravel, so tighten it again from another thread; it should last for all its time, and this is the shape of the teeth and the arrangement of the two healthy molars, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth is extracted and replaced in its place, fresh one by one, as we have said; it should be done only by someone wise and patient, and never should the shape of a healthy bone tooth be made, and it is placed where the deficiency is, and tightened as we have said, and lasts for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	from cutting the tongue's ligament
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	No matter what, this is the ligament that comes from beneath the tongue, either by nature or accident; for instance, when a deep wound occurs; and the work involves opening the mouth of the patient with care, placing their head in your hand, and gently loosening the tongue; then cut the nervous ligament widely, as much as possible, so that the tongue is dislocated from its position, and if there is any hardness or resistance, and it's a sudden wound, use a hook and cut widely through that ligament; be careful not to cut too deep, for the artery located below; and once you've done this, lift the tongue using rosewater or oil, or cold water, then place a thin linen under the tongue; repeat this process each night until the patient's teeth no longer cling together.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the blood flow increases due to an injury, apply a poultice of vitriol to it; and if the pain decreases, cauterize it with a slow-burning cautery, which is good for this; then apply other remedies until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you see it is red, black, or hard, so the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it becomes pale, and there is moisture, drain it with an onion, and cut it with a fine spatula on both sides; and if the pain decreases in your work, apply a poultice of vitriol until it is stained, then return to your work until everything is treated; then lift the limb from rest and stretch it, and apply other remedies until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	From the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	No matter how often holes appear in the throat that are called "godath," and they are properly known as the two amandres, when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, be careful: these are difficult to diagnose with a small or pale color, so do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if they are red and the root is thick, do not touch them with iron, also to prevent the spread of pus; but leave it until it dies, and then you will remove it, or it would break on its own; and if they are of a white color again, and the root is thin, have an instrument ready to cover it, but first make sure that the abscess is cool and calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and keep his feet in a healthy position, open the mouth, and press the tongue down with the instrument between his hands, pressing it firmly against the entire tool, and use silver or fine gold, just like a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	You should not press the tongue against all of this instrument, and if you see the abscess, take the needle and thread it into the wound, pulling it out from above as much as possible; do not touch any part of the threads with your hands, then cut them with the instrument, forming a shape that looks like a hook; nevertheless, the head is bent, one side higher than the other, very sharp, and made of iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument at hand, if it is like pincers, then this is its form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	It should be carved on one side and smooth on the other. Once you have extracted one of the mandibles, extract the other in the same manner, and after the incision, rinse the wound with hot and cold water, and if blood flows, rinse it with water containing extracts from pomegranate peels or myrrh, or similar substances, until the blood is cleansed; then treat it while it is still fresh, and be aware that no other abscesses will form in the throat besides these two mandibles, so extract them just as you would the two mandibles.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was located inside her throat, namely a small abscess; and she had her throat tightly closed so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passageway, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained thus for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so swollen that it had forced two ribs through the two openings in the throat.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I then quickly inserted a needle into one of the openings, and drew it out through another, and squeezed a large portion of pus; then I repeated this on the other side, opening the throat and pressing the tongue; after inserting the needle into these abscesses, and draining some of the pus, only a little blood came out; so the passageway in the throat was opened for her to drink water and wine, and I continued to cut away at the abscess for a long time. The abscess returned again, and filled the space that I had emptied, becoming very large. Then I cauterized it inside the throat, after which it did not grow back; and from these efforts, I left only God as her healer.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the retina detaches from the eye, and it is inflated and distant, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is thin and round, it is called "retina".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the inflammation around the wound has subsided, and it is gentle, then you must press it; and that which is round and not distant; and it is bloody or of a dark color, then you should avoid incising it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the ill patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see this, according to the manner I have said, you should make the patient lie facing the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument of which we spoke above; then insert the pin in the wound, and pull it out, and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned for the incision of the two mandibles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you should not remove more than the excess beyond the natural limit; for if you do, it causes great pain to speech and movement, and after the incision, use what we mentioned for the incision of the two mandibles, and treat it until it is healthy.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient feels great pain, it is necessary that you use a tool for cauterizing the sensitive part.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the method of cauterization is very sharp.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient should place his head on a healthy surface, and then press the tongue against the instrument we mentioned in this chapter of cauterization, using it with sharp, but not excessive heat. The application is done according to this instrument's form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the physician hold a brush, as if it were a spoon, and place the instrument with all the medicine on the eye; have the patient lie on their side so that the saliva and mucus from their mouth absorb the medicine, preventing it from going down to the throat and causing discomfort. Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour until you see it calm and the pain from the medicine is eased. And if you notice, take cotton and wrap it around a tool, moisten the cotton with the medicine, and pass the instrument through the cotton into the socket, pressing it against the eye until the cotton sticks to the eye; do this several times until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry, and after three or four days, or five, if you need to repeat the cauterization, repeat it, wiping the medicine around the eye with cotton dipped in cold water, making gargles until the patient is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is safer than cautery, especially for incision; if it is performed with fumigation in this manner, take calament and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and similar herbs, and combine them all or any of them in a pot, and place it there, and boil it; and make sure the pot is well sealed with strong clay, and have a cheveit (a type of instrument) placed over it in this manner.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	It should be of silver or gold, and one of the joints should be pressed into the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the eye through the nose, until the eye becomes numb; then it often returns, as long as the eye dries out, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the hot abscess, as many things can happen; and do not perform this action except during the decline of the hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not available, take a cane and put inside the patient's mouth a piece of cold iron, so that it does not burn too hot; for the piece of iron does not allow the steam to weigh down the mouth, and it is a good remedy altogether safe.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Often a sore throat is caused by bone or a spine from a fish, or some other thing. Therefore, you must treat what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all your instruments until you see the object; and if it does not open and remains in the throat, you should make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps this will dislodge the object through vomiting. Sometimes patients swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a dry cracker, and then you should tie a thread to the sponge and pass it through; and when it reaches the throat, it will become stuck, and then you can pull it out forcefully. If it does not come out as we have said, take an instrument made of salt according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument be curved at the tip so that it can enter the throat more easily, and hold the head raised high; and beware not to touch the epiglottis, lest all of it come out, nor push the bone inside; and you must move the patient to insert the instrument, because it needs to be moved where the object is stuck; if it goes down, pull it out gently throughout the entire instrument until it comes out.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Never is the throat treated with medicine, as I said in the previous division, except with medicinal remedies; and if that does not help, then look at the throat of the patient in sunlight, and press the tongue with the instrument I told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the vein, take it with all its small hooks, or subtle pincers that are suited to it.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if the vein is not suitable, take a sharp knife and insert it into the throat of the patient, then press or lift the knife repeatedly on the vein until hot. Do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient becomes dehydrated every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it in until they swallow it, moving the hand often; and as soon as the vein senses the water, it closes.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not fall as we have said, and the patient inhales the foul smell from the smoke of the eye's treatment instrument, do this many times, for it will eventually fall without resistance.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	The method of fumigation is as follows: you need a pot with hot coals in it, and place a perforated cover over the pot with the treatment instrument inside; then pour your fumigation mixture, and have the patient put the tip of the cane in their mouth, seal their mouth, so that the smoke does not escape, but stays until it takes effect. The smoke will now begin to work, and if it does not fall, repeat the fumigation many times. Have the patient endure thirst, eat salty and bitter things, and do not drink water; then it will be necessary for him to cough up the phlegm through this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the wound, if it is possible to see, resembles curved pliers designed to enter the throat; and it looks like a hawk's beak, and has the roughness of stone, so that whatever it grasps, it cannot let go; and here you can see the shape.
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many appearances of abscesses are, according to what memory brings to mind in this book, and they vary in terms of perforation and incision; and there are two ways, one being in the same appearance, and from those that retain moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method is for the joints where they are within the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscess of the head is different from that of the base, and the abscess of the muscular limb is different from that which comes to joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if, for abscesses, one must not pierce the bowel until it is completely healed; and if for others it is necessary to pierce them when they are hardened, but they do not die according to their healing, like abscesses that are in the joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when an abscess comes from damaged joints, and it is left until it becomes gangrenous around, then the ligaments and nerves of the joint may be corrupted, which causes contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	If the abscess is in the main member and you delay piercing it until it becomes gangrenous, it will harm the principal member; if it is at the root, pierce it only when it is rotten; otherwise, do not pierce a healthy abscess, for fear that it spreads inside and becomes a fistula, and cannot heal completely.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you should know the time of perforation of the abscess which is killed according to completion, and this is when the pain is soothed, and the fever departs, and the pain and redness lessen, and the swelling in the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and you should make the perforation depend on the abscess' location, and where it opens; and the perforation should be long in the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and tendons and arteries, and everywhere equally, without any swelling.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, according to that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in a fatty part of the body, it is good to leave the incision open until it is completely healed through digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you perforate it too soon, the body retains the blood from it, and it is filled with much filth; and by chance, the lips harden and you deepen the wound within.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if an abscess is pierced at any place according to the thickness of the body, as needed by the limb.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you should treat small abscesses with small incisions; for large abscesses, with large incisions and many cuts according to the size of the abscess; and if such abscesses need to be drained, and covered; when they have become as big as a cloth and are swollen, then one should do it like they do with boils: and if they are split into three angles, or if they are treated similarly to the fuelle of myrtle, like abscesses from attackers; and if such require a round cut, other cuts, and similar treatments.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	For those who have no head, like a superficial sore abscess, you should pierce it thoroughly; and when the abscess is large and has gathered great pus, and you pierce it, do not drain all the pus at once, but some of it; then bandage the abscess until the next day, and then take nothing from it again; repeat this process many times, gradually, until all the pus has drained; especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or old, frail people.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For sometimes the patient experiences a sudden tremor due to the discharge from the bowels, which may cause the ill person's death, and you must not be alarmed.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have felt your abscess, if the wound is clean, and the abscess in the wound is small, then apply a bandage of linen or cotton; but if it is a large abscess with many openings, then put on each one a bandage so that they touch each other. And if you find in the abscess a piece of hard skin, and you have cleaned it around, then fill it with old cotton or shavings of dry flax without moisture, and bind it for three days; then remove it and treat the wound with care until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bloodletting occurs during your work, then administer cold water and ice, and moisten the compresses, and repeatedly apply them to the affected joint.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If bloodletting persists, apply countermeasures and treatment, and use the powders I mentioned in this book; if it is winter, and the joints or abscesses are very sensitive, then you should place wet compresses of wine and hot oil on them; and if they are in a state of inflammation, and the joint is fleshy, then put moistened compresses of water and cold oil, or wine and fresh oil, until the third day, as we have said; then drain the abscess and clean it and treat it as appropriate, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: for I have already told you how to proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and here is this chapter.
des soros	from the birds
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Or, there are small abscesses that come from the head, and they often resemble threads, just like the vesicles of a chicken, and they have many similar appearances.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	Some are thick and such that they contain moisture, just like veins; and if there are such that are hard and resistant to cutting, then there is no doubt that the arteries do not act contrarily.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work on the body is such that you should try all instruments called "entromissory", from which the form below comes, something it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	Because if it contains moisture, they make a hole from above down long.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is evacuated, it doesn't leave any skin, allowing the moistened skin to return; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment if available; if not, use water and string, and apply it to the wound, leaving it until the next day; this will correct what has lingered from the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then begin the treatment again, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know for certain that it does not remain at night; then dress the wound with suitable medicine until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	If the abscess persists and is large, follow this procedure: drain it from all sides, remove the flesh, and apply all your care to draw out the pus from the wound where it lies; if the artery resists, do as I have told you.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	Similarly, treat the abscess if it is deep, cutting and dressing it as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut the abscess and the moist tissue first, if it is lighter, because they contain little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if there is no moisture in any of these abscesses or sores, and among these hard abscesses that I found on the head of an old woman, they were as hard as stones, sharp, and white, and could not be crushed; and if anyone had tried to cut them, it would have caused just as much harm as a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming on the head, these that appear at the top of children's heads and at the roots of ears, keep the opening closed as much as possible to let the pus drain; and treat them as appropriate.
des scrophules	Of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times this abscess appears in the neck, and dislocates the bones, and infests them with anger, and never comes elsewhere in the body, and it is painful, and entwined with one another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly within its rib cage, just as the nodule and abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many manifestations of these scrofulas.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and some of them are malicious and do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In that one where you see a good disposition for touch, and it resembles the color of healthy flesh, and is motionless from every side, not even constricted at the collarbone or artery or passageway, and is not excessively deep; then you must cut it open from above, and scrape each part, and the two lips of the heart in its place, if needed, as we have said in the chapters on the head; and gradually, little by little, be careful not to cut the nerve or vein, and do not use excessive force or cutting, so that the hand does not slip, and do not look too far ahead, lest you cut something you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not allow you to work, apply vitriol or any powder that stops blood flow, and close the wound; leave it until the inflammation subsides, and the wound softens, and then begin to heal.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound is stained with blood, it returns to your work until you complete it; then pay attention to your clear sign if there are no small pustules, if you clean and dress them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein in the root of the abscess, it is not advisable to clean that abscess at its root, but rather tie it with a double strong thread and leave it hanging without harm; then apply the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment and treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you clean the entire abscess, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now, so that there is no delay due to the size of the abscess.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If you need to understand how to address the root of it, and pull it out with force, then cut it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofulas that retain superfluity, pierce them where they appear to be closing; and the piercing is done as mentioned above, then apply these treatments with ointment and similar things, so that it does not corrupt what remains from the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, continue the healing treatment with care until it is healed.
de squinance	squinance (n.) - squint or cross-
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	They old ones spoke and talked about the anatomy of the throat; but I have never seen anyone in our land who has done it, and these are their written words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those with a squint, it is important that the fold in the throat, called the "epiglottis," be left alone; and one should not intervene by this means, because all the veins and the source of pain are in those who have an abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the tonsils.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the throat, it is important to cover the epiglottis to prevent the damage that comes from constriction.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	When we want to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary to make it in three circles or four small cuts across, between the two circles, or according to the size of the cut, without touching the cartilage; and these cuts are very suitable for cutting through the epiglottis so that there is no charring, and the knife blade remains long.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	If the masters are fearful, it is necessary that they stretch the throat skin to the entire ring, then cut through the heart while it reaches the trachea; and avoid blood vessels if you see any, and then remove the charred material as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the tracheal flow that jumps out from the broken place, and due to the loss of voice; and leave the wound open a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed and there is doubt about strangulation, gather the two edges of the wound together where the cartilage is, and cut it all through until it heals; then administer medications that promote healing as long as it remains healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albuscasim (a type of herbal medicine) should not be used until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be near death, as it lacks effectiveness.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then they should operate on the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and they breathe through the wound, thus preventing death; and for this reason, the ancients ordered the wound to remain open as long as the malice of the illness persists, and it passes in three or four days. Then they commanded that the wound be sewn up and treated, as long as healing continued; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a dame took a knife, and stabbed it into her throat, and cut part of the tongue from her mouth; and I was called to heal her, and found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had issued from it, and realized that it had no strength or control, leading only to the throat, and the vein emerged through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened, and sewed the wound, and healed it until it was clean; and it took the dame no further harm than that she lost her voice, and later returned to her normal state; for this reason, I say that with the incision of the epiglottis, there is no cause for fear.
de la grosse gorge	from the great throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Cysts of the throat are called "throat hernias," and they are large abscesses with a color similar to a arrow, and they often affect women; there are two types: natural and accidental, where the former has no apparent cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental type is also of two kinds, one resembling fat, and the other resembling an abscess arising from an artery; it causes fear, and one should not attempt to perform any surgery unless the case is minor, test and examine all access points: if you find it similar to ordinary flesh, and cannot be moved in any way, as one would with a nose, and remove it entirely if possible, and secure it well, treating it accordingly until it heals perfectly.
des nous	From us.
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways of which I will speak, showing their similarities; and now it is necessary that I explain the whole difference between us and them.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that issues are hot and feverish as long as the ebullition has not passed, and when putrefaction is complete, then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the new, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains satisfaction, which is its own sac, according to the condition of the body, and begins like a grain, becoming large; and they are similar in two ways, either fat or moist, and have much color as I said in division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	You should, when you approach the treatment of pain, test and inquire about all the instruments called "entromissory" first, according to their form as they appear in this chapter or subsequent ones.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	The method of inquiring about abscesses is to press more or less moistly on the abscess, and move your fingers in and out, as long as you know that the instrument has reached the core, then extract it according to the size of the abscess; be careful not to tear.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If moisture runs from the abscess, what color it is, do as I said for other abscesses; and if after extracting the entromissory instrument no moisture comes out, know that it is full of pus, so cut it in a cross shape and use it as tweezers to gently remove the crust on each side, taking care not to damage the healthy tissue underneath; and if you cannot extract it without damaging it, then remove it piece by piece so nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if it does not heal, the pain returns again and again; and if it heals a little bit but without any great distress, it employs the wound with certain corrosive powders or hot water, constricts the wound, applies soothing things to the abscess, and treats it with other remedies until it is healed; and when the wound is very large, it costs the two lips of the wound, and treats it from the source.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the pain persists or other symptoms occur with any haste, use the vitriole (a caustic substance) ground into a powder, and leave it for two or three days until the wound becomes infected and the blood flow subsides; then return to covering what has been affected by the new.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See here the shapes of the instruments introduced, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small; and there are three quarters called 'albaret', and one called 'breb', and they are also like needles used to cut sorceries, made of gold, silver, or iron, and move best those that are yellow, and are more tested for enclosing fistular corbel-gaps; and these too are of three types: large, medium, and small, according to the amount of the gap's width.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of the hooks are very similar, as you can see: large, medium, and small; and there are hooks with two curves in three ways; and there are hooks with three curves, also in three ways; and some have two curves, and some only one curve, in three ways as well; all these types are necessary for their use.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The head of these tools is sharp, and there are some that do not cut through completely from one side, which strips the skin, preventing access to the vein or nerve; and these insertions are responded in several ways, so that the patient does not lose blood at the opening of abscesses; and they are three types: large, small, and medium, as you can see; and they should only be used on fleshy parts like legs, arms, mammary glands, wounds, and similar places; and never make another small instrument resembling the cuts of a fist, according to this form, to stop the flow of blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it should never be placed in places that are healthy and without injury to veins and arteries, according to this great form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Never inflame the breasts of any man when they begin to be corrupt, as long as they appear like women's breasts; they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to cure them must do so according to this form described in this line b until g.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape off the fat and apply medicinal herbs to the wound with burning charcoal, then gather together the two lips of the wound with stitches, and heal it as long as it remains healthy; and if the breast inclines downwards and becomes soft due to its size, just like women, making two incisions on top of each other in the shape of slits, so that one holds the other at the end of each, ensuring the larger incision contains the smaller according to this form described in this line b until g. Then scrape off the leather between the two lips, remove the fat, and apply what we have mentioned about stitches and powders, as well as anything necessary for the healing, while it remains healthy. If it is not healed, or the incision has not fully healed because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the flow of blood, then you should fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive dressing; leave it until it removes the remaining fat and flesh, then heal it as long as it remains healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	from the abscesses of armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Abscesses that come from beneath the armpits are hard scrofulous nodules or ones that contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, apply a cloth to the wound for the next day, then remove all the cotton and continue with appropriate treatment until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scrofula, then treat it as we have said regarding the incisions made in scrofula, and if the wound opens, apply the cautery as we have mentioned before.
de la routure de l’artere	from the rupture of an artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When an artery ruptures and the flesh above it swells, many abscesses form, and the same happens in the veins, which become inflated and infected; and if you recognize this to be due to an artery rupture, the abscesses are long and deep; and when you feel them at your extremities, they feel strained; and in the case of a vein, they appear red and inflamed; and it is foolish to treat this abscess, especially when it has separated from the flesh and is infected with angles (possibly meaning gangrene) and other maladies, and it becomes very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary to observe the care of fire, and he who is at the head should also be cautious, and for him who has an arterial pulse, make a cut above the skin along; then open the arteries on both sides, until they are exposed; then insert a needle from below and pierce it through to the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have taught you in the extraction of two arteries in the temples; then mark the place between the two threads with an instrument, until there is no more discharge; then apply the treatment that has been described, while the wound is fresh; then cure it with suitable dressing, as long as it is clean; and if the abscess is through a vein cut, it is necessary to hold in your hand what remains of the abscess from the entire skin, then insert the needle below the place you are holding, and pierce it, and make a double thread, so that you draw it from the other side; then tie the abscess as I have told you, or the thread to one of the two parts in two places; and if you doubt that the threads do not come out, insert another needle through all the abscess below the first cut, and tighten the threads in four places; then cut off the excess, then cut off the superfluity around the wound, and leave what is attached; then place a moist cloth of wine and oil on it, and apply treatments and dressings until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	from the abscess of nails
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Similarly to abscesses in arteries and veins, nail abscesses occur when they are injured or due to excessive work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this occurs more often in joints and digits where there are many articulations, which is the source of these abscesses, and its appearance resembles the color of human flesh, and it takes various forms with great pain; and when they form, the patient feels a sharp pain, and it is not completely healed throughout the body, but only towards the heart; and it moves well in all directions, neither advancing nor retreating, neither downwards nor upwards, and the one in the joints should not be covered with iron; perhaps it would cause contraction; and that which is at the head or forehead causes the skin to puss.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, and it can be grasped with tweezers, dig it out at its base; and if it's large, suspend it on a hook, scrape off the skin, then cut out the flesh and sew up the wound, until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	The phrase "des grosses boces pendans" translates roughly to "pendent
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	It occurs in bellies alone, and nowhere else, and is called 'fungus' due to its appearance, it has subtle roots, and large drops; and there are both small and very large ones. I have seen people with two or more such growths in their bellies, which were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no discernible difference, they were white, had thin roots, and were constantly moist.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I gathered them and found in one eighteen ounces weighing, and in the other six ounces, and the work of incising is such that you look at the patient's moisture, and the color of the artery is white and moist and of subtle root; if it grasps with a wide spatula, then have fire cautery in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For cutting often brings too much bleeding, and if it does not stop for you, then hurry to cauterize; and if you see the patient afraid and anxious about the incision from fire, take a well-made thread, and bind the artery as we have said, and leave it for a day; then restrain it, and do not cease to tighten the thread until it cuts through the artery, without any effort; and if the roots are thick, be more careful in cutting, especially for the abdomen, but you can still cut half of it, then cauterize so that it does not bleed again; then dress the wound, and be sure not to cut the thin part that is red, poor in sense, and white with milk.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess enhanced, and I will come to the treatment of the ulcer right after.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the wound is closed for a time.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the wound is due to cauterization from a wound or incision on the soft tissue, and it's located on the stomach or in none of the bowels, as can occur with other ruptures, or from bloodletting or artery cutting according to what lies ahead, or from flatulence; and if it's through an opening in the soft tissue and evacuation of the bowel, then the abscess has a color similar to that of the body, and is a slight thing without pain, and opens up through various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to an intestinal issue, then it is more varied, and when pressed by its own force, it repairs itself and then returns, and sometimes it tightens at the entrance to the bath or through hard work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light issue and opens easily when pressed in the hand, without constraint; and if it is due to blood, it appears through these signs: large and hard abscesses, and it is fixed according to its quantity; and if it is due to windiness, it feels soft to the touch, and the work involves observing whether it appears due to blood from an artery, a vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it is necessary, let the healing continue.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For in the case of abscesses, as I told you in the chapter about them, whether due to an artery or a vein, there is often doubt and fear.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if it appears to be due to the intestine or bowels, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to retain their faeces, and lie completely straight, then make an incision around the entire opening of the bowel; then have them lie on one side, and carefully remove a portion of the abscess above all the sharp edges; then bind it firmly with a strong thread or sturdy silk thread, making sure the intestines are undisturbed. Then open the portion of the abscess that is extended over the binding, and insert your finger to explore the intestine; if you find it caught in the binding, free it and return the intestine to its proper place outside the abdomen. And if you discover a bowel obstruction, use the pincers at the oncine to remove excess material; and if the artery or vein opposes this process, gently manoeuvre around them, then return to your task, taking two needles, and insert them in the manner that we have described, making an incision in the same place as before. Then pull out the abscess in three parts over the needles, and if you can see it, remove the needles, leaving the wound to heal on its own, and allow the dead flesh to fall away naturally. Once the abscess has healed sufficiently, continue with the cure as appropriate, and finish the treatment of the abscess as we have said; then extract any blood or moisture that you find, treat the wound as necessary, and bind the wound.
dou chancre	A cancerous wound
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have discussed in the previous section the symptoms of cancer, and how it should be treated with medicines, and how to avoid iron therapy; we say that cancer spreads throughout the body, and requires great caution in its treatment, and they [the ancients] state that when a tumor is located where it can be removed, such as those found on mammary glands, or the leg, or similar places, it must all be cut out as soon as possible; however, for large and old tumors, one should not even approach them, because I have never been able to heal any, nor has anyone else before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And for the work, when a tumor is located where it can be removed, as we have said, you should never purge the patient of black blood; then make them healthier if there is visible repletion, and cut out the ill limb in a good place to perform the operation; then drain all the pus or cancer, and shave it from all sides, leaving nothing; let the blood flow out completely, and check the wound with your hand or any object, and if there is any sign of infection from the incision of an artery or vein, cauterize it until the bleeding stops; then use another cure as long as it heals.
de ydropisie	Of hydropsis 
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already discussed the symptoms of hydrops and how the collection of fluid is formed, as well as the signs of each condition and the remedies that are effective through medicine or iron. In these two cases, only treatment with medicine should be employed; one must not use iron on these two conditions: namely, tympanitis and yposarca, for they are deadly. Therefore, when treating this hydrops condition, which is called "eclites" due to medicine, and the cure does not benefit the patient, consider if the patient is weak or has another illness besides hydrops, such as intestinal distress or similar conditions. In such cases, do not use iron, for there is doubt; but if you observe the patient has strong vitality and suffers only from hydrops without any other illness, and he is neither too young nor too old, then proceed thus: place the patient gently on your hands and have the minister press the abdomen while driving the fluid to the lowest part of the pisu (a medical term for a specific body region). Then take the sharp-pointed spatula according to this form.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And make incisions from the second part.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Cut with a sharp point, but do not insert it so deeply that it reaches the intestine when pushed in, and do not let it pierce; then observe if there is any inflammation towards the intestines. If necessary, make an incision through three joints starting from the base of the thumb, and if the hydropic is due to liver disease, make your cut on the left side of the joint; and if it's due to mucus, on the right side. Avoid placing the patient face-down over the incision so that excess fluid does not flow into the weak part. Then cut through all the skin with a tool, and the muscle, and gently press your hand against the entire space between the skin and the fascia as if scraping it with the thickness of a nail or more; then pierce the fascia until the fluid flows out clearly, which is the sign of water, then remove the tool and shape it like this:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it resembles a thin silver chain, and is made of fine gold or silver, and has one small opening on each side; on one side there are three openings, and on the other two, and one on the other; and the part that holds it is cut as if it were a feather, and this is the shape of the incision where the scribes cut the feathers.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top of it, there is a hole, so that when the instrument comes into contact with water, it sinks immediately onto the instrument; then empty half or a third of it, for if you empty more than is necessary at this moment, by chance the patient may die due to the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he might lose his palm, or approach death; but empty according to the amount of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulse. Then take the instrument and hold back the water, and it is held back now by the core that stops the hole which I mentioned, that you pierce in this way; then continue with the instrument on the other side, if you see the patient suffering from it, and draw out a small amount of water; do this every day, and be careful not to let any more water out until only a little remains.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the patient, and leave him with much water, whether through a wound cure or hot sand, and by sweating or a bath and in the sun, and become discolored; then treat with drying medicines as long as he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the removal of the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	from the obstruction of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born without an opening in the penis, or the opening is very small, or it is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary at once that he does not pierce all the very fine spatium according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	then open the very subtle gap of the bladder, and hold it closed and keep it thus for three or four days, and when he wants to urinate, remove the closure, let him urinate, and then put it back; and sometimes it is not necessary at all, because the force of the urine will not allow the closure to remain.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the gap is small, it is a sign of a weak bladder closure, as we have said, and it will widen.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have a complete opening in their joint are afflicted, for no one is born with a dislocation at the top of the limb, which is why they cannot urinate until they raise their limb; and they cannot engender because the matter cannot reach up to the marrow, and this is a grave illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method of the operation is that the patient lies on their back, then the top of the limb and its socket are opened to the size of a feather, so that the dislocation can be corrected as it should; and beware of the discharge of blood which often comes out, and if it happens, stop it with what stops the bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	from the pustules of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often, this inflammation occurs in the penis, and it appears as a ugly mass; and there are both malignant and non-malignant cases; so you must prick them with a subtle needle, cut them, and clean them thoroughly, then apply moist cotton in an Egyptian ointment, and continue the healing process with a diaphonic treatment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the inflammation is malignant, with a putrid black color and stench, then you must apply cauterization.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have achieved it, and if the blister is in a som (a term for a type of skin growth or sore) that is raised and has a part within the skin and a part outside, then it is necessary to remove the blister inside first; and when it is sealed, then treat the outer part.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For if you treat it together, unless the base of the blister is thoroughly secured, it will turn black and corrupt the skin and wound; then it is necessary to remove all that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster made of honey and flour from crushed pomegranate skins and eggs, and continue treating it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if a blood clotting occurs, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery is carried out according to the following procedures: that is to say, in case of blood clotting and corruption; if the tip of the member is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary to insert or guide a cane into the urethra and allow the patient to urinate; when the hair at the top of the penis is dry and has become infected for those who have not been circumcised, or there is a wound or abscess, it is then necessary to peel it with a sharp instrument until the ligaments are loosened and the discharge from the member is freed from all sides; if this task is complex, it is advisable to peel it with a spatum along the tip of the penis and the scrotum; then carefully separate them and place a fine, moist linen cloth dipped in cold water over the affected area so that it does not dry out.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a dislocation of the continuation like other wounds; however, when we perform this work on our own will, and especially on children, it is necessary that we make the best and most gentle operation for healing.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision for their children, because they do not practice it in their laws, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have observed most of the masters and elders who perform circumcision near the anus, with force, and at all costs; it would seem better to leave it, because there are two openings, and perhaps one is closed while the other remains open.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or she returns to the wound, and the pain is doubled, and the tip of the member is not assured during cleansing; and in the cleansing of the nail, by chance the iron escapes, and it corrupts the work, and often they heal in such a way that no cleansing is needed, which I wish.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the cleansing that is done with force on all the ligaments of thread, I have found the goodness of experiment, for the forces cut precisely as well from above as from below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because when you press your hand, if the cut is even in both places, then tighten the thread well around the leather; and make sure the manner of the first operation so that the child, if it listens, believes that you are not doing anything but tightening the thread around the stick as gently as possible, and then let it dangle in all ways that you can; then stretch it straight between your hands, and place the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the baby does not see them, nor any of the tools; then close your hand on the stick and blow in its heart, and pull it up until the part of the stick is entirely removed; then clean it well from the dirt that is gathered on it, and tie it with a double thread, then connect it to another ligament; and hold it by the second ligature at the pouche and the index finger, and cut between the two ligaments, then lift the heart gently from above without haste, and pull the chief of the stick; then let the blood flow little by little, for that is the cure; and apply powder on top and on top of the powder, a mixture of a half-cooked egg white temper with rose water, preserved with good rosemary oil and fresh herbs, and leave it until the next day, and continue to treat it as long as it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of purification is as follows: both shoulders should be shaved and cut, and the hair on them should also be long and equally distributed.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in purification occurs when the veins are not cut correctly; then you should extend your finger to make an incision, so that the vein forms an abscess; and do it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, use pincers, and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it persists for three days, and the skin under the arrow is swollen, leave it until the abscess has healed, gently peeling off the wound; cut it as best you can, and be careful to avoid the shaft of the arrow, which will not harm it in any way.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat therefore the place of a sudden wound from gunpowder, which we have spoken of in dealing with gunpowder, and if one uses too much heart, it will go up, then it will cause no harm; treat it, therefore, as we have said, while it is sound.
dou retenement de l’urine	retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is caused by an obstruction such as a stone, or frozen blood, or bowels, or a newborn, or similar conditions, as we have discussed in the previous section. If the urine cannot be released and you see that the retention is due to a stone in the bladder or at the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent over on his knees; pressure should be applied to his back, and his belly should be extended from above the back. The patient must be restrained as much as possible. This will force the neck of the bladder to express the stone above, allowing the urine to flow freely. If, however, this does not work and the patient experiences severe pain, it is necessary to administer extraction to all instruments called 'syringes', which have the following structure: these are made of fine, lightweight silver, similar to a bird's feather. The length of the syringe should be about one palm and a half, and it must be slender at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the method for urination is as follows: take a double thread and tie one end of it to the top of a wool or cotton ball, then insert the thread into the syringe; cut off the excess wool and insert it up to the top of the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and place the patient on a couch. Lift the bladder and fill the urethra with moist oil and olive oil and tepid water; then gently insert the syringe into the urethra until it reaches its base, then double the urethra over itself towards the tip; next, insert the syringe before the bladder, and let the patient feel the urine flowing to the empty cavity, but do not do this unless the flow is directed correctly because if you force it, the thread may break. Then cut the thread from the wool ball one by one, and the urine will follow the thread; pull it out firmly, and drain the urine; repeat the process with the syringe until the bladder is empty, and comfort the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	From the diseases of the bladder.
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When burns or blood comes to the bladder, due to its putrefaction, you should draw off waters and medicines using the instrument called "clepsydre", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if it has three openings: two on one side and one on the other, as you see; the hollow part where the medicine should flow is shaped so that it absorbs well the moisture without addition, if one can draw out the moisture and squeeze as needed. And when you pour your medicines into the bladder, place the head of the container in the moisture and draw out gently what remains; you will draw out the moisture from the container and then press firmly on the container; the moisture enters the container and goes directly to the bladder, so that the patient feels it; this is the form of a delicate enema with which one enemas the bladder: thus:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or gold, and the joint is higher; then open the chest from the side where the ribs split; take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the moisture you intend to use for enema; tie it between the two breasts with a good double thread, and heat that moisture over fire. Then insert the nozzle of the enema bag into the rectum, and squeeze your hand onto the bladder until all the moisture has reached the bladder; and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle of it, and pierce it around evenly. Then thread a strong string through those holes, gather the circle as one would a dal, and place inside some oil, moisture, and water, and tie it with the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already discussed the methods of dealing with stones and their extraction, along with the use of medicines; I have explained the distinction between stones that are rain-related and all other types, and I have indicated which kinds require surgical intervention, be it in the bladder or the testicles; I will now clearly and concisely tell you about these.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is embedded in the bladder occurs more frequently in children, and this is a sign that there is an acute leakage from the bladder, resembling water because of its subtlety; it opens the way for the patient's pain, greatly affects their testicles, and often becomes chronic; indeed, these leakages damage the foundations. The cure for children who have stones is light until they reach four years old, but it is much more difficult in older individuals, those between youth and old age; the treatment for those with large stones is less complex than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient with a cleanse, in order to draw out all impurities from the bowels.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never fails to seek out the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and lift them up and move them to the sides, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and never moves up again; then place him between your hands with his legs extended downwards, in a position where the bladder is tilted downwards; then fasten him down and touch the stone inside. If you feel the stone in the space, then hurry now to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not come out at the touch, wet your index finger with oil from your left hand, and if the patient is sick, or your right middle finger with oil, and if the patient is young and fully grown; then press it back into its socket, and hold the stone, and when you feel it on your right side, near the bladder's neck; then press upon it with your right finger, and push it out through the opening where you see the cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the attendant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to stretch his right hand upward and extend his left hand downward, removing the skin covering the bladders at the point where the incision is made; then use the knife to cut out the stone, shaping it as follows:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And they make an incision between the scrotum and the fundament, not in the middle but on the side of the left thigh; and it should be straight on the stone, and both sides should meet at the fundament, and the cut should be wide enough to avoid difficulty, and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large; so that the pressure from the side which is at the fundament causes it to come out easily; and know that there are stones with angles and edges: these are difficult to pass; and if they are under the skin, resembling a glans or testicle, and round, their exit is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	If there are angles and edges, make the cut larger; and if it does not come out, you should use tweezers that are also like a file at the tip, to extract the stone so that it does not escape; or you can insert a thin, curved instrument at the top; and if you cannot extract it in this way, you can enlarge the opening slightly, and if it is decorticated, extract it with vitriol; and if there are more than one stones, first extract the largest one at the neck of the bladder, then cut from above, then pull it out forcefully, and afterwards the smaller ones, if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, as it should be cared for, it makes a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things can happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine flows again through the opening where the bones cannot unite; but nevertheless, strive diligently to extract it, either with pliers or by cleaning out the debris, bit by bit, while you treat the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it tightly, and place over it a moist cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then bandage the patient on his chest, and do not loosen the bandage for three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you dislocate it, if there is a great rise of oil and water in the joint, then apply healing ointment and basil ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses and corrosions occur in the wound, and congelements of blood in the bladder, and it retains urine, which is known to happen without warning: then press your finger into the wound and extract the blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and cause decay; then cleanse the wound with water and heat and cold, and aid it in every way you know, until it heals; and remember, when you treat it, that you bind both thighs of the patient and apply medicines to the joint.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is caught in the urethra, and stuck in place, and urine cannot pass; then through this treatment that I say, you should cut it many times, it is excusable to perform surgery for this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have tested it thusly.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take the iron at the forefront according to this form, and insert it into three pieces of wood.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the urethra beyond the stone, so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then gently push the iron into the urethra until it reaches the stone; and pull the iron back to your hand in the urethra little by little, as you are able to pierce the stone from another side; soon urine will come out, then press your hand on what is remaining of the stone inside the urethra.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is broken and jumps with urine, and rubs the patient; and if you cannot do this for any reason, then take a thread under and above the stone, then make the stick sharp on the stone between the two threads, then pull it out forcefully, loosen the string, and clean the frozen blood in the wound; and treat it as long as it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of the women's stone" 
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	When a stone is trapped in a woman's body, the cure is difficult, and it is hindered by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; the second is that it is hard to find a woman with good knowledge who understands how to remove it, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a woman with good knowledge in this art; and the fourth way is that if the stone in the woman's body is larger and more difficult to remove, then it must be cut deeper, and much fear exists. If such necessity arises, it is advisable to seek a knowledgeable midwife, or at least someone who understands the subtleties of the female body, and command her to do what you instruct regarding the removal of the stone; and pay close attention if the woman is a virgin. Then she must push her left hand down on the swollen bladder, and grasp the stone. If she finds it, she should pull it out from under her fingernail and recommend that the patient press their index finger into the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, she must move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder down to the thigh, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then cut into the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the hard part, where it is moved, and feel the stone in that area; and do not move her leg either above or below the stone, or make a small incision first. Then turn the rake towards the thigh, if she feels the stone deeply in the wound as long as the stone can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those with edges.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know these similarities to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood does not stop flowing, apply vitriole powder and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your task, as long as the stone is hard, and have tools that I told you for extracting stones from men, so that you may be helped in your work; and if the blood still does not stop flowing, and it's from an artery that has been cut, apply powder to the place and press with rags and bandages, and do not repeat this, and leave the stone and do not extract it, unless the patient dies; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat from the blood has subsided and the limb is relaxed, return to your task, as long as the stone is hard.
de hernie carnouse	from herniated cartilage
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Rice water is nothing other than a mixture of moisture or white sputum, which is separated from the heart of things, containing the egg white, and is called 'sputum', never properly part of the egg white, if one believes it to be another thing; and this is the membrane surrounding the egg white between the white sputum that we have mentioned, and it has no pore.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this rice water is due to weakness that affects the testicles, and this matter is expanded.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And never does it come from percussion on the joints, and this moisture takes many forms: it can be yellowish, or without redness, or black, or watery white, and so on; and these are the signs to recognize this gathering, for if it is white as we have said, the abscesses are bright, very long in shape like an egg, and do not open the joints, because they are filled with moisture.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the flesh itself, the abscesses are bright with a part of the egg, and because of this, one thinks it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white, one feels it well; then, when you want to know the color of the moisture, try to feel all over the affected area, as its shape is as described above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after, judge of what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healed according to their ability and the fullness of their body; then place them on their back, on something slightly elevated, and cover them with many sheets; then have them sit on their left side, and command the assistant to sit on their right, and extend the staff to one of the two ribs near the heart of the chest; then take the scalpel, and cut the skin of the chest from above the long bone down to the elbow, and make the incision completely straight by cutting through the skin of the chest until it is as white as possible, and carefully remove the flesh according to the patient's strength; then make a large opening in the flesh with water, and extract all the water, and then place your bandages, and close the opening; do not touch the heart of the ribs, but only cut through the flesh; cut it carefully, otherwise the water will return; and if the wound is successfully closed, then put them back in their original position when you have completed the work with the scalpel. Then sew together the two leaves of the chest at a seam, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the heart corrupted by another illness, it is necessary that you hold the vessels that are suspended, in doubt of the flow of blood; then cut off the clot from all the suspension, and extract the heart, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the wound is assembled in two parts, together, knowing that these are two branches; then cut off the other part as you did with the first, equally, wipe the blood, and place in the wound a clean cloth moistened in rose oil; and apply another clean cloth moistened in wine and oil, and place over the two cuts, and cover with doubled cloth, and tie it to all the ligatures according to this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two strips, and use woolen cloth according to this form, and join them together with stitching at the thigh's gullet, and one of these pins into the base up to the back, and the other on the hand's joint; and the third over both angles, and gather all the tightness in the loop of the breeches. And never use this cautery with a metal knife, but you should pin one delicate cauterizer, cutting through the skin, and make it hot as we have said, so that the white satisfying substance that contains water is revealed; take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that satisfying substance at once, and scrape it with this delicate hot cauterizer.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the poultice in all ways that you can, as long as it is completely dry; and be careful that the fire does not touch the wound; and know that this work is safer; and move gently to avoid blood loss, and take care with the cuts of surgery; and if anything goes against you, whether it's an abscess or a discharge of blood or any other thing, cure what goes against you, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	If the patient is afraid and does not want to undergo this operation because of its horror, then apply perforation, as I have told you, and make sure that when you are completely certain, through the signs we have mentioned, that the pain is due to moisture, place the patient in a raised position. Then incise the abscess from below, deep into the whole spatule (area), and make the opening long along the body; let all the pus flow out. Then apply cotton and bind it, allowing the remaining pus to drain, then treat the wound until it is clean. If the white cloth does not allow the pus to drain from the wound's opening, you should insert a quill or the instrument used to draw off water from hydropsic patients, in the form mentioned above; open the wound wider and know that the pus will flow again, and gather after six months or so, and when it gathers as before, then the patient's condition will improve.
de l’aposteme des coions	from the abscess of the hair follicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Knowing that in this section there are many bad arrangements, which is why I think it is better to leave it; and I will tell you about the work and similarities of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come where the hair follicles are; and most often they occur in the skin; and this is due to many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is due to excessive acidity and ague that spread to the hair follicles, or from percussion; and the color of the abscess matches that of the skin; it does not cause pain, and is a serious abscess; and sometimes there are many painful, dark-colored, and pus-filled abscesses, or of bright red color, and they never come from new arteries or the swelling of veins.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is due to an artery, if it is blocked by the hot inflammation of an abscess when you press on it with your fingers; and you must not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	What is made from vein inflammation is blocked by its disposition to the pressing of fingers, and it can be cut well on this model and on other parts; and it releases the heart of the blood, then warmth comes above, and the pain subsides quickly, and delivers the suspension of all parts of the blood.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the inflammation is already hard with these cuts, then you must drain the blood and cut it; and if it is hot to the touch, or inside the vessels, you must free all that tension, and cut it properly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the base of the hair is at the rear, it is necessary that you cut it entirely off, and extract the root, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, apply a moist woolen compress with rose oil and wine to the wound, then use other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the hairs
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess surrounded by a wrapping similar to a boil, with the hairs being soft and immobile, causing the patient great pain; and its cure for this illness is very precious, as well as frightening, just like the one mentioned above, and nevertheless, we will tell you about its work, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	You should place the patient in a comfortable position, then tie down the affected limb with a suspension bandage at your discretion, to all vessels near the point of interest, and stretch them taut; then use a scalpel with a broad, sharp edge to cut through the vessels, while they are exposed, and scrape from each side, as we have said for extracting arteries in temples; then insert a needle where there is a double thread, and secure it to the first joint where the vein entered, and then to the other end; then cut them evenly straight according to the length of the body, and remove corrupt moisture; then treat the wound as others, so that no vessel leaks and affects one of the joints; for by this, there will be no harm, and all vessels will have visibility, so it is necessary to tie down the joints to all vessels; so the vein does not lose its nourishment due to vessel incision, and dries up and cannot aid itself.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rupture of the sinew
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The consequences of this rupture are as follows: if it occurs from the section (amputation) or through extension in the abdominal region, near the angles, then the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the openings; and this rupture is either from the sinew (tendon) or from the extension, and these two conditions have various causes: percussion, a jump, straining, lifting a heavy weight, and similar things; and the signs when it is due to the tendon's rupture are that it happens little by little over a long period and does not come suddenly; and the abscess remains equally sized towards its entirety because the rupture (tendon) pushes the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is a successful section, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and various abscesses appear beneath the skin close to the bone, due to the release of intestine and flesh from the syphil's fire.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never drain the abscess with the intestine, but hold it in place, causing great pain to the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these poor treatments with iron, for that reason one must be wary.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the method for this chapter is that you command the patient to move the intestine back into its place inside the wound if it can be done; then carefully hold it in your hand and ease the pressure; next stretch out the heart on top, and shave all the flesh down to the bone. Then insert your thumb index between the muscle and the white flesh that lies beneath the outer skin of the testicle, and between the second flesh, and remove what is behind the testicle, and between the second flesh; then move your right hand inside the heart of the muscles, and position the white flesh on top with your left hand, easing the testicle towards the tailbone. Order the assistant to stretch out the testicle upwards, and free what is attached at the rear end of the ligament; be careful if there is no sign of intestine or firm white flesh, and if you find anything, insert it into the abdomen beneath the skin. Take a needle with a thick thread made from four threads, and sew it through the posterior part of the white flesh after the skin of the testicle; then cut off the appearance of the threads, as much as there are four; then arrange them one on top of another in the shape of a cross, and tie the white flesh that we mentioned is beneath the skin with a strong thread from both sides. Envelop the threads around the muscles, and make them secure so that no vessels can enter inside, preventing an abscess. Put the first ligament as long as two fingers, then after these two ligaments leave the white flesh beneath the heart of the muscles as one finger length; then cut off the remaining part of the white flesh below the skin, just like we mentioned before; then apply moist wool to the wounds and dress them, and use the thread that we spoke of.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never should the white flesh be cauterized as we have said, after the incision, out of fear of bloodletting.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens often, and leaves the wound open until it heals itself; if it takes time to close, then apply hot water, as we have said, until it heals; then treat the wound with other remedies, until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	of a hernia (fleshy protrusion)
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, never have I seen anyone who dared treat it with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients say that it is made like a branch which holds together the bone, in such a way as you tie the vessels, after cutting them slightly below the joint; then cut through it, and treat the abscess of him who opens, until the vessels stop bleeding; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	No rupture should occur from the wound, as we have said, and open the vessels; nor should any internal organs protrude, and if they do, it is a sign of danger, and it should be attended to every hour; nevertheless, if it persists in this condition, one should suspect either an abscess or gangrene, until the intestines protrude; and this occurs due to the extension of gangrene into the vessels, as we have said, for it extends, then softens and swells the vessel, and opens; and its cure is by cautery, as we have previously mentioned; and it should never be cured in any other way. The patient should lie on his back with his head between your hands, then cut the vessel affected by the gangrene from below, according to the amount of three fingers; remove the gangrenous tissue beneath the skin with a knife, take the edge of the knife, and place it over the visible vessels of the gangrene, press firmly into the abdomen, then cut both visible vessels of the gangrene on top of the knife edge, and stitch them closed; do not cover or extend the wound or do anything else differently, as I have instructed regarding the cure for intestinal rupture. Then treat it with a wound dressing.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you treat the wounds, if they are unclean and the injury is healed, as long as it is healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The treatment is difficult, and it has no appearance in the fracture, but the cauterization moves in this place, and it is closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the thick skin of the limbs
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the limbs is softened in no man, because the muscles inside are relaxed, and it is easy to see. When one wishes to treat it, one makes the patient lie on his back and cuts off the soft skin on the natural skin; then brings together the two edges with a stitch or three firmly, and removes any excess soft skin with cuts between the stitches, and treats it like other wounds as long as it is healed, and pulls out the thread.
dou chastrement	Dou chastrement (Double cautery)
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	You know that castration is condemned in our law, and for that reason I would not like to speak of it in this book; but there are two ways it can be necessary: one is to answer questions about it accurately and to provide the cure; and the other is because we often need castration of certain animals to help us, such as a goat, sheep, cat, or other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that castration is performed in two ways: either by attraction or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the method where we perform castration by attraction, we should keep the animal in hot water until the scrotum is softened and relaxed; then, with your hand, press on it until it is healed and you no longer feel it.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	From the castration of size: It is necessary that you fasten the animal, and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspension, and cut each one individually to the point where they are well scalped; and leave no trace of pain or the subtle pain that lies on the veins; and this method of castration is different from that which is done by attraction, because at attraction, by chance, something of the testicles may remain, leading the animal to desire lust; then treat the wound until it is clean.
des hermofrodites	hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	An hermaphrodite is according to two manners in men: one such that between the two testicles appears also like the figure of a woman's nature, or it has hair, and never cuts itself short in court when urinating.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And another method is for women, where it grows on the palm like a stick and has two joints.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for men and women is that you remove all the tight clothing, and treat them like other wounds; in the second case, for those whose urine flows through the skin of their penis, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the goiter
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Goiter is a tight growth on the natural part, as it is too ugly to see; and no woman can remove it completely like a hand, and this is its treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	You should retain the excess of the tendon in your hand or fingers, and cut it lightly; do not cut too deeply, lest bleeding occur, which can be counteracted with another cure until it is healed; and for a condition that arises at the opening of the mare's mouth, and its use, and perhaps jumps out, and resembles a cow, and for this reason the ancients called it "cow disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	It is necessary that you cut it, as we have said about the tendon, and treat it until it is healed.
de erratique	erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erroneous is the judgment when one does not fully understand the nature of women, or if the wound is small; it is either by nature from birth, or an accident due to illness that comes upon them; or it is caused by improper posture, or some subtle or specific affliction, and is done completely during pregnancy, or on the side, or underneath, or in any way; and it requires knowledge of conception, childbirth, and perhaps even the flowers to be born; and this knowledge is obtained through observation of dance.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the symptoms are soon apparent, whether they are due to your own fault or through chance.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a subtle affliction and the symptoms are soon apparent, act quickly: place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then form both legs into fists until the subtle affliction disappears and the symptoms vanish; then take wool, moisten it in oil, and apply it to the affected area, placing the woman face up each day so she cannot tighten or move.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if it is hard and sticky, you must then use a scalpel similar to a mistletoe leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the swelling is from cold, suspend it at the joint and use a scalpel; have medicines that stop blood flow, such as witch hazel, dragon's blood, incense, in abundance; then apply a wide bandage so that the wound cannot close, and thus, after a while, apply a dry linen compress; and continue other treatments until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when gangrene occurs from cold, you must cover it according to this manner; if it is not abscessed.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an abscess that has enlarged in the wound, one must not attempt to treat it with fire.
des emorroides	hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are open veins that, without proper treatment, can become chronic. In the previous section, we discussed the similarities and signs of good and bad hemorrhoids, and now I will describe those that receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and their complications, when they are completely in the anus and not felt, can only be properly treated with fire.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the mare, one can feel, are those that one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is therefore necessary that you place the woman in a cold house, then stretch her legs with tongs and cut the flesh at its roots, then sprinkle medicine to stop the blood, such as wormwood and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then bind her feet to the wall for an hour, then immerse her in cold water. And this process of bleeding will take place, if she leaves it in a decoction of sumac and bark from pomegranates and gall nuts and similar things, and then take flour from barley, mix it with honey and ash, and make an ointment to apply to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it becomes dry, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If it is not, then make cups and apply them to the back without hurting the breasts; then take linen, moisten it with juice of plantain or elderberry wine, and place them on the joint.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has rested, continue to treat the wound with care until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red and resembles a rough head, so it should be treated as I have said before; then heal it until it is whole.
des apostemes de la marris	from the abscess of the breast
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses occur in the breast, such as chancres, old abscesses, herpes, and fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and many other diseases already mentioned in the previous division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary that I discuss here the hot abscess that occurs in the breast, which is not a solid abscess but one that bleeds; and if you want to know the work of fire, consider whether the abscesses are red at their onset, filled with heat and fever, and turn red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Then do not hasten to pierce, but make the patient suffer until the pain is soothed; then place the afflicted person in a reclining position, and give them two small pillows on which to rest, and align their feet towards the parts that are weak in the leg; and spread his hips wide, and put his arms below his knees, and bind them tightly with a good bandage. Then open the patient's anus from the right side, and insert the instrument used to open the mouth of the wound, from which this form arises. And it is necessary that when you insert this instrument, that you first stick the point in so as to know the depth of the wound, so that what enters from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not hurt the patient; and if the instrument is too large, then cover the depths of the wound with cloth, so that the instrument does not cause pain. And place the cone of the instrument on top, and color the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess opens and they make an incision with their hands gently, if it is necessary to cover the wound, let them use a spatula; and when the bowel is empty, you should put moist cloth soaked in rose oil or dry green oil into the wound, right up to the edge of the wound, and put another cloth soaked in clear water outside the wound over the wound and on the thigh, and let this stay there until the healing process comes after two days of treatment, as long as it is healed; and never lift the bandage or the wound with a enema of water and honey, then with cooked water or lily roots and aristologe long soaked; then return to treatment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is healed in the thigh, it is necessary to be careful not to use heat, but treat it as we have said in the previous section.
de l’enfantement	from childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Skillful midwifery begins with knowing the signs of natural childbirth, and these signs are when you see a woman straining downward and exhaling strongly: then the child should be born immediately. At this point, understand that these children are born according to nature's figure, coming out head first, and seconding with the mother; and when you observe these signs, it is necessary to gently press on her belly so that the child comes quickly. For when it descends onto her pelvis, it seconding with her, and the womb expels its excesses through good purification; and this is what happens naturally, whereas anything otherwise does not come about naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it never comes upon its feet, but strikes the body here and there, or the hands, or upon the belly, or sometimes turns about by chance onto its neck, and assumes other evil forms; so it is necessary for the doctor to be wise and cunning in these matters, and to ward off error and disappointment, and I will show you all the forms how he should help.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the fever comes upon the head through natural causes, and the woman gives birth with great difficulty, and her strength is weak, then she should lie on a saddle, or the women should hold her; and prepare the remedy from oil or fenugreek, cooked as described below:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and cut the second one, and dig into their fingernails as deep as the moisture that is inside; and press the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, it is necessary to cleanse the woman with fenugreek mucilage mixed with sesame oil; then make her sneeze and blow her nose from a cold condition, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now the child will come out.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	If both hands come out, it is necessary to gently reset them little by little; and if they still cannot enter, place the woman on a chair and raise her feet upward; then remove the chair from the ground and have the woman lie down, so she does not try to stand up; and if her hands still cannot reach, cut through the forehand that is previously mentioned, extract the child, and reset them equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the exit of the child on his feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes on his feet, he should be pushed upward, and then little by little, until they are even; then press on the feet and extend them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	He should jump up to his toes if commanded to press, and it will make him sneeze from the condition; if he jumps far, God wills it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not happen as we have said, little by little, until it is according to the natural form.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it becomes slightly easier.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not work as we have said, take a small amount of musk, oil of roses, and gum resin, and grind them all in a mortar; apply this mixture to the female organ both inside and outside, then let it sit in warm water until below the ribs; when it is moistened, make a collar of myrrh and place it below, leaving it for an hour. Then place her on a seat, have her sneeze, press her mouth and nose slightly, and gently massage her belly, as the child is now ready to be born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the emergence of the child on his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this position, he should move his hands little by little; then he should rest on his collarbone, and let his feet hang down, and lie on his side; and gradually he moves his hands little by little, takes hold of his hands on his stomach, removes the cushions from below, until he is fully turned upside down; and if the child does not turn, take his feet and form them, then raise his stomach upwards, and press your hands; and gently rock the child; and instruct the woman to press herself as the child turns.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the birth of the child who comes with a strong hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I know how to bring the hand back: if it cannot be brought back, then have the woman rise and walk; if she cannot walk, lay her on her side with her legs raised, and administer the musk as I have mentioned; and if she does not give birth, have her sit on a chair, and study ways to bring the hand back, and deliver the child according to its natural position, and have her sneeze, and command her to push as the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the birth of the child onto its mother's chest, with its hands spread and its face turned towards its mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I want the patient to hold his hand, then turn it slightly and gently; and when it is even, he should apply a light, muscly, oily compress, as we have said, then instruct him to move it slightly; and once you have done that, place it on a warm seat, and command him to press; and make him sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same way for all the rest
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it acts in this way for all the rest, if the seconding (presumably a medical tool or technique) is applied to your finger, as long as the moisture is drained; and if it gets stuck on its face and neck, cut it from the edge so that it is not retained, and the embryo dies; then bring the child inside, while you have placed it as it should be, and command the woman to press herself at times; then slightly release (the pressure or tool).
de l’issue des gemelz	from the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	You know that twins are born many times, and never three or four at once; and this is not a strange thing, and it often happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Twins are a strange thing, and do not live long, they have no name; I know that they are multiplied, and their deaths are caused by the joy that divides them, which is connected to the mother's womb; and they never emerge as naturally as one would expect, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they are severely stuck, as the cure is as we have said, and the pain is sharp, then do it quickly and lightly; and act thus as it should be done for their safety.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	They should never be formed in the womb I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, or more up to XV, and are entirely shaped like an infant according to the measurement of its wise glory, and it is necessary that the skilled midwife knows all this, for by chance similar things may happen; so do as it requires.
de l’enfant mort	Of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you cure the woman who has suffered a stillbirth or abdominal pain, as I mentioned in the previous division, and there is no discharge, and you are forced to intervene manually; it is necessary that you know if the woman's health is good and free from any complications or fear of death. It is important that the woman be placed on her back, with her feet inclined downward and her legs raised. The practitioner should use both hands, applying two parts of the following: moistened eye drops mixed with althae and fenugreek powder and linseed oil, then anoint the perineum with these oils and eye drops; gently massage it, then apply light pressure to the areas where the ligaments are suitable for descent, taking care that the child does not fall on its head. Insert the ligament in her own natural positions - at the base of her tongue, her colum, mouth, palate, under the beard, or near the symphysis pubis - and if the descent is successful, hold it there with your fingers or a forceps, applying moderate pressure; it is better to insert the ligament with the right hand while holding the speculum with the left. The shape of the ligament is as follows:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then find another joint, where you need to insert it, so that the extraction is even; and then hold it equally by moving from one side to the other, to make it mobile, and be sure the joints are cut so as to hold them in place, just like this form.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	If a part remains stuck, and none of the oils on his fingers help to loosen it, squeeze it into that part, and pull the other part; and if nothing comes out, put this joint higher up the limb, and do what you can until it completely comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes forward over the other, and it cannot be brought back due to tightness, you should wrap it up with a cloth until it is completely loose; then cut at the joint of the palm or at the wrist, and do the same for the other hand, holding both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the child's head is large and stuck in the birth canal, and has a sharp point, it is necessary to insert the spiny spatula between your fingers, press on the head, and extract the water; or you can use the instrument called "almidach," with which the form is made along with the tools of this chapter that follow; and thus do the same for a child with a large natural head; then, pull out the bones with tweezers, and if the head comes out with force, it may be broken; as long as the moisture in the worst part has left; and if it cannot come out, cut it off in pieces as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, pierce it until the moisture runs.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the fever is on its feet, it has a light attraction, and the direction towards the mouth of the wound is gentle.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is twisted in the belly or thigh, you must stretch it out with a cloth wrapped around your hand; and make an incision on the belly or thigh until the moisture within is corrected; and if another member is broken and remains stuck, twist your hand towards the wound, and pull until it reaches the mouth of the wound; then use a saw or something similar to cut through, and pull it out. If the mouth of the wound becomes narrow due to hot abscess, it is not advisable to work on it, but rather to apply moist and greasy substances; and dress it with poultices, using soft water that soothes and moisturizes.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the dislocated joint is on his side, and you can put it back even, as we have said about a living child; and if it cannot be set right, then cut it off piece by piece, leaving nothing of the second joint.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, apply what we have said about abscesses that occur in the married state; and if bleeding occurs, it should be treated with strong restraints, and other remedies should be applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose belly had been cut open and an infant had been torn from it, then another was cut open on that same place, and the other injuries were healed.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, a small abscess appears on the cheek, it swells until it opens, and begins to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called upon to heal it, and I thought for a long time, but I could not close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied strong herbs, and an bone came out, and after a few days, others followed.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very amazed because this belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I thought it was a bone from a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I examined the wound and found a bone in my hand, as long as the woman was getting better; and after observing the woman for a long time, I noticed that she had a slight bowing of her limb; and I have never recorded this chapter to be anything other than because, when a master encounters something strange, he knows how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the shoulder back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	After this comes the form of pressure, with which one binds the books; and at its turn, to the two ends of the limbs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle in their tightening, and made of ebony or box; and the mouth opening should be broad enough for a fist to fit inside, with margins measuring one palm and a half long; and both sides of this same opening should have firm adjustments, each about half a palm long or slightly longer; and these adjustments are inserted into the mare's mouth to open it when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, resembling pliers; it should have two adjustments at each end, approximately one palm long and two fingers wide; when opening the mare's mouth with all the instruments, make the woman lie down on her side, with her legs spread apart, then insert both adjustments into the mare's mouth and join them together, holding the instrument's head beneath her thighs; then open your hand over the entire instrument, as you would with pliers, according to how far you need to open the mare's mouth, until the strain makes it do what is required.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	The surgical instruments are all carefully arranged, and there are many of their kind; when the mirror has made them appear clear, then the work is done more quickly, and with greater skill for their abundance.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not disregard the instrument even if you have not prepared it, for the need is no excuse for negligence.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the secondine (a type of instrument or technique) is used during childbirth, it is necessary to instruct the patient to hold her breath and then exhale slowly while pressing her hands to her mouth and nose. If she follows these instructions, all will be well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If it is not possible, take I a needle or a plug, and make I an opening in the cover, and insert herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, such as calament, rue, anis, chamomile, cassia, and centaur; all these herbs, or any of them, should be cooked or put in water over the fire; then place a cane or plug in the opening, and turn the other end into the mouth of the wound, holding it until the vapors enter the wound; then make the patient sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the treatment does not help, then do the following.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if after this treatment it persists and is not strong enough, tell the patient to moisten their left hand with oil of sesame or musk, then wrap it back in its natural position, and seek help from a second person; and as soon as they find it, press and stretch it little by little straightening, so that the dislocation does not slip during extraction; but he must gently move it to the right and left, and then treat it.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the opening of the dislocation is narrow, we have mentioned the cure of sneezing and herbal fumigation; and if it does not improve from all that we have said, be careful not to drain it; but he who is at the opening of the dislocation, should tie it to the woman's ankle, then give her a four-part treatment; she will release it and come out, but nevertheless, when she gets stuck, there will be a bad smell in the stomach and head, and the patient will be worse.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it is necessary, then suitable fumigations should be used: no one among the ancients has tried the fumigation of arugula and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument used to fumigate the woman for the retention of flowers and the placenta is this one:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is a glass instrument resembling a horn, and it has a narrow top naturally, and wide openings over the fire; and the fumigation should be on the coals, and the smoke until it is spent, and then repeat another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who have not had their foundation pierced, but it is covered by a subtle mark: therefore, when circumcising, one should pierce this mark with a sharp instrument, without damaging it, and avoid touching it; then apply a moist cloth soaked in wine and oil, and continue the treatment until it heals.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not heal, insert a thin wire or pin, and leave it for several days, allowing the child to move freely; it should be removed when the wound has healed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And never comes this sudden stop of a wound or abscess; it is necessary to cover this stop, if it is cured, as we have said about the pain of the bone.
de la fistule dou fondement	about the fistula from the depths of the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistules that originate from below the foundation are more serious than those that come from above, or in the space between two parts, if there is a fistula or several; and when this nodation is old, it opens, and still emits white or subtle discharge, and never do these fistules heal; they are known by the fact that there is oozing or pus when the patient evacuates, and sometimes they jump around.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if the ulcers penetrate to the bladder, and to half of the penis; and they reach the joint of the thigh, and to the root of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus, you recognize the fistula that penetrates but does not heal: and it is good to insert your index finger into the anus and push a fine needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no curvature.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has curvature, if you insert a fine plunger or a horsehair, as long as you feel the attempt or the hair in your hand; and if you do not feel it, and it does not produce any expulsion of pus or wind, as we have said, know that it will not penetrate; be quick to cure it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula persists all the way to the bladder or to the urethra, if it leaks urine and cannot be sealed with medications.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced all the way to the hip joint, then there is a chance of veins being affected close to the place; if there is no curvature or change in the pain around it, and it remains bent, neither medications nor any treatment helps; and for these persistent fistulas, there is no sure cure except through hard work and the vain efforts of those who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the case where it is neither persistent nor old, there is hope for healing with heat, as I have experienced, and the patient lies on their back in your hands; extend their legs up to their hips, and bring their hips towards their stomach; then wrap a tent of cloth or, if there is curvature, a soft material, as long as you know where the pain originates.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain in the foundation, it is necessary that you press your index finger into it, and then he feels that the pain is piercing; and if you uncover between your thumb and forefinger where the satisfaction or chill is felt, then know that it is persistent; unless worked upon, it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One cannot be completely healed of these, but it does happen occasionally; and the help that can be provided involves applying hot cautery to the wound according to its size, as mentioned above; and burn all the way to the base of the fistula until it disappears; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these charred marks must heal, which are similar to a bird's feather. Then apply moist compresses, until the wound is completely healed, then use treatment with ointment, making sure it is clean and sealing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is in such a state, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If this cannot be done in any other way, and the tent (presumably a wound) is between his teeth, and he does not reach the root which is at the base, place a thick covering of wool or similar material between your two fingers and see where the fistula is located after removing the covering; cut from the beginning of the fistula, but do not remove it completely until it reaches the base of the tent; then cauterize it, as much as possible, at the top of the tent; and the tent will be healed and free. Beware of those evil-looking materials that resemble a bird's feather, and do not linger on them.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the pain attacks you suddenly and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or a strong medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For fire cautery combines two beneficial things: namely, the burning of these prepared herbs, and the inflammation of blood and the removal of moisture; then treat wounds with moist, healing butter or crushed matter, until the bowels become soft, and push out the burned parts from within; then cure the wound with hot compresses and hard, binding herbs, which are dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it becomes healthy and does not relapse.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula appears all the way to the bottom of the foundation and is distant from the body, press your finger onto that very foundation, and see what happens.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tentation, and between it and the skin is the pus or the wound or it is ready to pierce, if there is no other way of escape and hope, through one of the three methods: cauterize it as we have said, cut it all the way to the bottom, or if you can place tents and treat it as before; do not go too deep, that you do not cut the covering which holds the foundation, and complications arise by the will of God; then treat it as we have said; perhaps it will heal, or you remove that cover and clean it after it has been cut from the base, either with a tent or another pointed instrument; then disinfect the infected wound, as much as you can; study to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the part beyond the foundation. If it is a lighter matter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And never are fistulas made in this way: and it is when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is on one side from the base of the skin above, so take a probe sharp at the end according to this shape.
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And insert the wire twisted in two, and push the probe through the whole length of the fistula until it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is persistent at the edge of the base inside, then extract the wire from that opening, and insert your second finger or base; take the thread from the top of the wire, and join the two ends together, squeezing them tightly, and leave it for one or two days; do not remove it, until the threads break off that are between them, and stop bleeding; then treat the wound until it is healed and clean.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If you cannot pierce the fistula, no matter what method you use, it will not be too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not appropriate to make the wound worse if it is not too deep, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form is a sharp, spiky one in which the fistula is made if it is deep and narrow on one side and cuts deeply; on the other side, it is neither too deep nor too shallow, as you can see.
des emorroydes	Of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: those that are inside the anus, resembling grains of resin, with small or large ones, and sometimes they are accompanied by blood, and extend from the anus down to the rectum; but those that protrude outside have little moisture, and sometimes a bit of cold or hot liquid, and have the appearance of the skin. The treatment for hemorrhoids inside the anus is to order the patient to lie on their side until the anus relaxes and the seeds fall out; if they are stuck, take them with tweezers or hold them with your finger nail, then cut them off at the root. If they cannot be held due to moisture, grasp them with a piece of cloth, cotton, or a strip of chamois, and remove them gently. Then cut them off and apply hot powdered medicines as instructed in the cautery chapter; or cauterize them as mentioned, and treat other conditions as long as there is no infection. If the anus cannot be relaxed, wash it with a strong enema to clean out what is inside so that it can be removed easily. The treatment is light if the patient's condition improves quickly after applying these remedies, and cutting off the hemorrhoids without using a knife.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary to administer the stitch in this manner: take a twisted thread, and wind it around an needle, then draw the thread from above and pierce the needle from the other side, and pass both ends of the thread through the needle, and if it is too thick, tighten the forming thread, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do thus with all others, leaving one for draining the excess blood; then place a moist cloth over the wound, or wax, and put it on the wound, and instruct the patient to rest; then leave it until they heal, and when they have fallen, apply treatments and other remedies until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	The phrase "dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement" translates roughly to "the gently drying of the
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is drying of feces in the intestine, due to natural constraint, and when the illness is old and no medicine helps.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary that you scrape off the dry skin with a spatula or your fingernail, which does not allow it to moisten; then treat it as soon as possible, and if it cannot be moistened, repeat the scraping stronger than before until it becomes moist and slightly cut; then treat it as long as it heals.
dou fremit	Douloureux" is the Old French
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Mice are small, hairy creatures that burrow into the body and grow rapidly; and they never harm it by their touch, but cause a sensation as if dead from trembling, spreading throughout the whole body, especially in the hands.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a cane from a goose feather or a strong falcon's feather, and place this cane on the trembling until the purplish circles cover the whole trembling; then turn your hand over the entire cane until you cover all around the trembling, and set it straight, and remove the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you find yourself in need of a cane made from either bronze or iron, make it according to this form, and be sure that it is both strong and flexible.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not touch, for fear of hurting, and do not press. If you see, cauterize the tremor as it is described in this chapter of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of a douche (or enema)
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	One should never use a enema with silver or lead, or melted gold or iron wire; and one should never use these small and large instruments, according to those to whom they are prescribed.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those are the ones that are prescribed for the treatment of children and those who are weak and suffering, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	He must prepare a small and wide bladder if it is too narrow above; he will bind the abdomen according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and if there is a distension and the abdomen is bound as you see, and the feces are inside, he should have two openings on one side and one on the other; then place in the abdomen either a bladder from an animal or parchment, making small incisions around it, with a space of about an inch between each incision, and thread through these incisions a strong thread twisted in the shape of X or any other pattern, pulling the skin tight, forming a circle; when the medicine is inside, secure it with a strong thread at the instrument's end, then perform the enema; and this is the form of a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and apply a warm compress with oil or egg white or something similar, then gently squeeze it out; then the attendant should hold the patient's legs against the wall, and allow the medicine to flow out as much as possible; and if he sleeps through the night, it is even better.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you use the enema for an illness due to intestinal stagnation, and the medicine flows out quickly, repeat it as long as there is no further need.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoid is at the anus or abscess, it should also be enema as delicate as for a child; and this is the shape of the delicate enema compress on which the skin is drawn tight.
des plaies	from wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already spoken of the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments for hands and medicine, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are, and according to the place where the wounds are made, and from what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are through the striking of stone, and the cutting with a sword or knife, or with a spear or staff or arrow, or similar things; or they are made according to the places on the body, such as a wound that opens on the collarbone, or on the head, or on the side, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and begin with simple head wounds, because the remembrance will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound appears on the head, and the bone is not broken, be careful if it's caused by a stone or similar objects, for the skin is still torn and the wound is deep, and you slightly doubt an abscess: do it soon to heal the most from the headache, especially if there is little blood loss from the wound, and treat the affected part accordingly; and remove the patient's excess wine and heavy meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to heal, then reduce his meat intake and do not drink wine or eat char; and apply a poultice of rose oil only or aromatic wine to the wound, especially if an abscess forms as it comes; in its early stages, keep it clean without letting air, powder, enter until it is healed. If there are burns, apply any suitable remedies while it remains healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is great, like the size of a sword or similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by pressure, then they are sewed together, as I will say about wounds in the belly, from the stitches.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is open and deep, reaching the bone, and it bleeds profusely, then stop the bleeding with a bandage; treat the wound with medicine, and replace the skin with hard wood in place of leather, and instruct the patient to eat hearty meats, such as testicles, cooked wheat, as well as poultry and similar foods.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	If you find putrefaction in a wound that does not reach the bone, and it bleeds profusely and emits a bad odor, then stop the bleeding and treat it; but if there is an artery in the wound, or a vein without a cut, and medicines cannot stop it, then cauterize it, and if this does not help, tie it off with a thread.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is light: it is that you apply this powder that will soothe the fire so that it heals.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the method for the powder is this: take one part incense, two parts dragon's blood, and three parts of the living charcoal, mix it finely, apply it to the wound, and tighten it until it spreads well and joins together with all its moisture; then bind it tightly and leave it untouched if it does not swell, because the medicine is not removed as long as it remains healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never should charcoal be used alone, unless one has incense or dragon's blood, but the fire should have healed the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the fire has moved the wound, especially if there is no powder applied; but put on some prepared ointments, or a paste of barley flour made with water and honey, until it is soft; then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if a bone fracture occurs with the wound and it is small, extract it with delicate pincers; and I will tell you below about the fractures of the skull.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the collar (or neck).
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound occurs on the neck and it is simple, then there is no distinction between it and any other wound in the head, but if the wound is deep in the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is an artery, then there is no other remedy but to let it heal, and do not put anything constricting, as that would harm the artery and cause it to retract; and do not apply any hot things to the wound, because the substance of the artery is cold, and its continuation is connected with the brain, which is the highest member. But use medicine accordingly, such as washing with lukewarm water mixed with rose oil, and clean bandages also in lukewarm water, and other remedies from mineral sources in this manner, and moist compresses.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is great, cutting it open and binding it with bandages, then treat it until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and severe, filled with pus and bowing, then pierce them lower or cut them open; and if the artery is severed, and bleeding occurs, then ignore it and use cauterization; and if there is a sharp pain in the throat or heart, and the passage of air is blocked, do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural position; then tighten it gently and leave it for no more than a day, applying treatments without delay until it heals; and if the wound has pressed into the bone, dig out any pieces of bone you can reach, leaving those you cannot until the wound festered and becomes disfigured; and for fresh wounds, apply the powder I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones or a fistula in the wound, treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	wound from a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a spear or knife, and deep, then consider the signs of its severity as the patient alone can show: then know that the wound is mortal; but if it is not too deep, and still has all its blood, do not apply powder in the first hour, nor bind it tightly so as to prevent further bleeding that might return to the body and cause the patient harm; instead, apply an attractive dressing and change it twice a day. And if you have no dressing, put old cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture, and keep the patient sleeping on the wound for three or four days, or more; if there is no spasm, nor any shaking or extreme pain, know that the patient is recovering. When you see these good signs, then know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure the wounds with various remedies and others, as long as they are healthy; and if they cannot heal, know that there is a fistula; then treat them as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	If the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is shallow or deep in the front, back, or side, treat it accordingly; if large, sew it up; and if small, use powder, and if it has penetrated into the bone and broken off pieces, clean the wound thoroughly if the pieces are devious; if they are not devious, let the wound heal, and gently extract foreign bodies; for other wounds in other limbs, judge them as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	disruption of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The disruption of the belly is great and medium and small; from a large wound there flows no time the intestine or the nerve of the intestines, which causes the entry of evil; and stitching is more difficult, and never worth less the small wound than the large one, because one must handle the intestines more carefully, if not from above and below; for the intestines soon swell, causing pain, if they are pressed again, and therefore the smaller wound is more mobile, because one moves the intestine to its proper place in contrast to others. And know that the rupture of the belly occurs according to four manners: The common stitches have their place in the stitching of the belly, and the stitching of other wounds on the body and other specific stitches are common to other wounds; nevertheless, they are more suitable for the stitching of the belly, and I will explain each one.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small and nothing of the intestine is damaged, and it is a difficult thing to reset, then this is one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to the injury.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this way: moisten a sponge or a thin cloth with hot water alone, or cook water with squinant (a type of herb), and cypress, and spices, and raise the intestine until the swelling is removed; and never use wine as a constricting agent, and let it cool down slowly.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, if the intestine is filled with water or blood and the veins are closed, because by this means the entry becomes lighter for a little while; and if it cannot enter, make a slight cut in the wound with the instrument used to treat hemorrhoids; and the first cure is to move that which is blocking, that we should not cut without great need; and this is the instrument to split: cut inside the lump and push outward, observe the shape.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound has enlarged and the intestine protrudes, return it to its natural position in its proper place, if you have the ability, because this is preferable.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large, and it's in the lower part of the belly, then you should make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it's in the lower part of the abdomen, place the head and breasts higher than the lower parts, and pay attention so that the affected area is higher than the other; thus it is necessary to apply what I say for both large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, prepare a moistened medicated oil and apply it to the entire wound with your fingers, then close the lips; this is the common method of stitching. Insert one or more needles according to the width of the wound, leaving two spaces at the head of the wound, and thread a strong, fine needle; pierce both layers of skin with the two points of the scalpel, assembling the two points of the scalpels together in three places; then tie a double thread around the needle from both sides, closing the wound neatly, continuing to do so until all the wound is closed. The needles should be neither too fine nor too thick; the fine ones capture all the tissue, and the thick ones cannot enter the skin and flesh well. Therefore, they should be medium-sized. Do not push the needles too far from the surface of the skin and flesh, or else they will open up the wound before the stitching is complete. Then cut off the needle points so that they do not disturb the patient while sleeping, and place a tent or cloth at the ends of the stitches to hold them in place until the wound is healed. This type of stitching is more suitable for small wounds; for larger ones, you simply stitch with one or two needles, threading a strong, medium needle, assembling both layers of skin and scalpels together, leaving spaces about as wide as a thin finger between each stitch. This method cured a man who had been stabbed in the belly, where the wound was more than a palm-width long and extended several palms from the intestines; it was deep within the abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine after it had been out for twenty-four hours, and the wound healed completely within fifteen days, and it was cured, and it became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And they marveled that he did not die, and it was a miracle; I did not cure him with any treatment, as I was in a place where none were found, nor any medicine; every day for two weeks, I put clean cotton on the wound and washed it with honey and water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching: take the needle and the thread from the outer part of the wound until it reaches the inner; when it has pierced through the center, do not move the chief [of the stitch] but continue stitching or withdrawing the needle as you have done initially, and repeat on the other side until the stitching is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second way of sewing, which Galenus calls the proper method, is like nothing else, which joins the two parts together naturally, and applies one end to the other with great care: pierce a needle or the sharp end close by, and make a single hole in the flesh; leave the two ends of the thread intact. Then turn the needle and pierce it from the opposite side towards these ends inside; then pierce each one from the opposite side towards the others inside, through the other threads on either side; and this is the most moving way of sewing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen calls this method, and no one testifies to it: one must sew the belly with two needles, each with a thread; you should poke one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew intestines; and know that when the rupture is within the belly, the stitching is more difficult than for other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is like the judgment of other wounds: and it is that when you open a fresh wound and drain all its blood, if the arrow has moved, then you should stop the bleeding and apply a poultice with charred herbs, and if the arrow has moved further, then apply any available treatment as long as the wound remains open; then bind it tightly, and seal it with wax and mirra; then treat the wound like other wounds until it is healed; and if you have no medicines, put old cotton and move it twice a day until it heals.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you need no other medicine in addition to these arrangements when the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound is affecting important members, it is necessary to moisten a light linen cloth with hot temperate oil or rose oil, and place it around the affected area, and under the armpits; and if it feels painful or pus-filled, which often happens, then give it enemas of black wine, especially if the pus reaches the intestines. Puncture it inside, and know that when it is the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The internal organ called "young" cannot heal when it is weary, and this is due to the condition of its vessels, and the subtlety of all the body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	If the gum (or 'zirbe') jumps out of the wound, reset it as you would the intestine, while it is still fresh; and if it has become old and turned white or black, then hold the black part still, as there are vessels and arteries beneath; then cut away the tissue in between, and hang the two gums down from the edge of the wound until the extraction of the gum is complete, making sure the wound bends.
de la routure dou boueil	from the rupture of the bowels
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestines are ruptured and the wound is small, it cannot be restored in any man, as I have seen a nobleman with a lance through his stomach; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, it became gangrenous and fistulous, and there issued excretion and flatulence; I applied treatment according to my ability, and did not cease subtilizing until he was healed, and the wounds were sealed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him healed, I doubted that the patient would not have pain in his stomach; but he felt no pain, only improved conditions, and eating and drinking; and certain physicians said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be treated in this manner: take a large reed, then gather the edges of the wound together, and when the reed has opened the mouth, place it between the two edges, so that it draws them tightly together; then cut off the head of the reed, and let it remain in such a way that he cannot unfasten it, then put another reed in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely healed; and dress the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the disease is severe in the intestine, and causes no harm to the patient, one can bind the intestine with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal, in this way: take the tip of this intestinal thread, which is well-stripped, and tie it to the tip of this thin linen thread twisted, then wind the thread onto the needle and sew up the intestine, and arrange it in the wound; this method of sewing has no equal except according to the path of faith and hope; and if the wound is deep and wide, especially when it affects one of the main intestines, no one will heal it with any subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	whether it is a fistula, wherever it may be.
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Every wound or abscess, when it opens, is generally called a "fistula," especially if it is covered with hair and deeply infected.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	A fistula is according to true nature, hard and white, without feeling pain, just like the feathers of a bird; it doesn't heal clearly, sometimes thin and other times thick; sometimes moist, and other times dry; and I have already spoken in the division of wounds that every wound that is not healthy, and there is no discharge, is only due to one of the nine causes: namely, the smallness of blood or pus; or because of its evil nature; or because there is hard matter inside, preventing it from healing; or because there is too much discharge; or the flesh is rotten, and the material is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good for treatment; or because corruption has the manner of a plague; or because the proprieties in the region delay digestion, and late health, and are naturally flatulent; or it involves veins or bones, and I have already explained all these causes, signs, and medical cures in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary that I inform you about the treatment of a fistula which is performed by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	You know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistules that affect large veins, arteries, nerves, or any part of the digestive tract, bladder, or any of the ribs, or the spine, or any joint in the hands or feet, and if they affect the primary member and its corresponding parts.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all fistulas of this kind are difficult to heal and require hard work and knowledge; and if there is a fistula that does not come to the place I mentioned, but you have faith in its cure and understand it, take a needle or iron wire, and if the fistula is straight, insert it as desired; and if it is crooked, seek a delicate surgical probe to adjust it according to its curvature; for the fluid will flow around the bend. And if the fistula has an opening that cannot be properly probed by instruments, clean it with a syringe from one of the openings, as moisture passes from one opening to another and cleanses it; then do it carefully at your convenience, knowing if there is bone or nerve, and if it is completely cut off, and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you press your hand on it, and the place where he feels it; and when you know the exact location, and whether it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or any of the places I mentioned, then cut it as I told you, and remove all foreign matter and corrupt flesh inside; and then cure it until it is completely healed, and if the fistula is very deep and straight, cut it completely, as much as possible, then place moist, medicated bands around it, and insert bottles with medicine until the superfluous fluid at the bottom has been washed away; and then apply hot poultices of clean, healthy fat while it heals; and if it does not heal through these means, cauterize it as we said, and if the bone is corrupt from the fistula, cut it out.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerve does not affect the principal limbs, as we have said, and if the bone is exposed with corruption and blackening, the king must treat it until all corruption is removed, then heal the injuries thoroughly while it is sound; but if it remains unsound and bends back as before, know that you are not yet free: expose it and keep it in that state until you have removed all corruption, then restore it to its place; and if thus healed, it will be well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If no, know that the corruption is too deep for you to treat it; if there is no other way but to let nature take its course; and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can pull it with tweezers, extract it with an instrument suitable for this purpose, and if there are many bones, break them not, leave none intact; and if moisture opposes you, causing doubt or fear, cauterize and dry, and heal the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, apply something putrefying to the wound, and let it fester until the pus has formed around the bones; then they will be more easily removed. If it is a large bone, like that of the leg or thigh, scrape off the corruption as much as possible until all blackness is gone, then dress the wound; if there is a great deal of putrefaction extending almost to the bone, cover and protect it completely until the corruption is healed, and then treat it until it is healed. And I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that you may take an example from it and provide aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	He was a young man around thirty years old who had a pain in his leg due to something that arose inside his body, causing substances to flow towards the leg, and he had a large abscess that could not be opened; but because of their foolishness, they pricked the abscess so much that many matters corroded, turning into a fistula, and he suffered from many openings through which all bowels and moisture from the body leaked out. Many tried to cure him for two years, but found no wise man skilled in such arts until I was called upon, and I examined his leg and the medicines used to cure him, and what had corroded through the openings into the flesh; and the young man's skin turned red, and it took on a citrine color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I set up a tent in one of these gaps, and then I examined all the gaps, and I found that some came against each other from every part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I quickly acted and pressed into one of the gaps until I discovered a part of the bone, which I found corrupted and pierced, and the corruption reached down to the bone itself; I knew what appeared to be the corrupted bone, and thought there was no other corruption except that which I had left; and I began to treat the wound with medicines for a long time, but it would not heal. Then I examined it again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, so I treated it and then opened it up, and applied medicine; and it healed and became sound, and did not want to begin the operation again, except for the weakness of the patient who could not bear it, and for the fear of death that I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For in the evacuation of blood, it often becomes completely clean, and a hard scar forms in its place on the bone, and it has a good disposition and causes no harm or pain to anything at all, neither going away nor coming back.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this manner: take a linen bandage, stretch it over the opening of the bone, and instruct someone to pull it upward; then tie another thicker linen bandage over the first one, and bind it to the flesh that is detached from the bone, pulling it downward so that you remove the corrupt flesh from beneath, and expose the flesh on the bone where you see or feel the corruption. Place ashes or a table under the bone to prevent further corruption; and it should be treated as much as possible, so as to see and feel the corruption, and be treated again afterward.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if a bone is corrupted and will not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then expose the whole thing; then apply hot coals from one side to the other of the corruption, and be sure to cauterize it over a long period, as we have said; and if the corruption is in the joint, cut off the corrupted joint, and if it is in the continuation of two joints, there is no other way but to cut them both; and if the corruption is in the fingers of the hand or foot, this thing is very difficult, but you must inquire how the corruption opens, and cleanse it in every way that you can, as long as the vein or nerve does not oppose you; and know that there are many instruments for cutting and cauterizing these bones, according to the position of the bone, its appearance, thickness, size, and hardness, and therefore it is necessary to match each instrument to the work; and know that the operation will show you the instrument you need, according to the knowledge of this art and the testimony of the ways of the diseases; choose the instrument that is suitable.
dou feu	with fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The joint dislocates either internally or externally; and when you have treated the inflammation with remedies, and they do not help, it is necessary to cover that limb until the inflammation disappears, so that the patient escapes from death or harm, which is greater, due to the defect in the member; and the signs of this are that the limb becomes black, as if burned by fire, and then turns white, since the inflammation spreads from one part to all parts of the body; hurry to cover it, and if it is caused by the bite of some venomous beast, such as a scorpion or a snake or similar, treat the head of the affected joint immediately, and do not give it time to come to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes up to the hand, so that the bone is dislocated at the joint, then the corrosion does not reach the arm; and if it comes to the arm, then the bone is dislocated at the shoulder; and if it passes by the shoulder, death is certain, and there is no cure outside of the quantity of its virtue; and thus it acts wherever the corrosion appears: if it starts at a joint, the bone is dislocated after the other joints; and if it comes to the foot, it dislocates the whole foot; and if it rises in the leg, it dislocates at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy than to leave the patient to die; and the manner of applying either bandage or splint to the limb is that you bind it above and below, and extend one assistant with each ligament, and you separate the skin between the two ligaments with a broad spatula, until the bone is exposed, then apply the splint or bandage, and place a linen cloth on each side so that the bandage does not touch the healthy part, and cause further damage and abscess to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if the bleeding occurs when you open, cauterize the vein carefully or apply certain powders to restrict it; then return to your medicine until it is completed, bind the afflicted member with a suitable ligature, and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man in great pain: he had a blackness that looked like a burn from fire, and that ulceration came first on his right big toe, until it discolored the whole toe; and when the man saw the ulceration, he covered his foot, and it healed; but after a long time, the ulcer returned on his left hand, and he came to me, and I placed reflective things over the purification of the body after the corruption, and it could not cease. And he begged me to cut off his hand, but I had no hope of reflecting the material; and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die, since the strength of the man was weak; and he became completely despairing, returned to his land, covered his hand, and it healed; and I have never heard of a worse consequence for doing otherwise, if one has need.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	No abscess appears in a fat flesh, and it stays for so long that it causes great swelling; then it bursts and perforates, and the bowels jump out, and remain visible, just like a vessel; and the skin covering it is as thin as delicate cloth, and does not cover the bone or nerve, and such a condition is called "sain," and not "fistule"; but if it extends so far that it reaches the bone completely, then it is called "fistule"; and the flesh, if you cut all around it, especially when it is thin like cloth, should be cauterized to prevent its putrefaction.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you believe that the skin has become hard and the corruption is not completely healed and the skin is dry and brittle, then treat it with a cleansing enema in this way: examine if the breast is swollen and if there is an unpleasant odor coming from it; then give an Egyptian medicine made thus: take ashes, oil, and litargy (alum), in equal parts, and place them in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey. Then, according to your need, mix it with water and honey, and use it for the enema to clean the breast and close the fistula; leave the medicine on for two hours, then extract it while squeezing; do this many times until the breast is completely cleansed and the pus is drained. And if Egyptian medicine or ash water is not available, grind ashes from vine roots, pour water over them, let it settle, and strain; use this for the enema as you know that the breast is thoroughly cleaned. If the patient cannot tolerate either of these, then give him an enema with a mixture of water and honey or ground litargy; or use just honey or sweet wine to cleanse and wash; when you have done this and believe the breast is completely cleansed, give him a cleansing enema using what causes charring in the breast, and apply some diaphanous plaster made with rose oil and wine. Or you can use various medicines and ointments whose properties I explained earlier in the chapter on ointments. And if the fistula opening in the breast is very small and the catheter cannot enter, enlarge it slightly with a hot iron; then place a small amount of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment inside until it is enlarged enough for the enema. If the wound is too wide, cutting it will leave only part of the catheter inside or outside, and if the fistula opening downwards has more tissue above than below.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bowel is in perfect condition, it does not allow itself to protrude; and if you cannot cover the opening of the anus as you see fit, arrange yourself so that the bowel descends to its lowest point, for when the bowel is perfect, it does not allow itself to protrude, and if you cannot cover the opening of the anus as you see fit, arrange yourself so that the bowel moves slightly downwards, and do not leave any part of the bowel protruding; and take consolidative medicines to apply over the wound, and place them on a linen drape that covers the entire wound; then press firmly around the opening in the anus, making it wider than before, for often, in order to press the bowel, they remove the covering, and you must know what comes from the bowel: whether it is venom or poison or enough or too little, or digested or undigested; and be careful if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or no, and when your medicine has taken effect and you see the nature that arises over the opening of the wound in the anus, then you know that healing is approaching, and then loosen it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you unbind the wound, change the other drape, and renew the treatment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast is bowing downward due to indigestion after many days, know that the breast will not open.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons manifest after a long time, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are people whose spirits are so tormented by their wounds that they do the opposite of what is beneficial; and if the breast bowing downward due to indigestion after many days does not open, know that it will remain closed; and if the breast refuses to open, it is distant, so apply moist medicines with a subtle substance and dry in virtue as a final remedy, for there is much vitriol present, which is the last medicine. Take the final remedy and make it with rose oil and mix it with old wine of equal substance; then conserve it and use it; and do the same with heated honey thickened with cooked grain flour or alyssum root, which is like flour made from grains and herbs; use simple or composite remedies: grind them and make powder, and add to the honey I mentioned, and use it; and if the cure is prolonged, and this cure does not help, then know that corruption has taken hold, and it exerts pressure on the bones, or hard members, or ligaments, as in the case of a fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	from the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Gangrene is an abscess that forms under a nail in the hand or foot, or occasionally in other areas; and when it becomes old and one does not take care of it, it can lead to gangrene in the toes, causing them to rot and fall off as far as the root of the nail, and possibly even the entire toe. It causes intense, foul-smelling pain, and the flesh around the toe becomes wide and discolored.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When treating it as we have described in the previous section, if the treatment is not effective, you must remove all debris stuck under the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cautery is very great aid if the bone is healthy, and the nail is sound; and if the nail catches fire in the flame, and begins to burn, and you need to point it with a tool, and pull it out upwards, and gently remove that charred part, and apply to it hot and corrosive medications to remove all of it; then treat the wound with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corruption is in the bone, cut it off and pull it out, for as much as the bone decays, it cannot heal; and if you see both corrupting, cut it as mentioned above, then treat it until it is healed; and if it is burnt and blistered, and causes great pain, you must first treat the wound; then cut the nail with a sharp spatumile diagonally from above, and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh under the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if this happens, apply something soothing.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain from the deep wound causes him great suffering.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	He who is born into the hands of no one, perhaps because he is very fleshy, and perhaps he has a bone there, and never an angle, and none are born in the socket of the joint, where birth is against all reason.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	He who is born in no place at all, does not move, and he who is born at the joint of a limb, may remain immobile; for the size of him who is fleshy is very light, in that same manner: remove him from his root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure: if you keep him covered.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For him who is born or has an injury elsewhere, it is necessary that you first cover the wound thoroughly to the bone, then dislocate the bone to a suitable position, and then cure it as long as it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The dislocations that come at any joint come either from birth, or from a wound becoming stuck, or from a burn of fire, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If you need to tie this suture, so that it must be repaired according to their natural forms; then place between two moistened cloths or drapes in rose oil, so that they do not adhere; or place between two pieces of fine cloth, as long as the limbs are sewn together, as appropriate.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If dislocation occurs in any of its fingers with the palm, tie this suture as appropriate.
des vils	of evil
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	They have thick, enveloped veins, full of melancholy excess, which come to many parts of the body; and there is more in the legs of those who walk, work, and carry, than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary for you to administer purgative once, and then cleanse the basil (i.e., the bowels).
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cure for iron (or possibly a specific condition) is according to two methods: one is with the use of cupping and drawing out the black blood; and the other method is that you open the vein and drain it entirely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The procedure (or surgery) is as follows: first, immediately apply hot water to the leg, making it as warm and comfortable as possible, until the thick blood becomes thin; then, lift the sick leg from above the ankle towards the hip; next, cut the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a broad knife, then drain and extract the black blood with your hand, from the upper part to the lower, until enough blood has been drawn, as much as the patient can endure; then bind it up, and instruct him to consume food that will turn his blood black; and repeat the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, causing harm to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Lift the affected leg and if there are many hairs, immerse it in water, and raise it with hot water until it turns red and swells; then warm the veins. If you do not have a bath, heat it over a fire, and then apply it to the long vein at the top of the knee or at the ankle joint; cut open the skin over the vein until it is exposed. Cut the skin around the vein from both sides, making it red and bleeding; like a white cord. Pull the leg away from the body until the skin lifts off the vein, then make a second cut at the first joint; pull and cut again from another angle as you did before; continue cutting and pulling in this way. Once all the muscle is severed, cut the vein; and if it cannot be pulled out, insert a needle through the entire length of the thread and pull it along with the thread, pushing from behind at the same time, and turning your hand back and forth until it comes out. Be careful not to cut, as this prevents pulling and can cause harm to the patient; once you have completely removed it, apply a moist woolen cloth dipped in wine and rose oil to the wound and dress it until healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if it (the dislocation) is tight and twisted and wrapped up together, and it is not at all straight, as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly but do not cover it; treat it as we have previously mentioned.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The way to cut the joint without damaging it is to make a cut that does not pierce the vein; it should be done with great care because if it were too thin, it would cut into the vein, but since it needs to be thick as we have said, this is its form:
de la voinne civile	of the vein's cavity
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in the legs, in warm parts where no herbs or trees grow, and on land where there is no moisture; and sometimes it appears elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens because of putrefaction that comes from under the skin, as it winds and turns inside the body.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein appear, it is that there is a very great swelling in the leg, then the color changes, and the vein begins to protrude strongly, as if from the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the vein opens, it is necessary to wrap around a piece of cloth from one and a half to two fingers thick, and leave it on the leg; and at every instance when there is no discharge, wrap around the cloth again, and do not cover it at its base, until it has completely drained; for if you cut it, it will return to the flesh, causing abscesses and putrefaction or other illnesses. For this reason, it should be treated little by little, up to the point where no part of it remains in the body; and it is often a vein that is about five or six fingers long when it is first opened, and when you cut it, it retracts one or two millimeters, and pierces through to the bottom, completely draining. And there should be nothing left inside, and remedies should be applied to the wound daily to prevent putrefaction until the cure is complete, as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And in no case should this vein be cut again, especially when it opens at the ankle joint or at the foot, and there is much bleeding and from which it jumps; then treat it as we have said above.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	vers that are born between skin and flesh.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called "beef disease" in our land because it often affects cattle, and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh. It spreads throughout the body, moving up and down, and it feels very painful as it moves from one member to another until it breaks through the skin where it was, and then it goes away with great force; and it is caused by the putrefaction of certain humors, just like worms, snakes, or lice in the belly. One doubts its severity, for when it travels through the body and reaches the head, it can go to the eye, perhaps retreat, and destroy the eye. This happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it healing and drawing, it cannot be done further unless it is completely healed: therefore, it is necessary that you hold the limb above and below with a strong, tight ligature, then cut and draw it out forcibly, and if the vein bursts, apply fire cautery until it heals; and the greatest harm it does is when it lets blood, as we have said; and if you see it coming close to the oil, tighten the ligature on the brow, then cut and draw it out forcefully; and it is advisable for the patient to use purification of the body with solvents and medicines to drain evil humors, and to cleanse putrid meats.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	The pain that comes from flatulence.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This illness is called "weakness" in our land, and it brings pain to any limb, and then moves from one limb to another; and I have seen this as I told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and I examined her arm, and saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and after that, I noticed a small worm-like thing rising on her shoulder, brighter than anything else, like living silver when it moves from one place to another; the pain left that area and moved to her shoulder, and then, shortly afterward, spread throughout her body, reaching the other arm; then she told me that she felt it moving around inside her body.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was very amazed at how she moved from one limb to another, for I had never seen this disease in such a way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Nevertheless, I wanted everyone to understand that the pain should move from one place to another, but I had not seen this happen as much as with the woman; and I thought it was because she had dry skin and exposed veins, which is why such stiffness appeared; and I did not find the same reason for those who are sickly, and have moist skin and closed veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see this disease cured, and the patient feels this pain, if it opens up as we have said, press it gently from above and below, until this constrained stiffness in the limb leaves; and cauterize the limb; and if you do not have these things at hand, cure it with those that remove stiffness, such as foul pills, stonecrop pills, and others like them.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows vary, according to their appearance and according to the parts of the body from which they originate.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	Their diversity lies in that there are those with large and small tips, some with barbs, others sealed; and those with two angles, or with tongues, or with pieces; and those that shoot into any member do so in different ways: either into a principal member, like the head, body, liver, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it comes out in any part of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you below, appears: it is necessary that you fight against the extraction of this arrow, because death comes later in various ways; and when this bad sign does not appear for you, and the arrow is not completely extracted, pull it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when the arrow comes out and pierces the bone, and if there is satisfaction above the brain, it is when scotoma, sudden darkness, and seeing halos around objects occur; and redness and inflammation of the tongue, spasms, and difficulty in understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps the arrow comes out from the nose or ears; and sometimes it causes loss of speech and voice; and also pus-like discharge from the wound that looks like a worm, and there is also sudden, strong pain similar to that of a horse's kick; and if these signs appear to you, and you are in charge of the cure, then extract the arrow even if it is not embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of an arrow when it breaks or pierces the body is that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were embedded in something hard, not empty; and sometimes the arrow becomes silent like the pulse, and there is black blood, and coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: so know for certain that death is approaching.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow that never draws blood is that no foam comes from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's face turns pale, and they breathe heavily and stop moving.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow breaks in the deepest part of the flesh, it is very painful, causing great pain and heavy breathing; and all the muscles of the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow pierces the stomach, perhaps something from the unwanted flesh jumps out.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow pierces the abdomen, and something jumps out through the intestines, there is no hope for healing or extraction of the arrow in this case.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow pierces the bladder, the urine jumps out and gushes out, and the patient feels intense pain; know that this wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, as they make and feel hot and cold and pain in the throat and shoulder and aid (joint) and sharp pain down the back and stiffness and the knees and legs, and the limb appears similarly, are safe according to various dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery, and it is not venomous, as I shall tell you what happened to me, because you do such things.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	There once happened to me a case where an arrow struck the ear or the jaw: I tried to remove it by reaching around behind the ear fat, and it was completely healed without any injury.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And tried another time with an arrow that had struck in the fat beneath the paper of the skin, and the arrow was completely withdrawn, leaving only the point against the flesh, and it was a large arrow with a blue arc, without causing any pain; the wound healed, and no ill accidents came to pass.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And pull a sharp arrow from the throat of a Christian, which had Arab ears; I cut the barbs, and drew it out as gently as possible, and healed the Christian.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And I pulled an arrow from a man who had it in his belly, and thought he was dying; but after thirty days, he showed no change in condition; then I cut the arrow, cleaned it, and drew it out, without any bad outcome.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you wish to help a man whose arrow is stuck in his back, and the wound has become infected; and the arrow remains inside him, and he shows no change in his natural conditions, nor does he experience any discomfort in his natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And see another man to whom an arrow has struck his face, and the wound has healed; but he still endures great pain without suffering; and many others like him.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And I treated a prince, the king himself, who had an arrow in his neck that was slightly displaced to the right side; and the arrow was completely embedded, and I was called to treat it after three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I applied it very gently, and he felt nothing; but he had a sharp sensation and pain beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow I applied a soothing poultice to the wound because the swelling did not subside; and I could see the arrowhead.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I left the poultice on for several days, and thus soothed the wound, and held the patient for a long time until he no longer felt the arrow inside his body; and he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied a corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it healed and then probed it; I felt the tip of the arrow that was embedded in the flesh; then I adjusted the opening of the wound using that medicine until the tip of the arrow became visible; and it took over three months for the wound to heal. Then, I used pincers and moved them from one side to another, but I could not extract it; after which I continued to try subtle and clever methods until I found a way to use pincers shaped in a certain manner as described at the end of this chapter, while I pulled on the arrow and reopened the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And they consider that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: so I restored it, and the wound healed, and the patient was completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	I have also told you about the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you focus on what I am saying rather than what is written in books, for they cannot contain everything; but wise masters compare well and consider both small and significant things, applying new techniques and new instruments to unfamiliar issues in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not come out of the members where they are embedded, but in two ways: either through the vein where they entered or from another place; and that which comes out from the side where it entered is an arrow that has penetrated into the flesh and cannot come out now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not now move, let it grow until the flesh around it decays and becomes light; and also if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it for several days, and each day move it slightly; then it will move, or pierce through all the surrounding wood, until the space around the bone is widened, and then pull it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone at the top and goes down to one of the brain cavities, and none of the accidents I mentioned affect the patient: do not pull it out, but let it stay as long as it remains straight for several days, because if it goes all the way down, it will be fatal.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is embedded in the bone alone and does not come out satisfactorily, it leaves the patient without any further harm if the skill of pulling it out is used.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply embedded and cannot come out, then apply tar to it as I have told you; then treat the wound while it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is lodged in the flesh deeply and cannot be seen, one should try with all their might; and if you feel it, use any suitable instrument; and if you cannot because of the tightness of the wound or the depth of the arrow, and there are no bones or nerves or veins, leave it until the wound becomes large; and pull the arrow if you can, and if it has roots by which it is attached, remove the charred part from both sides as much as possible, then break or bend the arrowheads until you can pull it out. Be careful not to break the arrow itself so that you do not make the wound worse.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, wait until the swelling around it subsides, then treat it, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	If the signs of blood poisoning concern you, follow what we have said about treatment in that chapter; and be careful with incising near nerves and veins, and use whatever means you can to extract the arrow safely, at once or later, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the position it was in when the arrow entered, for this is the greatest aid, and if you cannot do so, put him in a position that the signs show.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	He knows the arrow that comes from another direction, where it opens something of his body, or the skin is inflamed in that place if one sees or feels it apparently: so cut there, as long as the pincers can grasp it, and then pull it out: if it comes out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	If it is stuck in the bone, turn your hand round, until it enters the bone, widening it, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot be pulled out, leave it for now, and then try to pull it out again until it comes out; and if the arrow is embedded in the bone, do not remove it, but apply pressure around it, so that when you do extract it, the point of the arrow enters the groove of the instrument, and then push it out, and if the arrow is removed from the bone, apply an instrument with a pointed end entering at the same time to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is embedded, it is necessary that you remove all the soil around where the venom is, if you can, and then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow comes out in the side or abdomen or near the ribcage, and it is accessible, remove it; but be careful not to touch the vein or nerve, then extract it, and dress the wound as needed, and treat it until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the pliers used to extract arrows resembles an eagle's beak, and here is its shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways of doing this: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The form that points downwards like a horse's tail is also similar to the feather of a bird, to push the tip of the arrow, as this is the shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of claws to push and grip is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common veins of the body,
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are 31 veins from which one can draw blood, of which there are 16 main ones: two beats located behind the ears, called "herbech"; and the two arteries prominently visible in the temples; and the two veins in each arm, called "aspires"; the vein across the forehead; the vein at the crown of the head; the two glands located on the collarbone; and the two veins found above the lips, called "augeherich"; and the two veins beneath the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The common veins from which one draws blood are five in each arm: one is the cephalic vein, located on the left side and called by the common people "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "fast" and is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and is called by the common people "vein of the body"; and the basilic is on the right side and is called by the common people "vein of the belly", located above the femur, and it is the one that appears clearly when opening the vein.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the cure is the vein that is between the little finger and the ring finger, and if it rains; and in the leg, there are three veins: one is below the knee on the left side, and the second is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein called 'nasse', which is at the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg, there are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The treatment of veins behind the ears aids in the cure of old catarrhs and migraines. The quality of the treatment consists of raising the patient's head and rubbing the affected area with a rough cloth; then, tighten the bandage around the neck to expose the two veins behind the ears, hanging down from the head. Hold them there and feel for the pulsing beneath your hand; then take the lancet and puncture the vein just below the bone, drawing blood upward along the vein. Lift your hand above the affected area and repeat the process until you have drawn enough blood; then bind and dress it, as described in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	He heals the two arteries that are in the temples, if they are old and thin and accustomed to weeping, and at the back of the eyes there are hot tears. The quality of the healer is as I say: he pulls the sick person's neck until the two vessels open wide; he feels the pulse below his right index, and then signs with a stick; then gently presses on the vein high up on his left side, withdraws the lance, opens the vein high up, and stops the bleeding, as you did for the other veins. He lets the blood out according to need, then loosens the patient, and places his right hand on the artery for an hour, then wraps it with cotton; he forms a bandage and leaves it until it heals; we have spoken much of their healing and extraction, at the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The health of the vein in the forehead is as valuable as the health of the brain as much as old facial diseases, and to migraine and redness; its quality is such that the patient pulls his head by twisting, until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called "drier", whose form is as follows:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the tip on the vein, and hold it with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow out according to the amount you see; then release the patient's head, and tie the vein as long as it remains healthy without cutting a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Nevertheless, the flames should not be too intense; and if the wound is diagonal, since the bone is close, it may break the flame when it is thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The wound of the two veins located in the armpits is helped by itself, and at the edge, and at the red swelling, and at the pain in the eye, and for facial diseases; and the quality of its wound is such that the patient tenses his collar without twisting any ligament, as before. Then the healing, and indeed the wound, is slightly curved, a little long with the flame, and somewhat wide, because there is no choice.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, they may break; then draw out the blood carefully, as much as needed, and then bind it with cotton, and tie it tightly.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The venise of the nose is very valuable for a cold, sudden sickness, and facial ailments such as migraines and redness that come to the face, especially when it is old. The quality of the venise is such that the patient tightens his jaw, then pulls his nose to your left hand, and takes the subtle flame, long, and inserts it between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well enough, and the blood will begin to flow now; do not dig too deep, and let the blood flow as needed, then bind it for a night, for it is quickly restored; and this is the form of the flame.
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The holy oil of the two glands is helpful for narrowing the eye, and for the beginning of inflammation, and for many ailments, and for impetigo, and for corrosion, and for herpes, and for boils; and its quality is such that it draws out the pus from both inside and outside, as we have said; and let the master be over the head of the patient with the illness, and let the patient sit on a seat, then clean the vein with long and wide strokes, then treat with warm blood, as much as is needed; then repeat on the other vein, then loosen the bandage, and tighten the veins slightly so that the patient does not choke; and leave it until morning, so that the wound may heal.
de la sainie des leivres	from the health of the veins
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the veins in the lips helps to maintain moisture in the mouth, and it aids in healing gum disease, splits in the lips, and pain and swelling around them.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the veins is such that you make the patient sit before you, hold their chin as I said; then turn the lip and look at the veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, and you recognize them by their black color and the small black veins around them: so cut both, and if you do not know them or are in doubt, cut the thicker one from each side, and also do the same with the two veins above and below, because it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	from the purity of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The purity of the veins that are detached from the tongue is most beneficial after cleansing the head, and it helps with throat constriction, eye diseases, and mouth ailments; and the quality of purifying is such that the patient should hold their tongue between their hands in front of the sun, gently loosening it, and examine each side for a black vein: then cleanse both, but do not over-press, for they are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the neck, which are commonly cleansed, are done in two ways: either with a sharp flame heated to a moderate temperature, or with a delicate olive-shaped instrument called an "anesil"; and they are wide and narrow according to the width and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame burns brightly if it is very renowned, and it is wide as you can see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it requires skill to open veins that are smooth and contain thick blood and pus; and this is the shape of the olive-colored flame.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more delicately pointed, and is used to heal the delicate veins where there is subtle, citrus-colored blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The health (sainie) of the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, is very helpful for illnesses that affect the throat, and the collarbone, and the chest, and the belly; and it is important for the healer to heal gently and wash away the artery below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it cuts the artery, and blood flow stops, as I have said, it must be stopped; and the fire should not be painful, but cutting like a blade.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the vein does not open clearly, it is necessary that you extract it and choose another one; either you want to apply pressure or clean the vein in the arm, it opens clearly; and cut it with a blade, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you come to know the vein, it is necessary that you extract the arm and touch the vein until you feel the pulse; then mark the spot with a sign, and bind the arm, and cut the vein with a blade; and be careful not to harm the artery when you see it swell, for that is the artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see a discharge coming out at the top as urine from a child, and the skin is red and thin, know that it is without an artery: so hurry, and put your finger over it for a long time, then remove your finger when the bleeding has stopped, which often happens; let the arm be still, and leave it like that, and do not move the patient; be afraid, and do not move until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the skin is not stained and it bleeds, and no medicine is at hand, if you can open the artery, for the source of the retreat, and stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Take a piece of fig bark, cut it, and take one half and wrap it tightly to the other side; if it stays in place without falling, that is good. If not, treat it as we have said, with powders that stop blood flow; the stopping will not cause further harm due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	If the vein is infected from the top or bottom, it is necessary to drain blood from it, for it is composed of basilic and cephalic veins as we have said; the healer should press on the nerve below, and if he cannot find it exactly, he should find the nerve and open it; it will swell and cause pain, and healing may be affected, and in some cases, it does not heal at all; this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any other person due to its subtlety, then you must cure it with an instrument; take care not to injure the nerve.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if the vein is between the two bones, make it open long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The treatment for the head wound is as follows: it draws blood from the head, and aids in the healing; and it is beneficial to apply olive oil or myrrh flame, as this is the safest of all veins, as it does not affect any nerve or artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Nevertheless, it is advisable to seek the most gentle method, and do not be concerned if it hurts the first time, just try again; and sometimes the veins swell up in some people when they are punctured for the first time, but this should not cause concern.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the health lies according to your own thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about health is that health is maintained solely for the purpose of preserving health and preventing future illnesses; and healing should take place in one of the three veins, namely, the cephalic, femoral, or basilic vein; and one should heal during the beginning of prayers at dawn, and in autumn and winter after meals, when the signs of saturation appear; and one should heal on the first day or third day, after two to three hours.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The healing that is administered for illnesses has no fixed time, but rather as needed during the day or night, whenever it is necessary; and one should not heal children until they are twelve to fourteen years old, nor women who have recently given birth until after seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	One should not treat the old who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when anyone wishes to be cured, in any way whatsoever, it is necessary for him to empty the bowels with a light enema, if he has retained much feces, so that the veins do not draw from the intestines too many harmful residues to the principal members; nor should one cure someone who is excessively salt with meat or wet, as long as they have such conditions; and be careful to cure after colic, vomiting, abdominal distension, frequent sexual intercourse, hard work, overstudy, and fasting; then subtilize the humors carefully, if they are thick, through diet, drinks, and medications, if you have access to them; then enter the bath, if nothing prevents it, to purify the blood, and cure the vein from the third day onwards, as we have said; and be careful that day to avoid work, exertion, lust, and similar things; and be peaceful and joyful, and make yourself healthier than those whom you are curing, and rub the affected area with your hands twice or three times, then gently press the swollen vein from above, for when it is too tight or stiff, it cannot be corrected otherwise; and then rub the area with oil, and place your left-hand index finger under the vein, a little below where you wish to cure it, so that the vein does not rupture while applying treatment.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flow as if tied with cords in the body, and if they are of a kind that are troubled by impurities, when one applies fire, it draws away from the flame, and cannot open the vein, thus becoming one of them; and if he opens the vein, the wound is too tight, so it is necessary for the healer to be aware of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens the first time, it is good; but if not, it begins again from the previous place or with greater difficulty, as the limbs are not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the limb is swollen and the patient is afraid, let it be for one or two days without binding it; perhaps abscesses will form later. Do not enter a bath, but continue the treatment as it pleases you; if the opening is small, carefully perforate it subtly, and doubt not that it may release as much blood as you see, precisely in that same wound, for fear of swelling; and work a little more gently so that the limb does not swell. This often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the vein swollen, do not recommence the treatment, and apply a little oil to it, for it lightens the body of blood, and the oil moves in this vein the substance that causes the swelling; and thus administer the oil in each wound that you treat veins, to stop the flow of blood; and the same is done with lint and bandages when applied to the vein; if it is very swollen, the oil softens and spreads it.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if a large abscess occurs, which happens frequently, especially when the vein is only slightly open, act quickly and apply a moist sponge with hot water and hemp for an hour; and you should do this after the blood flow from the vein has stopped, and if it remains in place after several days without turning black or green, it does not cause harm; and if you notice, apply any aloe or myrrh prepared in calament juice, or similar substances.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there appears an abscess and swelling in the holy basil; then place your hand upon it, and if you feel the joint soft under the pressure of your hand, that is when the appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	So be careful not to apply anything we have mentioned, for it might cut off the flow from the artery; but make a dry plaster to harden the joint, then use another remedy until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each case of pain according to the quantity of its strength and the color of the pain.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the wound is still infected, let it continue to heal until the redness disappears; and if you see it swelling, leave it alone until it becomes less pronounced; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for the strong and robust person, who needs to extract blood, to make a wider wound, with broader incisions; and for the weak one, do the opposite, making smaller and more frequent wounds, and take care to heal them diagonally rather than deeply, and this method of healing saves from infection and nerve damage, and is better than long and wide wounds.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And to him whose body goes to the bathroom, it is necessary to give a mild pain in the juice of pomegranates; if he is overheated, he should drink warm blood three or four times, and if he has a cold complexion, he should take before going to the bathroom, a moist pain in syrup made from musk, or aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and dates, and a well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints in the bathroom after the release of much blood, it is necessary that he breathes a soup of coal and a subtle fragrant syrup, and uses other things that we have mentioned in the section or chapter on syncope for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to extend his arm and heal it later, if it is weakened by much blood loss, he should treat it little by little, according to the quantity of its ongoing power.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wishes to extend his arm after the first dressing and has a strong cramp, he should heal it seven hours after the first dressing, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to heal from another place should be healed on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is much blood within the body, which has been heated, and causes fever; so it needs to be drawn out in large quantities, and the wound widened until it feels better; then, after fulfilling all the conditions of health, place your hand on his pulse when he is recovering, lest death come instead of recovery, and this happens often when healing is neglected; and it is not right when you release the arm and cause blood to flow again, and close the wound, while it is still healing, for that would be harmful; but leave it until it feels better a second time; or if there is a sharp pain at the point of the flame, until the frost within the vein disappears, apply a little silk soaked in water, and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not squeeze it until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it becomes necessary to treat the blood from an abscess a second time, if the wound is in the same place or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is cleaned in place of the vein in the head because it is composed differently.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the method of cleansing is that the patient should hold their hand in hot water until the veins are red; then tie it slightly so that the vein appears well, and now cleanse through it, not too wide or too long; and make the incision large enough to allow for drainage, without allowing any pus to escape, then return the hand to hot water and let the blood flow until you have enough. And if this is done, do not stop the hand from being in hot water, because more heat is applied than necessary; and cleansing of this vein is safer than any other, as it contains neither arteries nor nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The salve for the salvation of the hand's health on the right side is good for all diseases of the flesh: stretch the hand and immerse it in hot water until the vein is swollen if you see it; then cross the limb, embrace it from every side, so that nothing disturbs it; do not cut too deeply, because the nerve is entirely devoid of its covering, and then return the hand to hot water, for if the skin becomes frozen in the wound, it will not be able to heal.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as best you can, apply oil and silk to the vein to bind it tightly, and do this for every person.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The healthy person holds the mouse with their left hand to treat the pain in their right side; they do the same as I have told you for the left side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The wise woman treats all diseases that affect the body, such as diseases of the womb, retention of flowers (perhaps referring to menstrual issues), diseases of the kidneys, and old ailments of the feet and legs, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of her medicine is such that the patient drinks warm water and rubs the vein until it heals, binding it over the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, it goes up from there with much pain. Thus, depending on whether the swelling is greater or more severe in the leg or at the ankle, that is where treatment should focus.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you treat it on the foot, be careful not to touch the bones inside, and clean it thoroughly just as if you were bandaging; and apply the flames gently.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	If the pain does not subside, immerse the foot in water and let the vein drain completely.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the dressing is applied for the first time, repeat it a second time slightly above, as the bones are salty; do not doubt the nerves, as we have said, and do the same thing with the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein's lion is at the knee joint, and its inflammation causes pain in the back, when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its inflammation is such that the patient feels pain in the bath, and three turns are required to remove it from the knee, for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then all the ways you can think of, and by passing through; and it requires great effort to close it, for the lion is free, and it is very much exhausted by manual labor.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not succeed, a small amount of blood will open on the back of the foot towards the little toe, and be careful not to tighten the nail; and make sure that the inflammation is as dry as possible, then loosen the bandage, place cotton and tighten it; now the wound is healed.
des sainies de ventouse	from the suction of the cupping glass
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping glasses are made of horn, or iron, or glass; and cupping is performed in two ways: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	This non-piercing cupping is performed in two ways: either at full heat or without heat; and the cups placed on the body are as follows: twelve on the torso, with one at the top of the head, others along the neck, two on each side of the neck, one under the chin, two on each shoulder, two on each leg, two on each ankle, and two on each wrist. The procedure does not involve drawing blood; it is merely about opening small veins scattered across the body, so as not to weaken any part of the body, much like with vein cupping. It should not be applied to any condition arising from a full stomach, until the entire body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if by necessity of illness or custom, it is necessary to purge, we should do so each hour at the beginning and end of the month, and every day; for there are such who, when they need to purge, have a heavy head; and some who experience fullness and redness in their faces, heads, necks, and darkness; and those who feel a drop of blood in their mouths, and their tongues are swollen, and they cough up blood; and there are those who dream and see blackness, pain, death, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially in the middle of the month, we order purging after three hours during the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The doctor of the museum helps with the pain in the head ... which comes from the joints, and it is not appropriate to do this after evacuating all the body; and this treatment is for the museum of the cephalic, and it is not appropriate for those with a cold complexion, or those who have scabs, because it does them much harm; and for this reason, the old should not use it, nor those who suffer from cold headaches.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who heal themselves often become obstinate, and for this reason, a suction cup should be placed slightly lower, out of doubt of obstruction.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation of the chest is beneficial for the health of the heart and basil (organs), and therefore it helps to tighten the muscles, open the channel of the penis, and relieve pressure; however, it should be done with caution, as holding it too tightly can cause discomfort or damage to the stomach and body.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventilation of the chest between the ribs provides relief from headaches, eye pain, migraines, choking, and root tooth pain, and is beneficial for the health of the heart and basil (organs). It is important that the patient directs their breath without pressing on the arteries to avoid any complications with blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The inflammation of the gums is beneficial for mouth diseases, and for the corruption of gums, and similar ailments in the mouth; it is found in the health of both lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The inflammation of the shoulders is beneficial for diseases that arise from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The inflammation of the veins is just as beneficial as three veins in the arm, as it draws blood from these large veins; and instructs the patient not to press too hard, for the flesh is devoid of color, and knows how to heal nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The vacuum that is on the thigh is as dangerous as bloodlets from the depths, and to diseases below, and it is necessary that the vacuum be large, and of iron, that it may need to be pulled well; and by chance, if it were too fine, it would break; and it causes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The ventouses on the legs tighten strongly, as they draw blood from throughout the body, and are as painful as ancient pains in the rain, and in the back, and in the bladder, and cause inflammation; and they affect the joints of the two thighs, and the two ankles, and nevertheless, after long use, they weaken the body and bring more pain.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying the cup is such that you first place it on the skin while it is still empty, and suck gently, then apply it firmly and move it equally, not ceasing this until you see the red color and heat of the blood, and open the pores; then remove it, and be mindful of the condition of the skin, for there are some who have thick and others who have thin pores: it is only necessary to strike once, and make wide incisions, and somewhat deep; suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the vein is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: first to open the path for the thick blood flow.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the pain is very intense, it is necessary to strike the third time; and when we want to draw out blood little by little, we suffice once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want a lot of blood, we must do it often; and if the pain is intense, striking with precision until the veins burst, which is good for those with thick and hard skin, and who have hairy legs, one should apply oil to the suction cups, either stimulating or dissolving: it can be violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if it's in ivy, watercress oil, or chamomile oil, or other similar herbs.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, take amber oil, or balsam, or donkey oil, and similar substances.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if anyone has a tender, wide-open wound, it is not appropriate to apply oil, but instead, wash it after the application of rosewater, or cold water, or morelle water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or any similar liquid.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those with excessive moisture should rise from it using myrrh water, sumac water, and similar substances.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have excessive superfluities should rise from old wine, or holy water, or decoction of nettle or chamomile, or other similar things; and one should not use a cupping glass before the bath or after, but an hour or two after the bath; and one should not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that he washes himself, when it is time to cup and when he has been cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And beware that the patient with a hot temper does not become too agitated and inflamed; it is necessary for him to press cold things, such as pomegranates, endive, lettuce, and similar things; and eat little, and porridge, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And he who has a cold complexion, should take syrup of honey, and moderate wine that is neither too old nor too new, and eat little, and enjoy raisins and small birds; and on the day that he takes fresh air, he must drink more than he eats; and it is appropriate to give any man triacle or musk before or after ventilation to strengthen his principal members; but it is not advisable for those who are hot to consume it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The cups that are placed without causing harm are those placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and gout, and on the belly and the bowels and the kidneys and the hips, for these members do not tolerate being pricked, and they are only used to draw blood from one member to another, as we place cups on the mammary glands when the nipples are healthy; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we place cups on the belly and bowels to reduce the member; and it removes pain, when there is congestion or a stone, so it may perhaps attract the congestion, or abandon the stone from its place; and it does so when placed on the liver and spleen when there is retained windiness, and these cups are emptied to suck only; and they are never heated with fire, nor filled with cold water, as in cases of tears that flow freely, and in this manner one fills the cup with hot water mixed with herbs suitable for it.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the suction cup applied with fire is this:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	It should have a width of two and a half palm lengths, and on one side near the middle, it should have a small hole, as if to fit an needle, and be made of iron or steel, so that it does not pierce the patient when placed on the body; and in the middle, there should be a crossbar of iron or steel, to hold a cloth, and their sizes vary according to the illness and age of those who use them; for the suction cups for children are different from those for adults, and thinner than the fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one should place this suction cup over the affected member: take the wax or linen cloth and place it through the hole in the suction cup, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the cup to prevent burning the patient; then place it on the member, and your fingers should be on the opening we have mentioned, so that when you want, the vapour goes out, and remove the suction cup; and use the linen cloth as before, and repeat often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the case of the suction cup used for pleurisy, or any other acute condition, it has no hole or opening, and should only be applied when the surface is dry, and placed on the affected member only once; this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Without any bonds or constraints that would prevent them from moving, only in members such as lips and gums, and similar areas, are tourniquets applied; and in cases where the skin is stripped of hair, like on the face, hands, or other places; if the quality of the wound allows it, immediately apply a tourniquet to these areas. Soak them in sweet water until they become soft and then clean the wound with a vein and tourniquet, after ensuring there is nothing in their stomachs; subsequently, wash the member with a vein and tourniquet, rub it until it turns red, and reapply the tourniquets; when they stop bleeding, bind them again, if it is possible to do so.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If the lion rises from its sleep and then from water, it feels much better and is refreshed; and if the joints are too stiff after the body's heat, moisten them with cold linen and place it on top until they are relaxed; and if the stiffness increases, apply vitriol or gall or similar substances until they are relaxed; or you can put half-peel peas on the lion, leaving them until they adhere to the joint, which will now relax; and if you need more, take other lions.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the lions do not want to be taken, rub fresh blood on them or insert an needle into the stiff joint until it releases, then apply it and soon as they feel the blood, they will relax; and when you see that they start to move, sprinkle some aloe and silk powder or ash, and they will stop.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	We begin the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it restores fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know this, dear reader, that the foolish eyes cast aside this chapter, which they have never seen nor read in any ancient books; and for this reason the science is strange to our land, for I have never found it good, except through the knowledge of ancient books, on which I have studied so much that I have treated the science both by experiment and by the habits of my life. And I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and abridged it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments used, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we recite at the beginning of this book the summa of its words and the chapters where the wise men place their understanding, pausing over truth, so that those who are tested know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	When a fracture, dislocation, or twist occurs in any part of the body, it is necessary to hasten to heal the patient on both sides. If none of these remedies are effective, such as weakness of the body, illness, or old age; or if the temperature is too hot or too cold; and he avoids cold things like ice, raw meat, and goose fat, and does not drink wine, nor consume any fatty foods, and does not overeat meats that clog the veins, until you have no doubt of an abscess forming, or spreading of material in the member; then the patient will return to his former state as if he had never been ill.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one alleviate the patient from foods that cause excessive flatulence, or have a viscous consistency, such as cooked wheat in water, and laughter, and talking, and pressure, and eating rich food, and drinking, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For excessive flatulence can return and even worsen the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that bones broken in the elderly or those with decrepitude cannot heal well and solidify according to their nature due to the fragility of the members, nor can those that are too tender, such as the bones of young children; however, do not be discouraged, hold fast to the broken bone with firm grips that join the member together, as it was before, and do not restrict its movement entirely, and for this reason, it is necessary to alleviate them from heavy foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, and in this chapter, I will tell you all manners of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	Because there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another when sharpening, like the blade of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, and the fracture is just a tiny crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each type of dislocation has its own mechanism and specific tool for restoration, according to the memory that comes to mind in its place; and the fracture of the bone is known because the joint is twisted, widely opened from the outside, and sounds when pressed by the hand; and when there is no curvature or imperfection upon touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture; but it can have curvature, a fissure, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You should not move it with the hand; instead, apply medications that will be described later, and then gently tighten it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the fracture which goes up in the air, and the two parts are disjoined, it is now necessary to set them equal, so that the abscesses come there; and if hot abscesses come, let him leave them no day until the abscesses are healed; then put them equal in movement that you can gently and effectively, and know that the restoration of them is lighter than the restorations of those where they have broken off; then tighten it as necessary afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if a bone is broken into two parts, whether it is in the foot or hand, or one of the smaller members, or at two joints, or at one joint and in your hand, place the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are aligned, all the additions in their places be equalized by your work, and beware that through your handling no further injury or pain comes to the patient; and adjust well the two joints of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And it will feel good to the touch if it seems not well: if it is dressed nicely, and not pulled too hard, not pressed as those who cause a hot abscess and contraction in the member with their own work, as we have often wanted.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the member is at its limit, it is wise to be gentle with the patient so he does not move it, neither awake nor asleep, nor by turning or any other means; and take good care that the member is completely secure so as not to feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, except that it is not yet completely healed, it is necessary to put him in a position where he feels no pain; and be careful that he is correctly aligned, so that any curvature does not come back as he recovers; and the quality of the damaged member will depend on what I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	You know that broken members are diverse in size and shape and strength.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For some members are small, like arms and hands, and others large, like thighs and legs; therefore, it is necessary to wrap soft and thin linen around them. For the small ones, use narrow bands, three or four times around the member, and tighten your hand a little on each band, then go above the fracture and loosen it slightly, so that the fracture moves a little away from it; then soften the band little by little until you press strongly into the healthy part below. Then take another band and wrap it around again from the opposite side over the broken member; then return to the under-part of the fracture and tighten it moderately, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first part above; then place soft bands or linen strips between the bands, so that they are all even, then tie everything with a bandage, and put your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is a swelling or abscess, apply to it a hot soothing paste that removes the swelling and leave it for no days; then bind your stars tightly, and make them of half a broad cane cut sharply, or of wood used to make splints, or of palm fronds, according to this figure.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the star placed on the break be a little thicker and wider than the others; and also as long as it should be for the member, whether small or large; then bind the stars just as you did with the first layer, and tie a thin thread over them, just as in the first layer over the fracture; tighter now, less later; and the thread must be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and of soft flax; for if the thread is thick, it's like the works of foolish men who make their bands from twisted flax threads, and that's a great error, because the band cannot be even if it's too delicate, and it does not suit that there be less than two threads between each star.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is troubled by the roots of the stars after dislocating them in their joints, he should place soft cloth or any other dressing over them so that they do not get hurt.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by fracture, and the blood vessels are broken, I will describe the treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not appropriate to dislocate all the stars of the fractured members on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the members are large, it is not appropriate to put stars (possibly referring to splints or bandages) until after 5 or 7 days, or more according to your judgment of the heat of the sore; and here you will see the ancient method of using plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and torsions: take flour that clings to the walls of the mill, mix it with plenty of egg, and make this preparation, not too clear or too thick, and use it. This is the common method of using a plaster to restore fractures in various positions, especially for women and small children, as it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of plaster for restoring fracture and dislocation and torsion: take wolfsbane and nettle and hemlock and pestle and gum arabic and myrrh, each 3 parts; add mirror and aloe, each 5 parts; ales (alum) 7 parts; make it into powder and mix with egg white; if the man's body temperature is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and it restores broken bones severely, and it benefits many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another plaster method for torsion: take myrrh and wormwood, each 3 parts; mirror and aloe, each 7 parts; acacia 6 parts; Armenian bole 10 parts; grind well and mix with water or egg white, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method of splinting joints and setting bones out of their place, to soothe the pain that comes from it, and use a saw on the bone, and the break: take a fresh cloth, and moisten it with hot water and oil, and lay it over the joint.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Cyst splints do not restore, but they are good for soothing hot abscesses, and properly extracting bones to relieve pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of splinting that restores broken bones: take dry fig leaves and earth poppy leaves, crush them together, and make a paste.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of plastering for the restoration of a broken bone and to soften the return of the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take the root of chamomile, camomille, violet flowers, and meal, from each part in equal measure; grind them and mix with wine, and apply to the affected member, heating it. Alternatively, mix with fresh coriander water or water, and use as needed.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another stronger method of plastering when a hard abscess forms during the restoration of the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of chamomile, and seeds of flax, balsam, melilot, and fennel, and flowers of violet and chamomile, from all these plants a portion; and grind them, and preserve with vinegar, or sweet water, or wine, according to the warmth of the member and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates writes in his book that to restore a broken member, one should apply a mixture of wax and oil, and nothing else, stating it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen suggests applying dry, slightly warm substances to a broken member in order to restore it, such as myrrh and aloe, incense, and similar things, as we have mentioned.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of plastering that is effective against pain and injury: take the skin and feathers of a bird that has been skinned, or the quills of an eagle, and grind them equally fine, and make a plaster from it and bind it to the affected area.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, after a little while, take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor do the bones move from their place; if, however, the pain returns or itching appears, or swelling, act quickly, and remove the plaster immediately, and take a light cloth, and a moist sponge, and dip it in water, and apply it to the affected area, until the itching stops and the pain is soothed; then let the member rest for an hour, and place a dry cloth, moistened with water or rose oil, on top, and bind it with a nut, as long as you are certain of the warmth of the abscess. And thus relieve the inflammation of the affected limb, and remove the pain, and then continue the treatment with a delicate touch and a little plaster, not pulling too hard as before; gently until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is closed, red, painful and swollen, you have used hot compresses and binding, but it returns again as it did at first, then you must do it again just as you did before.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	If the limb shows no improvement after what we have said, do not dislocate it again until after three, four, five or seven days; and under no circumstances leave it for twenty days, as long as the fracture is open and the adjustment of the bone to the socket is progressing; then tighten it more than before and thicken the flesh, as I mentioned earlier. And if you see that the limb is drying out more than necessary, know that healing cannot take place; so raise the temperature with warm water each time you dislocate it, every third day, and loosen the bandage slightly. By this means, the healing of the limb will be improved, and do not underestimate the danger that these actions pose; I see nothing else but to let it rest and do it correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various ways of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many ways of fracture, each with distinct forms and causes; for there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, where the bone is completely shattered down to its marrow, as with a hatchet or axe; this type of fracture is therefore called "haichure" (axing).
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or, the sword may cut through the bone without piercing it, and this is called "absolute" fracture; and the wound from these two types of fractures can be large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a sensation of pounding, or a cut, or a wound from a stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a recent fracture that approaches the skin just beneath or on the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound that has healed is as subtle as a hair, and the fracture is small, this is called a "capillary" fracture; and if the wound was caused by a stone, or a blow, or a similar thing, and the bone fragment enters beneath the skin, and the limb becomes stiff like the blacksmith's arm when he works on the forge, then it is trapped between the bones.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this occurs more often in those with moist shoulders, as in an infant's shoulder; and it happens in all these ways of breakage that small fragments are dislocated, just as they are. And I will speak of it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all the ways of breakage through retraction upon them, and inquiry at close range, and through corrupt fat which is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair is known because when the bone is discovered and rubbed hard, it opens the break and reveals the black fragment.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, be cautious regarding complications with the patient's condition, and if you notice any adverse events such as vomiting, loss of consciousness, stiffness, pallor, fever, or other similar symptoms in various combinations, then recovery is unlikely without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any alarming symptoms, but still hope for a recovery, then commence the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the fracture presents itself first, and it is in winter, then it is advisable to remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the injury.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if this happens, if you hurry to remove the bone on the seventh day, when the tissue under the bone is corrupted, then come the accidents that we have mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone extends to the tissue that covers the brain, then you must split the broken part in this way: press down firmly on the patient's head to relieve the pain, and expose the bone in all ways possible, and tenderly uncover the wound, as much as you can, and if blood oozes upon exposing the bone, or pus comes from a wound, or an abscess forms at the site of exposure, then use this aid, and fill the cavity with moist, rose-colored cloth; then rest the wound until any abscesses are calmed and you are assured of no further discharge. Then begin removing the bone, and it is done according to two methods: one method is that you cut tightly before, and this is its form...
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then take another treatment even greater than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	The second method is that you have many different treatments, some narrow and others wide, and they are sharp and made of iron indelible; and perform them gently so as not to damage the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and strong, it is necessary that you make a cut around it, so as to administer treatments with caution, so that they do not go through the bone too deeply, and there should be a margin or a circle on top of the point, which does not allow the point to pass through the bone; and you need many of them, so that each one comes in its place according to the thickness of the bone, so that you have cautery for all parts; and this is the form of the three types of cautery:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality to discover the fracture of a bone is that you place pressure on it and return to your original position until you know the bone is broken; then, put pressure elsewhere a little later, and do this all around, then cut with incisions the space between the cracks in the bone, and do so as precisely as possible, gently, while still holding the bone in your hand or with any of the tools you have, such as pincers or pliers, and be careful not to touch the brain or the spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have broken the bone and treated it, it is necessary to remove the tension that remains from the bone to all other tools similar to an incision tool, but it should be more precise and subtler than any other incision tool; and if it holds onto small bones or scales, gently lift them with the appropriate instrument; then dress the wound with bandages and remedies as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of treatment is that which Galen says, which is safer; it is very powerful, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary that you expose a part of the bone, either by opening the fracture widely, so that when you have exposed this part, you will place the tip of this curved knife beneath it, whose form is as follows:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, but expose the acute part on this side, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike gently with a small mallet all around the bone, and be very careful of the tissue beneath; if it is away from the bone, gently pull it, for otherwise you will extract it with great pain and fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not reach down to the flesh, and the bone is only cut from above, leaving small fragments, then it is necessary to remove these rough edges with a fine scalpel, having various quantities of them at hand, in order to render each part as convenient as possible, according to the severity and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you encounter great difficulty with razors, and then more subtle ones, never cease to do this until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other haircuts and subtle fractures, it is necessary to render them according to their location; and this is a matter that cannot be fully answered by anyone who has studied this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if it pleases him to be uncovered, then you should press the linen drape according to the size of the wound, moisten it with rose oil, and place it over the wound; then take another double drape in two or three layers, moisten it with wine and rose oil, and lay it over the first drape; do this as lightly as possible so as not to harm the patient, then apply a second bandage and do not tighten it too much until the wound is only covered; leave it like that for one or two days until the abscess has subsided, then loosen it and administer medicines such as fennel roots, flour of times (spices), incense powder, aristologus (a herb), and similar things; make a powder from these substances and apply it to the wound, and also give unmixed foreign medicines without burning; be sure that the wound is always clean, do not leave any dressing on it, nor allow bowing (scarring) to form, because when bowing occurs on the skin of the head, it corrots and destroys it, and does great harm to the patient; for when a sharp substance is placed over the syphilis, it hurts from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, if no bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if darkness comes not from the medicine that has been placed upon it, but to show its virtue, then you must apply a mixture of one part honey and three parts rose oil, and wrap it in a cloth; then cure the wound in the manner of cures that are appropriate, until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	You know that the two parts of the bone should never be broken, either together or separately, for they are two bones; and this inner part is cartilage, and does not break, but only bends or twists, then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you insert your small finger or a pointed tool between the joints, and put this fracture back into place with your index finger and thumb, until the joint returns to its natural position; do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain due to your actions.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the joint and the fingers cannot be moved to their original position, it is necessary that you place a slightly thicker ruler at the top of the joint.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the fracture is in both parts, do as you did before, and hurry to restore it on the first day if possible; if not, wait until the seventh or fifth day (after the abscess has subsided), then gently insert a thin piece of linen between the joints if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or turn to another part, if it is broken; and make the splints so thick that they fill the openings of the bones.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say that no restoration is required; one must soften the splints with butter, and change them each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I do not think that is good enough, but it is advisable to soften them with egg yolk and flour powder; then remove the splints, as long as the bones are hard and the cartilage stiff.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never should one burn the feathers of a goose in place of others, and if it pricks the patient around, and holds the wound closed, and blows air into it; do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses form at the new wound while you are working on it, apply a compress or cotton moistened in rose oil or in a poultice of dye.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If no abscess forms, apply a plaster made of flour, incense powder, confited with egg albumen, then place light bandages and do not tie the wound; and if the rupture at the wound is small and broken into small pieces, extract it with suitable instruments, then clean the cut, and treat the resulting charred and infected areas with appropriate plasters and dressings until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	from the dislocation of the mandible
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the mandible is dislocated, and there is no external wound, and the fracture is only slightly out of place, and not broken in two, but only shifted inside, then if you know it lightly, you can reset it.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is in the right side, you should push your index finger of the left hand into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is on the left mandible, then push your index finger of the right hand inside gently, and pull the fracture out with the other hand, making it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is severe in two places, you should administer an extension to both parts, as long as they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movement of the teeth occurs, or rupture, by applying tension with a golden or silver thread or silk, then place on the broken jaw cerate and cover with a double cloth; and on this cloth place a large well-made star or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the mandible, secure it to the muscles as best you can, and command the patient to rest and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	If you notice that the shape changes on the third day, remove the bandage and then reassess what has changed; apply a paste made of fine powder with egg or flour, after removing the cerate, and place a thin layer of this paste over the affected area. If the bandages become tight, do not change their position as long as the patient's condition does not change for the worse; in many cases, healing occurs within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess appears, it is necessary to do as we have said many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is both a fracture and a wound together, no part of the bone that is broken should be removed; it is necessary to carefully extract the suitable instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, it should be widened with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and it does not delay any longer, if the wound is wide, close it with suitable bandages to prevent infection, until it is healed.
de la forcele	of the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forceps break in many places, towards the shoulder, and the fracture is of three kinds: it may be broken and displaced in two parts, with fragments, and is the easiest to restore; or there may be a fracture with an accompanying wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And for the case where the fracture is without a wound, you shall have two assistants: one holds the aid that is broken; the other stretches the collar towards the affected part. Then, with both hands, set the fracture in its proper place, so that it forms as it should, and there is neither bulge nor deformity.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend it further, place a round spear of cloth or wool under the patient's shoulder, as thick as necessary; then stretch and gently pull on the spear, holding it firmly in your hand, so that you equalize the fracture, as appropriate.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the fracture away from the external side, because it is stuck completely, then the patient should lie on his side with his shoulder supported, and the healers should push the shoulder upwards, until the bone of the fracture is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then address the fracture to your advantage, and if you find any debris, it is appropriate to cut through it; pull the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join together despite all efforts, use the instrument under the fracture to ensure the desired result.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and it should look like a spoon, and is not too small, and is as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the ability of the work; and it has two parts, as you see, one wider, and the other narrower, just as the wound's rupture that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are certain of the hot abscess, if you cut the wound deeply, or if its rupture is small, then you doubt a hot abscess, if you cover the wound with cloth and bandages, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses occur, then moisten the cloth with rose oil and silk and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The binding of the bone, when it feels wounds or cuts, is to place plaster made from fine flour and egg white on it, and add light stoppers below, and insert a spike under the armpit if necessary; then take a very wide bandage one palm in width, place two layers of cloth over the stoppers and plaster, then wrap the narrow strip around it, ensuring the top of the bandage is hanging down; place the thin piece of wood on the fracture, and turn the bandage back over the collarbone, removing it from the healthy armpit and the injured one; rearrange each part, and when you see that the binding holds the fracture well, and clearly see that the wood does not move over the broken bone, rewarding each day, and when the stitches loosen, tighten them again; put the patient on his back, and place a small pillow under the armpit while he sleeps, to raise the dislocated joint; if the fracture is relieved by aligning the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the collarbone, and no further accidents occur, leave it for 20 days; then repeat the plastering if needed, tighten it, and leave it thus until it is healed; healing usually occurs within 28 days, and in some cases sooner.
de la brisure de l’espaule	from the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	If the shoulder is dislocated, it does not move in any way except through touch; if you put it back according to the shape of the dislocation and restore it to its natural state in every way that you can, then sprinkle a little fine powder on it, apply light bandages, and cover with a double cloth. Then place a wide and thin plate over it, slightly larger than the shoulder, and secure it firmly with straps so that the plate does not move from its place; check it each day. Whenever it tries to move, tighten the straps and return the plate to its correct position if it has moved. Lie the patient on his side, and be sure of it, for it is not a bone that can be easily put back in place.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone protrudes and is not removed from the inside, it causes inflammation in the abscess hotly, and the bone, and does as we have said in the calming of the heat of the abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	from the fracture of the worst
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The bone is never broken in the middle, but that happens rarely; but it often breaks at the extremities.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it declines to one side, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of strength, and sometimes bleeds, and opens up the wound in the broken bone, and feels much better.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back, and puts a cushion between their shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and aligns the ribs with both hands, and subtly adjusts it in every way that you can, so long as the bone figure is as it should be; then apply poultices and compresses over the delicate salt or other light bandage, wrap it in a cloth, and secure it to the broken bone, so that it does not move; and return the ligament to its natural state on the back, tighten it properly, and check the wound every hour, and if it softens, tighten it; if it needs to be released due to decay or itching that arises at the site, or pain or abscess, act quickly, release it, remove the poultice, and address what has come about in terms of treatment; then reapply the poultice and tighten it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	from the fracture of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	You know that the fracture of ribs only occurs in the upper back and at the top, and they do not bend except because they are broken; and anyone can feel it well with their hands.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is such that you put the fracture back in place as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, and tighten it with a board, if you have such need.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining inward, the patient feels great pain and stabbing, as if from crying out, because the bone pierces the skin; also it weakens the hands, and causes them to shake, and vomit much blood, which is a sign of grave illness, and ancient physicians have put much effort into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And for those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that cause bloating in the stomach to expel the fracture outward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make the mistake of thinking that an abscess will not come if it did not previously exist.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it comes, if the healthy one.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that none of you should apply cupping glasses over the joint to draw out blood, for it seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt that the cupping glass may attract excess fluids to the joint due to weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that none of you should cover the joint with moist wool in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to evenly distribute the heat around it, then cure the pleurisy, the flesh, and with medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure through the bone where the fracture is, then doubt arises in the patient, and it is necessary to split open the broken rib, and place an instrument to hold it steady; and then one must cut the bone, pull gently, and sew together the two edges of the wound if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses form, place moist, oil-soaked rags over them and on the affected area; treat it while the abscess is present, keeping the patient lying on their side where needed, until they heal.
de la brisure dou col	From the rupture of the collarbone.
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No rupture occurs to the bone of the collarbone unless it rains; and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will recover, be on guard if you notice their hands becoming soft, swollen, and numb, and they cannot move or extend them, and if you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is deadly in many ways, and if they are motionless and feel well when you press them and there is no pain, know that the joint of the bone is safe, and the patient will be cured if proper treatment is given.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if similar things occur in the spine, you must know if there is health or sickness, if you see that the feet are limp and the accidents are in the hands, and the winds and emissions on the back without will; and when you remember it on the belly, it also does the same.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is remembered on the back and it wants to attack, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Knowing that it is deadly, one must not labor in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not happen, then it is a lighter matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is as follows: if there is an abscess that is hot to the touch, apply warm rose oil or egg-white oil to it until it is soothed; then place a comforting and drying plaster on it and secure it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on the affected area while it heals.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is separated, it should be covered with a bandage; then the bone is removed, and the wound's edges are sutured if they are large, using stitches, and treated with an ointment to promote healing; and if the fragment of bone is broken off, which is called the "fragment of the break," you press it back into place with your left hand, equalizing it with the other hand, then apply a plaster and a splint, if necessary; then tighten it, and if there are any further separated bones, reduce them and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	from the fracture of the bone in the shoulder blade
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	If the bone in the shoulder blade breaks, and there is not even a slight reduction in the pain at first; it causes long-term discomfort, declining towards one side, and brings to the patient pain, stabbing, and swelling where it breaks.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, as long as you are over the break; and know what the break is and its form; and if the break is only at the top, then put it back equally, as much as it was in its natural form.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, it inclines inward, then make the patient lie on his stomach until the restoration of that fracture becomes visible.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, place a splint over it, then put a piece of wood or hard material on top and tighten the fracture so that it does not move; and keep the limb under the ribs until the ribcage is level.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscess becomes closed and it is not touched, until the abscess beneath is calmed, apply what we have said above; then return to reduction, drawing it tight as appropriate, if there is no adverse event, this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	dislocation of the shoulder joint
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The aid (or joint) is located between the shoulder blade and the top of the shoulder, and if it is dislocated, it must be reduced according to one of two methods: one is to take a wooden stick of medium thickness, in this shape:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And hold the two feet, pull them up, and place the patient on a seat; then break one of his arms over the thigh until it is dislocated, and put a piece of wood between his legs, then pull down any heavy object or have the assistant stretch it back into place; then arrange the broken arm so that the dislocation is even with both hands together, until the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And another method is that we place the patient on his side, and bind his hand to his neck, then instruct the assistants to grasp what is over the broken arm at his hands, and the others grasp each joint, and stretch them as best they can.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that extraction is too forceful, tighten the ligature around the rupture, and on the rupture, extend each of the assistants to their respective sides.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the rupture is near the shoulder joint, it is necessary to place a ligature halfway beneath the acromion and another towards the collarbone below the rupture; and likewise, if the rupture is on the side of the collarbone, it is appropriate to apply a slight ligature without strain, as long as the rupture remains balanced on the bone, then set the dislocation correctly and tighten it gently if there are no complications.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an abscess appears, do not extract it for seven days; and put a moist cloth dipped in rose oil on the abscess until it is calmed; then extract it, and the manner of extracting it is that you place the plaster on the fracture, then reassemble the arm to the shoulder or breast, and cover with a drape, then extract from the joint and the arm, so that the arm is straight, unless something prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	If you doubt that the bone does not move, use a wider and stronger splint than the others, and leave two spaces between each splint, so that each splint is large enough to pass over the fracture by three spaces on either side; then extract the splints as I said at the beginning of this chapter about the fracture, making them stronger and farther apart.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the position of the stars and the tightness, as we have said, when you return the broken member, and you doubt the heat of the abscess, leave it bound for seven days, as we have said; then every three days check the binding, that no swelling or pain comes to the place, or the healing cannot come to the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If it is necessary, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accident happens, and the binding is not removed for three days or more, then have the patient lie on his back and keep his hands on his stomach; place under the dislocated limb a smooth cushion of equal thickness made of wool, and every hour during the day and night watch that the position of the dislocated member does not change, or the binding becomes loose. If it heals by the power of medicine and the patient is given food as we have mentioned above, in such a way that the food is first made fine; then when he begins to regain strength, it will be great.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the aid and leg should be taken in for forty days; and then one must loosen and administer baths and medicated oils to correct the place.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the contraction is severe and tight, it may take up to ten days or two months to loosen.
de la brisure du bras	of the breakage of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fossa," of which one is small and supports the pouch; and the other is large, and is below the small bone; so it may happen that only the large fossa breaks, or only the small one, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, their restoration is light and rapid; but when the large ones are broken, the healing is slow, and more difficult than when they were broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the small bones that are broken, they should be gently extended and aligned evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large bones, they require stronger stretching; place them on a pillow, and position the palm of the hand higher than the others, with the small bones lower, crossing the patient over themselves, and the pillow in front of them higher than the rest, so that the patient feels no pain. Then have one assistant stretch the affected arm towards the joint closer to their body, while another assists above it.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then arrange them equally, according to their best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture, each piece is put back in its place, and if there is no suitable one that grasps the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place by moving and the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the specific chapter; then take the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if at the beginning of restoration there appear abscesses, I apply a bandage made of rosin oil and white wax, not too hard nor too soft; and I wrap it very gently until the abscess is calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the plaster, and apply the pouder from the soft mill with plenty of egg, then place the needles, making the needle of the fracture stronger and a little wider than the others; and know that it should have six needles or more on each arm in various positions: whether the fracture is in one bone or two; and tighten more over the fracture than elsewhere, and less away from it, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and make the cloths lying over the fracture soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and let the thread, from which it is bound, be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the ligament after no days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if no adverse event comes to the member, such as itching that appears on the member, then it is necessary that you immerse the member in hot water until the itching is soothed; and allow the member not to be tightly rested.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then repeat the process, and if the ligament is loosened and the bone is dislocated or any similar thing, address it accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the tension cannot be removed from the member because it is too tight, then you should gently loosen it and leave it for a few days until the inflammation subsides, and then tighten it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said help the patient, then he should be loosened for up to 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	If uncertain, then bind his hands to his chest, ensuring his collarbones are even, and guard against movement and reaching; let him sleep on his back. And know that this fracture is healed in 30 days or 45, or perhaps in 20 days, depending on the combinations and complexities of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	You know that on the back of the hand and on each finger there are often small fractures, and it brings only pain many times over.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the hand plant is broken or bent, it is necessary for the patient to cut a cross into it and place it straight in front of him equally; then he places his hand on a cloth extended on the table, and extends the broken bones with the help of assistants, putting them back in their proper places, as much as possible; and applies a plaster and compresses if an abscess forms, then he wraps it up with a linen cloth according to the size.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the rupture is near the belly of the plant, make a ball of cloth, and instruct the patient to press it onto their bruised limb; then take a long strip of cloth, and wrap it around as tightly as necessary, so that the pain in the heart is also great, like the plant on the hand.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the open air, it is necessary that you place a stick above and another under the plant, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand, and stop the blood flow between them.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture occurs in either of the fingers, it should be set evenly, as appropriate; and hold it with the plant, and if you see that a small stick needs to be placed to keep the fracture still, do so, and do not move it. And if the fracture is in the other fingers, like the index or any other, set them evenly, and bind them with the healthy finger next to it; or you can hold all of them together, which is better, or place a stick on top, as needed; and be careful during restoration and arrangement near the abscess, and support what comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	from the broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The hip bone is often broken, and one can clearly see it when it returns to its place in front and behind; its restoration is achieved by binding it tightly over the break, and on the other side.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then extends each limb equally to its fullest extent; this is when the break is between the bones.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the hip bone, one must bind the limb towards the knee, and the other binds below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And also if it is close to the knee, then loosen the ligaments of the knee, and extend it downward; then place the splint so that the bone is in its natural position, and then apply the plaster and bandage, so that no further injury occurs.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside, then return to your work and treatment; the bandage is made in this way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap the fracture with a hard bandage, doubling it in two or three layers, and remove the excess, then turn the leg until the heels reach the root of the toe, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg below the knee, and around the joint, and bring the end above; then turn back to the leg and thigh, and bandage again. Then place a splint with stars on top of the bone; then use eight layers of soft cloth between the leg and thigh to equalize the compression. Then tie three turns or four over the splint, and as you go higher up the splint, loosen it less; then take the two threads that you inserted between the leg and thigh, and tie three stars above them, and turn again to the top of the foot with the thread, until you reach below the ankle. And tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this, so that no abscess or swelling occurs.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, and the dislocation occurs, and you address what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are fragments of bone that have gripped, it is necessary to do so, if possible; and if it cannot be done, it is necessary to break the joint and pull it out strongly; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the joint broken with such stars as in the aid of the leg or arm; nevertheless, such restoration does not please the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the joint is restored in L days, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of dispositions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the street of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	You know that in the street of the knee there is little rupture, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it ruptures, even just a crack or an opening, it affects every wound, and without a wound, and this feels very good.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that you put everything back in its place as much as possible; then apply an adhesive, and place a round plaster, if needed, and tighten it appropriately, then follow all the arrangements we have mentioned for other ruptures, such as a hot compress or anything similar; apply whatever is suitable to each case, as long as it heals.
de la brisure de la jambe	from the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	You know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "tibula" and the other "fibula"; and a fracture occurs in the same way as it does in the arm, and its restoration is identical to that of the arm; all the work is the same. And if both bones are broken together, the leg returns to its original state from every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bones are broken, they turn forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if a large bone is broken, it causes great pain, and one can see it well, and the limb turns pale.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then apply extension, and set it even, and tie the stars equally; but still, it is important to note that if the break is ugly, and there are several pieces, then the extension should be less and lighter; and align it according to your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your task, take two strips of cloth that cover the leg on both sides, and stretch them from the knee to the ankle; then wrap two bands around it, tying them in the middle, and at this band, the leg cannot bend to the right or left, and so it is well; no one should administer anything along the length of the leg, and if it is made of cloth, place the leg to prevent movement, and make sure that the healing occurs properly at the fracture site or where there is an injury; and move the leg each day to see if there is any pus or other complications; treat it as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	From the fracture of bones in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but the bones in the foot can be fractured and the joints dislocated, and there are various arrangements where this may occur.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if the bones in the foot are fractured and you see them stacked on top of each other, the patient will cry out with great pain on the affected foot, as if they wanted to go somewhere, and then place your foot on theirs, raising the broken bones, and press gently until they return to their proper place; then apply a splint and wrap it, placing a small wooden board under the belly of the foot, and securing it to the foot that has been treated, and use other things as needed.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three days or four have passed, if he loosens the bandage, for you will find the bones even, either broken or discolored.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if none of the bones are broken, but they are discolored, as we have said about the hand's bones, then place a narrow piece of wood along the length of the bone and make it slightly wider, and put the plank under the foot, applying pressure; and if there are two or three, or more, broken bones, place a piece of wood on each bone according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and tighten the plank under the foot, and be sure to keep the end of the board against the belly of the foot.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you should not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, as we have mentioned; and treat each accident as it requires.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	On the fracture of the wrist bone.
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the wrist bone of a woman is fractured and the swelling subsides, then she should lie on her back with her rear end raised; then fill the cavity with cotton and pack it tightly. Afterwards, stand her up and gently press the cotton in and out, repeatedly, until it reaches the entrance of the wound, and the bone returns to its place with the cotton inside. When she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and after she has urinated, replace it, and do this for seven or eight days. If successful, a bladder from a goat will be used, and a straw tied around the gap, then the entire bladder inserted into the wound; blow on the straw until the bladder is completely inflated inside. The fracture will heal, and if you notice any pus, take a new bladder and repeat the process. Then fill it with cotton and leave it like this for as long as it takes to heal.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bones of the hand or foot are broken, restore them as we have said regarding the hip bone; and these breaks are not hidden from one who applies his knowledge and skill, and understands this book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For these breaks indicate various arrangements for the right way of restoration: understand this therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	When the staff (or rod) is broken, take a goose throat and insert it into the break; then wrap cloth around it, and leave it for three or four days, and it will heal naturally.
de brisure avec plaie	from fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	For one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is great, such as the bone of the shin or shoulder or similar, it is necessary for him to be healed now, so that the healings we have spoken of bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, but the stiffness from the plaster remains, and you have no other remedy, then begin to restore the fracture in the same hour or on the same day, if the abscess does not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the abscess closes again after opening it, allow the healing to continue until the abscess is calmed, and do not touch it for at least a day or a half-day, lest you bring about an ill consequence.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible upon exposing the heart, it is necessary that you place it gently in your hands with a slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not appear suitable to place equally in your hands, then take this instrument made of iron, with seven or eight fingers long, and adjust its width according to the amount of the wound; and for this purpose, it must be pressed firmly against the member during your work, and thin at the front, thickening towards the middle.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche," so the dislocated bone must be placed back on top of the visible joint; and hold it in place once, until it returns to its original position and is even on both sides.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle and the instrument cannot properly grasp the bone, you must hold the head of the bone until the instrument has a firm grip.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back as we have said, with a suitable instrument such as a knife or scissors within your power, then remove the portion that is stuck in the bone, cauterizing and trimming any rough edges.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterward, knowing that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you do all that it is in its place, then moisten the cloth with a dry black styptic wine, and arrange it properly; do not put any wax or other substance on the wound, lest it bring decay and corruption. Then administer stars (medicinal herbs) when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound exposed, and cover it around according to the amount of the wound, and be very careful that the wound is not constricted by the break; and often the foolish do this and bring death or corrosion to the patient, and the bindings should be gentler and softer than others.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is deep or large, and you doubt that a bad accident may come of it, as we have said, and you feel pain instead of relief, if it is not suitable to put bandages on it; but cover it with hard cloths, and bind them tightly.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound is beginning to close, then remove whatever you have put on it, and apply a healing dressing for wounds, such as a four-ingredient ointment or similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, as long as it remains swollen and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be separated in such a way that the bow of the joint gently moves downward.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if it is continually re-dislocated and cannot return to its original position, knowing that there are small fragments of bone, then you must clean the wound thoroughly and remove all these misplaced fragments which cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula or any other form of decay appears in the place, then it must be treated according to what is said in this chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when a bone is broken and opened up on a limb, such as the bone of the calf or the shoulder, or other large limbs, do not pull it, for many times death results, but let it heal until it rots; perhaps after 20 days or 30, then treat the wound if you can; if not, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	burns that come from the metal.
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come after the healing of the burn, especially when it is near a joint, and it is a nasty sight to see the disfigurement of the limb; and in some cases, the member cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care then, if we must administer medicinal substances that contract, such as aloe, incense, myrrh, sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others, so that you press any of these things, or all together, and conserve them with a contractive wine or with abundance of heat or with cold; and place them on the affected area, tightening it well, and do not loosen it for many days; then loosen it and begin again with another, until the swelling is removed; or you press a piece of good plaster, because the property of plaster is to remove all swellings from the limbs; and if the nodulation has already turned into hardness like stone, it is necessary to remove it, cutting off the excess above, and making the healthy part apparent; or you shave it with any razor, as long as it is removed, and cure it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The weak member after treatment.
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is healed and the weak and delicate member remains, this can happen for many reasons: sometimes because it was bound too tightly and not properly secured as it should be; or because there are too many bindings and it cannot take on the normal movements of the limb; or due to excessive bleeding; or from too great and untimely movements; or because it has little blood in its body, making it weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body firm, until the strength multiplies within it; then administer baths, give joy and comfort, then apply lead to the member, so that the lead draws on great movements, and often washes it with warm water, until the movement reaches the limb; and it returns to its natural state.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	After health, both members are twisted.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the members are twisted after restoration and the bones are broken open, and the form of the member is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function; do not believe the foolish ones who say one must break the member all over again, and many such follies have been done in our land. These actions are to be blamed, and great harm and perhaps death come from them. However, if the contusions and torture are fresh, then they should be raised with hot water, or softening herbs cooked, such as fennel leaves, roots, melilot, and similar things; and prepare a soothing plaster as follows: take the essence of fennel and mix it with goose fat or oil of sesame, and apply the plaster. Or you can use fig seeds ground with fine meal and similar medicines that reduce inflammation.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never should the node be broken because it is rubbed continuously and for a long time with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And allow the limb to move every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the stiffness becomes inflamed and hardened, like stone, it is necessary to break it with iron, if it is convenient to remove it all the way to the bone, with a delicate incision; and apply compression and care in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book on dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocations occur from no joint being in its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs from no cause, it is necessary to bring the limb back to its normal position immediately.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the limb swells, and by chance if it is reset to its place, it should not be moved at that hour when it is swollen; for this often brings about inflammation and other pains. However, once this occurs, make the patient better, then leave it until the abscesses have healed; then elevate the affected member with hot water and oil, and gently reset it, treating each limb as its cure comes to it in its proper place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the upper limbs from the hip to the toe.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It is often the case that the jaws become dislocated, and there are two types of dislocation: they may be slightly out of place, a bit bent, or entirely dislocated, hanging down towards the chest, preventing the patient from closing their mouth, holding saliva, and even moving their tongue during speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is minor, it may heal on its own with proper treatment.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it with haste, and not delay; and in such a way that the healers place the head towards the patient's malady, and gently pull the mirror with one of their hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, so that the dislocation is from two parts; and let the other two hands be stretched out equally; and command the patient to soften his jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And let the mirror be adjusted equally until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it returns to its place, especially when both jaws are together, then apply hot water and oil, gently resetting it; do not delay in returning it, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient is closed well without softening, place moistened cloth strips covered in rose oil and wax on them, then gently tie them with soft bands; and let the patient sleep on their back, with their limbs between two cushions, so that they do not move to the right or left, nor make any effort to increase [the pain], but consume light food as soon as the pain is gone and the jaws are healed; and then eat what they want gently, without opening their mouth to eat or drink until the jaw is completely healed and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if both jaws cannot be brought back to their original position within an hour and are not restored to their places, then fever and severe pain may occur, and perhaps intestinal ruptures, or vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then know it is a misfortune; and often death comes to him who experiences it, within seven to nine days.
de la forcelle	de la forcelle" translates to "of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The fork cannot be dislocated from any side within the depth of it, and it is never fully healed, especially when it is damaged, and one feels it greatly.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And its restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then he presses the joint in your palm, and it returns; then he applies the plaster and binds it, and tightens it; and the part which is opposite the shoulder cannot be dislocated; if it tries to, and it does not dislocate even once, then he must put it back in place as we have said; then he applies the plaster and the bandage, and tightens it, and instructs the patient to rest until he is healed; and thus the head of the shoulder is brought back into its place when it has returned to its proper position.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	From the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	You know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: one is when it dislocates at the acromion end; and the second is at the part of the scapula; and sometimes it dislocates above, which is rare; and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor inside for the nerves; and often it dislocates downward towards the acromion, especially in those who have little flesh, because it easily slips there; but in those who have enough flesh, it slightly shifts and returns slightly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to no one that they experience a blow or fracture, and the shoulder becomes hot with an abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of that.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary that you test it, as long as you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And dislocations are known when they lean towards the joint, and make a distinction between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a clear diversity; and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and by pressing on the shoulder blade, you can feel the top of the shoulder, just as if it were one. The patient cannot bring their hand to their side, nor make any movement; and if it is dislocated upward, unless it is completely hidden, you will find it clearly visible by touch; and this type of dislocation is not always easily reduced, especially when it is new, or the infection is in the joint.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the healer holds the patient's hand above the affected area, then places his palms below the joint, and pulls the joint upward with force; and he releases the hand and extends it upwards, then places it below; this will bring relief.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said, above the hands, after a few days, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and administer gently a mollifying and soothing preparation, such as a decoction of alder and fenugreek and melilot in water, and let him drink; then prepare a cushion with an equal amount of soft and firm wool under the affected area, and place the patient's heel on it, and pull the upper part of the shoulder gently, and treat the hand of the patient; and another healer should hold the head of the patient so that he does not move below; this will cause the shoulder to return immediately, and if you see that it is put in order according to this method: and make sure that you are present a man who is stronger than the patient; and position him straight against the ribcage, and pull the affected shoulder away from the joint, and pull the joint upward towards the chest, and another healer pulls the hand of the patient downward towards the stomach.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, so that anything heavy causes no harm to them, the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And it is also done in another way: take a long stick and insert it into the ground so that the end of it is as bright as a pistol, neither too thick nor too thin; then place it under the patient, but ensure there are soft rags on top, and the patient's arm is stretched downward from the other side, forming an angle; then the joint will return to its original position. If for any reason, out of all that we have said, the dislocation does not want to come back, this treatment should be performed: take a stick of great length and four feet in width, with a sharp point at the top, to be inserted entirely under the collarbone according to this form.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then place a heavy cloth over the head, so it does not hurt the patient, and put the patient on their side; extend one arm above the head, and tie the limb to the patient's side, then place the arm on the narrow edge of a large wooden board, and let the hand hang down, and leave the body hanging from the other side: the joint will now be realigned.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is aligned in any way, it is necessary to put under the joint a piece of equal wool, then apply the plaster made of fine powder, with incense and egg white, over the entire shoulder and around, then remove the joint carefully, and tighten the bandage on the plaster, and press the hand against the collarbone, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he move slightly, as long as the limb is comfortable, for it will heal faster; and then after a few days or seven, he moves it; and if it remains still and is not softened, it heals.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture or any other cause, it is necessary that you apply fire cautery at three openings, as described in the chapter on cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and after seven days the dislocation still does not hold, and he cannot raise his arm high, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is either cut, stretched, or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the worst, and the limbs, or behind, if it occurs through a blow, and stretch of the hands, and is attended by pain, another remedy should be applied; and treat until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after healing comes cracking in the limb, and delay in movement; if the patient uses it many times, as long as the cracking persists, it will be lightened, and return to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	on the cost of dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You know that the jointure in question is misaligned at the tips, and at the tips it returns; if it is misaligned from all sides, especially front and back, and the dislocation is not corrected, because one can clearly see it and feel it; and treats according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the affected part with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	Because the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch the shoulder to anything.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it in such a way that the pus forms and comes out, for if the pus forms but does not come out, it will be difficult to bring it back; and perhaps it cannot be brought back entirely, especially when it is at the rear; and it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and perhaps death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is possible when it can be brought back, that you stretch his hand with both of yours; and his arms should be spread out, and the hands turned to the side according to the joint around, from inside and outside, and pull the joint together at his wrists or at the base of his palm, until he returns to his original position.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to its original position, and turn the root of the palm towards the joint that is misaligned.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, apply a strong extension; and have the minister extend the arm, and stretch it tightly so that it does not move during the extension. Then turn the arm in each direction after you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth around it; and when you see the joint aligned with his hand, seal the joint with no oil to soften it, then pull the joint back until it returns to its place. And once it is in place, apply dry plaster with egg white, make it tight, bend the arm towards the patient's chest, and leave it for several days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, loosen the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not properly aligned, repeat the plastering and bandaging, and leave it for several days, until it is firmly set; then loosen it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if the patient feels grief after the joint is reset, and it becomes stiff, bathe and gently rub it, applying pressure until it is relieved; or place a grease-soaked woolen compress on the joint, leave it for one day and night, then remove it, and give the patient a bath. And when he has sweated, rub the joint properly, then apply the compress again, and repeat this process two or three times until it is healed; and if you see that it remains stiff, apply a fine moist warm compress with butter, and wrap it up. It will return to its normal state.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The hand joint is misaligned and its return to normal is lighter than that of other joints. Nevertheless, it must be brought back to its original position carefully, immediately after it becomes dislocated, so as to avoid swelling or the formation of a hot abscess.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And when you bring it back, place the patient's hand on a table, extend their fingers, and ensure they are even, so that the palm rests on the joint, holding it until it returns to its normal position. However, you must check if it is in the correct position; then, place the patient on their back on a table, extending and bringing back their hand.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, let the patient place the back of his hand on a table, and look to place his hand over the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, it is well; otherwise, if the strain of soothing embrocations does not cease, and it remains thus without restarting.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after any number of days, then the joint remains twisted; and it does not harm the patient for as long as the hand is soft, and nothing can be drawn from it: then know that a nerve or an artery is cut; unless there is no other mechanism to draw out the case, and perhaps there is nothing else worth trying.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is dislocated, if you place the splint as we have said, then stretch it and hold it for a day, then release it and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is no fracture, then apply warm water moisture, and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	On the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	The fingers of the hand should never be dislocated at any joint, neither at the back of the palm nor at the base; then they are stretched and the dislocation is reduced in small movements until it returns, then hold the top of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is separated; leave it for a day, and then reset it as you did before; do not tie it, as we have said, but release it at night, and move it, and relace it firmly; continue this often until it becomes tight, and do likewise if it is dislocated on the palm of the hand, or from any other side, until it heals.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	dislocation of the spine
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine or the collarbone is dislocated and there is no cure, the patient risks death due to the hastiness of the condition.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs of this are that the patient's extremities jump involuntarily, and they cannot hold them still, and often a limb becomes weak, or both arms or both legs, and sometimes the spine is bent to four parts; the part that bends backward is called "gypsiness". The cure for this is if the gypsiness originated in childhood: there is no cure or complete healing from it.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from a fall or percussions or similar things, the old ways of treatment speak in great words, without much benefit to him; but I have abbreviated it according to my understanding and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the stiffness that comes to the penis in front, no one has a cure; and also that which comes directly to either side, and it is only the one properly located at the back that can be cured, as I say; and it is that the patient should be extended on his face equally in the first position, and have a tight hold from below so he does not move; then insert a stick into the head in the ground forming, and another at the anus, and tie a strap across the patient's ass, and one at the hips, and another at the thighs, and another at the knees, and another at the ankles; and these assistants know the straps, one on the head and others on the anus among the sticks; and they should be well fastened, the stick as we have said, and the nurse places her palms on the protruding spine until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return with this treatment, take a table three feet long, cut through the wall from the inside, position the patient on their side, and turn the head of the table away from the wall; then place the center of the table over the pain; put both feet against the other side of the table, and press firmly until it returns to its place; and if you see fit, do it with a twist that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And take two large splints, one for the patient's head from a strong arm, and another two for their feet, and make a space of about a palm length between each; and put in each splint a hole or make it twist correctly, so that they are firmly fixed in place, and do not move; and between these two splints, let there be one more small splint turning, so that the others also turn, and have each of these smaller splints about as long as a palm; to turn the larger splint, tie it towards the head with a string from among the knots attached to the larger splint, and another string towards the feet to the other end of the splint, and let all the assistants twist their respective splints until the pain is completely alleviated.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, apply a drying plaster with plenty of heat, then the pads, and then the end of a tablet three fingers long, which should adhere to the area of the gibbosity and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a strap, as we have said, and use the patient's subtle relief, until he is healed; and if any occurrence happens at the end of health, then it is appropriate to administer softening and soothing medicines, using the method that we have mentioned above; and never apply a piece of plaster, nor let its appearance appear in the rear spine, and be careful that it is not dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, so one must not have presumption, for perhaps death would come.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of dislocations of the spine
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	You know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only cause dislocations, unlike the other joints; and the hip joint is misaligned according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and more inside, less misaligned in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation within is such that when you join the affected leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer, and the injured knee opens wider than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee; and this is due to the muscle that is swollen from an abscess above.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him who experiences this at death, it is that this event is contrary to what has been said before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him who experiences it beforehand, it is that his leg is healthy according to the condition; nevertheless, do not bend the knee without pain, and if one wants to make them walk, they cannot do so before, and they retain their urine, and the anger swells, and when they look down, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who experiences it afterwards, it is that he cannot extend or bend his knee, and one leg is more twisted than the other, and the anger is softened, and the foot is in a position opposite to the rest of the bones.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	They must reset this appearance of dislocation if it is an old dislocation that persists according to its nature, as there is no cure; and one must not let him have any presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for the one whose dislocation is fresh, and it's of the four types of dislocation, you must act quickly, reducing the joint to its original position both inward and outward, and ensuring it moves freely to the right and left; then it will likely heal on its own and no other treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it doesn't heal in this manner, you must apply a strong compress and extend the leg with two hands or bind it tightly above the knee; other ministers should place their hands from above in such a way that they press his hands down towards his feet, then pull strongly on a tight ligature placed on the calf; others should hold his head with a strap; and all at once, upwards and downwards, until the patient is completely lifted from the ground and remains still.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to all four limbs, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, that is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If the dislocation is in a hidden place, it is necessary to treat it as follows: You must have the patient lie on his healthy side, then tie the tendon at the root of the thigh, and the one beneath the angle; then stretch the ligament towards the angle and towards the force. Then have other assistants grasp the patient's arms, and embrace the large tendon of the affected thigh, and extend it in a direction opposite to its natural position. It will return to its place now; and this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot hold it in the manner we have said, then it is necessary that you tie together both feet of the patient with a strong soft ligature on both heels and knees; then let the sick leg be extended two fingers more than the others; then hang it over a post, and let it reach two arms' length above the ground; then command the minister to embrace the top of the thigh, and have other ministers hanging with the patient, who embrace the thigh, for the joints will now come together.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is external, if the patient lies as we have said in the case of the dislocated hip, then tighten the ligature precisely on the sick leg and also on the opposite side; then place two hot coals, one at the top and another at the bottom, and insert a third between the cuisses of the patient along the dislocation. Then surround it with moist cloths so that it does not hurt the patient, and let each minister extend towards him, and they should all place their hands equally on the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it does not return, put it on a table and press it as we have said in the previous section, and lay the patient on their healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is present, it is necessary to stretch the diseased leg forcefully, as I have said; and to alleviate the pain of being on the diseased limb, then press with the other hand and extend it downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is at the outside, it is not necessary to extend the diseased limb downwards or lift it up on the table, but rather it should be placed as if the hip was dislocated in the previous section; and it should be on its face, with the leg extended as we have said before, and pressure applied on the joint against the table; and it will be at the right point when the patient extends their legs and they are even. Then tighten the stockings, apply a plaster, and bind with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and let it rest for three or four days, then remove the bandage and plaster, and make them walk gently until the limb is healed.
de la dislocation dou genoil	From the dislocation of the knee.
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The limb is dislocated in three ways: internally, externally, and posteriorly; but not anteriorly.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if it does not yield at the knee, you know it is dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg if he can, and place his face on your hands, and rest his foot on yours; then take hold of the thigh with your palms, and draw between your fingers, and bend both sides of the knee joint; and another assistant extends the foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that the leg yields slightly at the knee; and apply a poultice, and raise the leg at the knee and ankle together firmly for three or four days, then release it; and let not the patient move about, until the member is comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not straight, apply firm extension as we have said in the treatment of the spine, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	On the dislocation of the heel.
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heel is neither completely dislocated nor fully reduced, and it remains misplaced both internally and externally.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and there is tenderness in the area where it is dislocated; the reduction is slight, and one should gently extend their hand towards the affected side when it is slightly dislocated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when the dislocation is slightly improved, it's important that you make the patient lie straight, and have assistants hold the leg apart from the knee, then grab the foot with your right hand, and with your left hand, twice, stretch the foot towards you; then extend it nicely upwards, and bring the foot back down; do this two times as we said, pinching and stretching the foot; if it comes back, that's good; if not, continue the treatment, for it will come back; and if it cannot return in this way, make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and have assistants firmly insert a stick between the patient's thighs, and bind them tightly so that the patient does not move; then each assistant holds the healthy leg from the ankle, and the dislocation will be re-aligned as they stretch it; then evenly place mirrors on both sides of the dislocation, and another assistant holds the intact leg at the knee, and the dislocation will return to its proper place.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when the swelling has subsided, apply an ointment and bandage, tighten the wrap around the leg, and secure the stirrups behind the ankle, ensuring the bindings are not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the swelling is gone, loosen the bindings; then remove them on the third or fourth day, and the patient must walk for four days; and if he recovers before that, it is not fortunate that he will heal no further.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess forms, it is necessary to calm it, as we have said elsewhere, while it is still healthy.
des dois	From two sources
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the eyes are dislocated, if they need to be nicely extended without strain, it is a light matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any other part of the back or foot, it is necessary that you place the patient on a level bed or table entirely straight, and place your foot on what opens these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns; and when it is even, and nothing opens, place a wooden block under the sole of the foot, then stretch strongly, and leave it for three days, then release it; and let it rest until it is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	From wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound appears with dislocation and it is desired to restore it, often the patient dies if one is not careful in its treatment; so be not presumptuous in its cure if you are unskilled in the art and have not practiced it for long, and be not hasty, but compassionate and slow. In the beginning, apply hot poultices to the abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands if there is no hope of recovery; but if there is hope, then immediately reposition the limb to its proper place, so that the abscess heats it; and when the limb is in place, administer soothing poultices to the abscess and treat the wound as appropriate, using desiccating herbs; and if with dislocation there are broken bones and small bones are damaged, fracture them and do as we have said for simple ailments; and beware of entering a path of fear, as I have said, for this is your salvation according to your Creator, and for the knowledge of your arm and body.
Amen	Sure, here is the line
