O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, my very dear children, I have completed this book which is the last of medical science, its fulfillment, and have finished it through its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this for you with this treatise, which is the beginning of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And since the work of hands is forbidden in our region and strange to all, the knowledge has perished and been lost, and there is nothing left from its strength except for small descriptions in ancient books about what the hands have done.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this, error and vanity have arisen, and thoughts are closed, and knowledge is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I will revive this treatise by organizing it according to the order of exposition and explanation, and also by summarizing; and I will bring together the forms of cautery tools and other instruments used in the work, with adjustments to the declarations and preparations, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine has become distant.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who wishes to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, must know the judgment of the members, their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and blood vessels and the number of veins, and understand the movement and rest of the veins, and from where they originate.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And Hippocrates says that the name is nothing, and the work is something; especially in the art of healing.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that he who is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, will certainly fall into error and mislead others; as I have often seen many who undertake this science without knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a most strange sight, where the abscess of scrofula affected the neck of a woman, and it damaged the arteries in her neck; so much blood gushed out that the woman died in the woman's hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another strange sight where a stone was removed from the bladder of an old man, and the stone was large; it took with it a piece of the bladder, and the man bled internally for three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone; if it was not removed, he would surely die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another wonder which took in hand the care of our lord who had a broken leg, and with the break, he suffered a wound; and the ignorant healers bound the break to the wound as if by strong thread, leaving no trace of healing on the wound, and left it thus until the leg was entirely swollen and painful and came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	They called me to come to him, and I hurried to free the leg; and when I freed it, he was at peace and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But every way to correct the corruption was already confirmed in that limb, and it could not be healed; and the corruption continued to spread through the member until the whole limb was completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I also see another wonder that increases an abscess, and then it inflames due to the wickedness of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For the ulcer, when it is free from dark humor, one should not use iron to touch it unless it is in a part of the body that allows for the complete removal of what is corrupt.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, dear child, it is necessary that you know that the art of healing is divided into two parts: that is to say, work where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each case in this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For this reason, it is necessary for you to guard yourself carefully, so that the ignorant do not speak ill of you; take up your arms in courage, and undertake your sick with lightness and firmness, and use the best means, so that through God's grace you may attain salvation and be safe; abandon diseases filled with despair, and put away from yourselves what makes you doubt, and be sure in yourself, so that you can pass from this world to the other one in glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in no way should one pay heed to evil diseases, unless they are called foolish by the masses.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cautery and medicinal agues, and it is ordered from the head to the feet; and about the shapes of instruments, and the tools for cautery, and everything that is necessary for the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and the use of suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is ordered with the shapes of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar conditions; it orders the use of the primary tools up to the foot, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Therefore, we must remember the work and it is necessary that I mention the qualities of aid and the harm of each condition.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and their harms are the longest discourse and most subtle science, revealing secrets; on these topics, the greatest sages have spoken and agreed among themselves; and for me, their words are sufficient, as I fear lengthening this discussion.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery helps universally for every complexion where it has matter, whether the complexities: that is to say, a hot complexion with matter, and a dry complexion without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In both hot and dry complexes, matter exists, some devise that cautery is great help, and others say the opposite: that cautery is useless for ailments arising from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be treated with heat for a hot illness by heat or dryness; and he who says the contrary states that cautery provides great help to hot and dry ailments that come into the body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the color of fire, you perceive the body is fresh.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	Because I have found it to be true through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in every case, no one should employ this method except he who has tried it and knows through long experience the chapter of cautery, the diversity of human complexes, the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the outcomes and the passage of time; for other complexes we have only fear, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all agreed and harmonized with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, child, that cautery enkindles fire from secret remedies, and is of greater benefit than medicinal burning cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and brings no harm but to the member that is afflicted, and does not affect any other member by name.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Medicine that burns travels from one member to another, bringing diseases of sorrow and hindering healing; and sometimes the fire, for its nobility and the goodness of its substance, does not cause harm if it is not excessive.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And thus, I have found by experience and the long service and study that I have devoted to this art, and it is in accord with the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse the length of my words, because I do not wish to deprive you of the secret contained within fire, nor its quality of work, how it heals diseases of the body, as the philosopher demonstrates; consider it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know this, my son, that there is agreement among them as to when the cautery should be made and the prayers invoked.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the pain and suffering caused by the disease are removed with the help of cautery; especially when cautery is for necessary and urgent pains that cannot wait until a greater ill comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear child, as they do who are ignorant; for the disease that is healed by cautery does not relapse; and so it must be done; but it is not like what they care for, because cautery is only a medicine that alters the constitution and dries up the humors that cause pain, and acts faster than any other medicine for the sake of its value, and for the virtue of its work and authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And another thing that can happen is that the disease returns according to the constitution of the sick person and the place of the disease and its virtue; and superfluities accumulate in him through the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cautery is administered where there are few superfluities and moisture, as in the cautery of deep wounds for pain and similar things, and such pain does not return; but it happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last of medicine, but it is true; however, their intentions are false, and they consider cautery to be the last of medicine because when we administer treatment methods for any illness and they are ineffective, then we should resort to cautery, and it is effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it becomes clear that cautery is indeed the last resort in medicine, not at all according to the understanding of ignorant people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that gold cautery instruments are more effective than iron ones, and they only mentioned fire for its quality of gold and the nobility of its substance; they said that the heat from cautery does not cause putrefaction, but this is not certain, for I have tried it, and I have found that it is true in no man; and gold cautery is more effective than iron, as they say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And still, when you heat the gold instrument, you are not sure if it is heated through by the color of the gold, and as soon as it cools down; and if you heat it too much, it will be damaged; thus there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this, we use fire cautery as we have equipped it with our tools for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or, I have ordered this chapter at the end so that the way be lighter to find.
dou cautere olivaire	Oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	Fire cautery is useful for moisture and cold on the brain, and it heals two conditions caused by disease, known as "soda," and by many humors that descend to the limbs and ears, and due to numerous dreams and toothaches and throat pain, especially in all diseases arising from cold, such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the patient is cleansed by a solvent medicine, purifying the head III or IV, according to the virtue and age and habit of the patient's malady; and then the head of the patient is made to lie down.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make it sit crossed in your hands, and place your palms on his two legs; afterward, put the root of your palm onto the root of his thigh between his two joints; and there where your middle fingers meet, if it bleeds, heat up the cautery called "olive," which has this shape:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And mark it on the skin with ink, and repeatedly push and pull your hand, gently twisting; then lift your hand carefully, and check if you can see the bone emerge; and if not, repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you. Afterward, take some string, put soft and melted butter inside, place it on the wound, and leave it for three days; then apply clean cotton until the burning sensation is gone; finally, dress the wound with "tetrafarmacy" until it heals completely.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And they say that the older the wound, the more it purifies itself; and for this reason, it needs help to heal.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say that one must not let the cautery burn off any part of the bone, and then remove what is burned from the bone, and it will be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And another says that one must not apply the cautery too heavily, and pry so forcefully from the bone as wide as a woman's fist, so that the humors can come out; and one must keep the wound open for a long time; then one should clean it and dress it.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cautery do not seem good to me in every way, except for those who have no fear; and I think I should leave them, because the joint is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other members; and even when the patient's joint is weak by nature, the first appearance of cauterization seems more safe and flexible to me, and from this I act accordingly.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	from the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When chronic pain in the head comes and lasts a long time, patients must use herbal remedies and pills known as "cough drops," and purgatives for the head and eyes and poultices; and if one tries the cauterization that we have mentioned above, it is of no avail.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care if the patient's shoulder is of strong nature and not too frozen; then cauterize it from below, just as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After cauterizing each corner of the shoulder close to the bone, as we have said before, and cauterize the one called "vasselz" (likely referring to a specific muscle or tissue), which is where ventosas (suction cups) are placed; hold your hand lightly so as not to see the bone. The patient feels much greater pain from this cauterization than from others, and I will speak of it at that time. It is important that the cauterization of the corners be more delicate than that of the middle part of the shoulder, and this is its form.
dou cautere dou chief	For fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in a part of the head sudden pain occurs, and the illness spreads to the oil (or possibly referring to inflammation), and the condition is purged with drugs made by skilled physicians, and all other treatments as I have mentioned in the division of illnesses, and none of these help: then perform cauterization according to two methods, that is, with hot ague medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauterization with hot ague medicine is when you press a warm compress on the affected area, remove the skin and clean the wound deeply, then place a poultice or cloth soaked in butter over it; leave this for 12 hours, then take it off, clean the wound thoroughly, and leave it uncovered for 2-3 days.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment with medicine, as long as it is healed; and if you find yourself doing something from any burning medicines that I have written about or dosed to treat burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery is done according to this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery instrument according to this form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the head is shaped like a clasp with a small amount of curvature, and in the middle there is a slight appearance; place it on the painful area, hold your hand, and gently turn it slightly until half of the thickness of the heart is burned; then remove your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is harmful, and allow an abundance of blood to flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing cotton in awe of the wound, and covering it with cloth for three days; then he moistens the cotton with butter, and continues to treat the wound with care until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with a cautery called 'cultellare' (scalpel), be careful not to damage the artery in this migraine that is not ancient.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraine as we have previously explained in the sections on diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cautery mentioned in the medicine does not help, then you must heat the cautery called 'cultellare' (scalpel) until it is white; and draw a line across the affected area, about half an inch long, and move your hand once so as not to damage the artery, and do not let it reach the bone; and beware of the mandible which becomes mute when chewing, and ensure that the teeth pay no attention other than to be mute, and prevent spasms from affecting the patient, and take care not to cause bleeding from the artery after it has been cut, especially in someone who is afraid or unfamiliar, and who is not well-versed or experienced; and leave the treatment halfway through. But I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is cut, and show you where it is explained in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery is not enough to cure the disease, and the patient suffers, cauterize both sides of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healthy; and if you see, apply the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on extracting an artery, along with a cautery having two blades; this cautery is better and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain in the ears due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is pain in the ear due to cold, and various soluble medicines and other remedies as we have mentioned in the previous section have been applied without relief, then use this cautery called "points," which is shaped as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After puncturing the entire painful ear, or both ears where the pain persists in either one, and you have marked the place of the joint, then take ten points around each ear; after that, treat the joint until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	regarding the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	The torture that requires cautery is limited to those causing fluid movement, as we have explained in the sections on disease; and do not perform cautery on parts that come from dryness and nerve pain.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	As you treat this kind of torture that stops from flowing water and purging from the head and gargarism, and if it doesn't work, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three types of cautery: one at the base of the ear, another slightly away from the temple, and the third in the alignment of the two lips; and place the cautery on the part that opens a healthy wound, and burn the cautery on top of the ear, a little below the forehead, and another on the temple just as far as a pea; and leave the cautery until half of the heart is burned. This is the shape of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it resembles the cutting knife that we have described above, but this is a little more subtle, and it is necessary for the knife to be slightly thicker; then treat it as I have said before, as long as it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, but it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, one on the whole head, and one on the liver, which is called 'vessel' as we have said before, and no cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	It seems like you've provided a keyword, "de lit
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, it is necessary to give the patient large amounts of herbs and supplements to purify the mind; after that, wash the whole head of the sick person, and place on their occipital bone the plaster of lupine, which is written about in treatments; and this is the way of cauterization: if he does it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If the patient is healthy thus, it is good; and if not, make three cauterizations on each side of the middle in descending to the collarbone, with a space between each cauterization of two finger-widths; treat it as the others, and if you see it becoming inflamed, make one cauterization in the center; and if necessary, two others on each horn, and treat until he is healthy; this cauterization is called 'olive' as I have said above.
de la froidor dou chief	of coldness from the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleansed with earth and water as we have said before; then remove the head from the patient, and perform a cautery on the head and each horn, and behind and three times on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the illness is severe, perform four cauterizations on the spine of the back; leave it until the hardest heart is burned, and gently your hand. Afterwards, treat it as long as it is healed, and the cautery that we have called 'olivare' as said before.
de l’epilempsie	Epilepsy" in Old French would be translated as "de l'épile
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should not use fire cautery except on those who are phlegmatic, and it is first necessary to purify the mind with years and other remedies that we have mentioned in the section regarding the great suffering of patients from harsh medicines.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot bear it, make them gargle and chew to purify the mind often with good meats; then place the head in the middle of the water, and perform the cautery as we have said before, and cauterize the veins and every horn; and if the patient is weak and suffers greatly, cauterize them as I have mentioned for those with paralysis and softening of the limbs, on the spine in the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive according to the manner I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is sick, perform a subtle cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When, due to melancholy, there are excessive or corrupted moisture and thick phlegm, then perform cautery with slight cautery as we have said for those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if, due to melancholy, the excesses decline towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist with ill health, then give him something to drink that purifies the mind, according to what is proper in this division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After resting the patient's head, make a well-made torus (a circular shape) as if it were placed on the head; and let the patient lie with their eyes closed, held firmly from all sides; then apply the remedy, mixing butter from old goats; and warm it at a moderate fire, so that the patient can endure it; afterward, empty the circle inside the head, and leave it to cool; and repeat this process for the patient each week, with another good treatment, until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or, if you need to cauterize a wound by making it smaller at the site of the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cautery moistens the flesh increasingly; then apply cotton soaked in butter and fat from a calf.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eyes come first as signs of the conditions I described in the previous section, then begin and cause the patient to drink something purifying for the head, guarding against all moisture, and applying sweats or baths several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After instructing the patient to look up, he performs a cauterization on the head, also applying cautery to both temples if they descend together or separately; he should close all veins and arteries beneath the heart, making the cautery long according to the width of the temple. Be cautious about bleeding, and if it appears excessively, stop it as much as possible.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you, in the extraction of arteries and the careful incising, how to prevent complications; and never should one cauterize or burn the bones from behind.
dou cors des larmes	two parts of the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears from the eyes are old and accustomed, and flow through the veins, removing the arteries that appear from the upper part of the head; and one sees that it is from cold, phlegmatic superfluities, then do the cauterization as I said at the beginning of this treatment, descending along the eyes: I cauterize across the forehead, and II cauterize on both temples, and II cauterize below the bones from behind; and if more is needed, cauterize carefully over the eyebrow with all the little cauterizations.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Let the body release tears from the eyes.
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat it according to what we have said in the previous section, and it does not benefit, then give the patient three doses of a bad-tasting medicine; after drinking this, warm his head with hot olive oil cautery; perform two cauterizations with the cautery called 'clavilis' on the two temples, a little below the hair; and be careful not to block the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	This is the form of cautery called 'clavilis':
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil (possibly referring to skin) is softened by illness and moisture, then use this cautery called "olive" (likely referring to a specific type of treatment or tool).
de coi ci est li forme:	Due to which the form is:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you perform the cautery on both sides of the limb as long as the tendons are, do not release your hand until the third part of the skin is burned, according to the manner I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair which protrudes from the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	No time does it happen that the hairs of the skin are turned to rust and prick the skin, and one makes cauterization according to two manners: that is to say, by fire or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then place the patient in a healthy position; afterwards, sign on the paper with a figure that is as large as the full moon, and make the beginning of the sign among the hairs; then apply moist cotton coated in egg glue and musk from the persil to the skin, and heat the cauterization tool as follows:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the affected area little by little, burn the surrounding skin; and the signs of healing are that you see the skin retreating and the hairs standing on end at the point of the oil; then lift your hand and leave it for three days, after which apply moistened cotton in butter until the burning is gone; subsequently, treat with a cure as long as it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And after the hairs grow in, and the skin becomes soft, then repeat the cauterization on that same area as you did before; and if the hairs are burned, cauterize it again while the skin is raised to its natural state, and even, and the hairs do not pierce the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The medicinal fire cautery is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment shape of the leaf of myrtle; take French soap and fresh charcoal, each in equal parts, and grind them together well; apply it gently, so that it does not cool down, then spread it over the shape made like the leaf of myrtle, and place the paper on top. If the disease persists for just one day, then the operation should be done on both sides; put cotton oil moistened in egg white beneath, and let the patient's part be in your healthy hand, placing your showing finger on the medicine, pressing lightly and gently every time the patient feels a sting from the medicine, because it also stings like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then take away the medicine from your body.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the infection has passed, then raise the limb from below, and observe if you see the paper-like skin raised as it was before by constraint of fire or incision; and if so, it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, apply more medicine to the limb while it hasn't healed completely, ensuring your work is even and your joints are aligned; then cover it with moistened butter until the pain subsides, after which treat the limb with a healing dressing known as 'dyafenis' and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary for you, take great care with your work so that it does not wish to depart from the medicine entirely.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterward, and the hairs prick in the oil, repeat the medicine on that part which has become softened from the paper, just as you did before; then cure it until it is healed; and this is the shape of the cloth with great care.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the needs of men are diverse in size and extent, and according to your constraints; and do not depart from the right way for those who have studied this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	On the treatment of a fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have discussed in the sections on diseases, and your treatments are ineffective, then it is necessary that you perform cauterization according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head in a healthy position, and hold his limbs' heads between your hands in such a way that they do not move or shift their positions; afterwards, apply moist cotton either in vinegar or in pear juice over the oil. After that, heat up the cauterizer until it is hot: shape it like a quill, so that its tip becomes the cauterizer; if you see fit, point it from one side to another, and if you prefer, make it similar to a tent; nevertheless, whatever shape it takes, it should be mobile for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula, open it and drain the pus and fluid; if it closes again, repeat the procedure and apply hot cautery; hold your hand over the cautery at the affected area above the oil, so your hand does not burn; place the cautery on the fat of the oil and corrupt (it).
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you begin the cautery close to the bone, that would be better.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If that does not work, repeat the cautery one more time, and if necessary, do it again after three days; then apply moist cotton in butter and cure the wound until it is healed, and if after forty days it is still not healed, apply a corrosive medicine to the exposed bone; and the remedy will depend on what comes in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cautery for a fistula that no one among the ancients spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Understand the fistula, and locate its source; then place a fine, sharp tool into the gap, thus taking on this shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and it makes the quantity of a drop of blood; and hold your hand firmly with the tool, and do not move the patient in any way, so that the blood does not leave the wound; and one must put a soft cloth moistened with oil on the wound for healing or relief: the blood drops deeply into the fistula, and the healthy tissue is restored through wonderful health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the ulcer is clean through the cautery we have described, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If that is not the case, it is necessary to administer heat or cold, and bring the ulcer back to the body according to what is appropriate for its own place.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cracks appear in the lips called "poil," especially on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these wounds as we have discussed in detail, and the cure does not benefit, then use a small surgical knife according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And insert the hospital (or dressing) into these wounds until it reaches the bottom; after that, treat the area with wax until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	from the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess forms in the throat's root or tonsil, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it causes putrefaction and rot, becoming a fistula, and you treat it as we have discussed before, but it does not help: then you must apply cautery according to the size of the fistula. After opening or draining the fistula, hold your hand over it until the heat from the fire reaches the bottom, and do this once or twice, following the cure that we have described earlier, until it is healed; and if it heals in this way, it's good. If not, you must expose the area and remove the corrupt bone, as you will find described in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	no movement of the joints
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and treatment with medicines is ineffective, then place the patient's aching jaw in a healthy position; afterward, apply the hot cautery where the tooth's shape will appear, as you would place a cane on the tooth; and immerse the hot cautery deeply, holding your hand firmly so that the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth; then release your hand and repeat the cauterization according to your desire; afterward, have the patient rinse his mouth with salty water and leave it for an hour, warming it thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way, the tooth which was moving is now confirmed in place, and the gums softened are restrained, and the moisture corrupted is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from coldness or chill, and the remedies of medicine are ineffective, then cautery must be used according to these two methods: butter cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Butter cautery is performed by pressing melted butter into a metal spoon (of iron or silver), then wrapping cotton around the tip and moistening it with butter. Apply this to the aching tooth with pressure until it becomes numb, and repeat this process several times until the numbing effect reaches the root of the tooth. If you find the butter too cold, you can place a hot iron on top while maintaining contact with the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	He uses fire cautery if it is such that you press a piece of iron or steel into the wound, and it is deep enough that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth; then, after heating the cautery, its shape will come forth, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools; do this often, for the pain will be lessened on that day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in the urgency of that cautery, and then suck out the heat; and this is the shape of the cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And perform cautery on the upper lip where you wish, and according to what you are able to do; and this is the shape of the instrument.
des scrophules	Of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula is from cold moisture and does not obey digestion with medicines, then heat the cautery over it so that afterwards a form appears, and it has openings for the fumes to escape from the cautery of the other part; and apply hot cautery to the abscess once, as it is necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, put cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, leaving it thus for three days; and then apply moist cotton or butter until the burn is healed; after that, cure the wound with oil and bandages until it is clean.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the bone.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture conquers the channels of the body, especially when it arises from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be first relieved by solvent medicines; afterwards, he should have fire cautery at the root of the throat, and beware not to go up to the throat, and do not breathe with force but slightly.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, he performs another cautery at the joint of the collarbone with the tip of the spine, and these cauteries that are called "clavicle" as we have shown before; and treat the limb as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	from the heat
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and any disease of the pores are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or chills, and it is an old illness, then make two cauterizations on the afflicted area; and another cauterization between the two limbs; and this cauterization called 'clavile' is according to the shape as mentioned above.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make a cauterization by pricking all the cauterization called 'poins' which forms as mentioned above in the illness of the ears; and the points can be up to 30, or even more.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After the treatment, reset the limb according to what has been said above, and make the cauterization in three stages according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And for this reason, the cautery is lighter, because you do it three times.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	on the dislocation of the shoulder joint
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterward, pay attention to the patient's pain on their back and side; afterward, apply the warm compress with your left hand on the affected area; and if the joint is dislocated inward, heat the cautery with two thin instruments until it forms this shape.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and burn the heart as long as it feels hot, and the image of the burn would be four burns altogether; and for this reason, the burn is made with a burn instrument that has three prongs, so that the appearance of the burn is six burns; and the nerve according to the subtlety of a thread, and this is the shape of the burn with three prongs.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never should it be adjusted on this nerve, for which there are eight burns.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying the burn, put a bandage with silk; then rest the patient, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated from above, this happens poorly, then apply cautery to the thick skin with a heated nail or many cauterizing pokes.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	Because the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach while it is being stretched from its natural state, catarrh multiplies within it, and the usual remedies are ineffective, then the patient should be made to lie on his back, extending his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From this and afterwards make three cauterizations and remove the knife with the greatest care, taking as much flesh as a finger, cauterizing all over; and two cauterizations on both sides, so that the shape of the cautery is at three angles, and there is enough space between each one that they do not stick together when they rot; and make the cautery deep enough to reach both parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cautery be like this without distortion.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see yourself cauterized with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form; and whoever is afraid of this cautery, cauterize by poking and marking on the stomach in the amount that you see fit; then cauterize all over the cautery called "point.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment we have previously discussed, as long as he is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver experiences pain from cold and moisture and excessive gas, as long as it is removed from its natural state due to excesses; and the patient is treated according to what we have mentioned in sections, but it does not help, then it is necessary that the patient be careful with his head; and a sign of this is three cauterizations according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, removing the humors from the stomach or the intestines; and there should be enough space between each cauterization, approximately the thickness of two fingers; and the cautery should be long throughout the body, and do not press too hard with your hand over all the cauterized areas; and burn only slightly the middle part of the heart, and let the patient keep his legs straight; and if he cannot, let him lie down and stretch out his legs, easing his breath; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you wish, cauterize these cauteries with a knife, if you are skilled and sharp in the art, and be careful not to burn all the heart, for you would scorch the whole body; and let it not come to boiling, for the veins are very delicate there, and only the wise can see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you need to know if it is within the liver tissue or in the membrane: if it is in the tissue, the patient feels moderate pain; but if it is in the membrane, they feel intense pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this cure involves the mirrors, it is necessary for the patient to rest their head; then apply a signet over the vein where the abscess is, and afterwards heat the cautery which resembles a rose, in this way:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize the cautery until the colors are burned, and come just to the syphag, as long as the pus is entirely hot; after the cure according to the treatment of the eschar as long as it is healed; and it is not appropriate for this cautery to be used by anyone other than those who have studied medicine extensively, and by whose hands these illnesses have been corrected in no way.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can boldly operate, but nevertheless, I still think it is better to leave it.
dou cautere de pleuresin	the cautery of tears
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	They say that one should perform cautery on the pleura with roots of the plant Aristolochia, in this way: take a long root of Aristolochia, as large as you can find it, and dry it; moisten it in oil, then apply it to the fire, and cauterize the cautery between the ribcage and collarbone, and smaller cauteries lower down on the part below the beard; cauterize between the fifth and sixth ribs, slightly leaning back; cauterize across the lower parts of the pelvis, and another one on the stomach, and between the shoulder blades, and along both sides of the lower pelvis, removing the cautery between the shoulder blades; do not press your hand, but hold it open as if smelling something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And they say that no ancient scholar or doctor use the fire cautery resembling a razor, and burn it, and place it between the ribs, until it reaches this abscess; and there is great pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this case, the patients often die now, or there is an infection that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse according to the divisions of treatment we have mentioned, and it does not benefit, then they (the healers) resort to three ways of cauterization, all of which are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Dislocate the joint in such a way that you perform three cauterizations, or four, following the length of the bone, according to the figure of the heat from the fire we have mentioned above; and do not rush your hand over the entire cauterization, and let the patient be cautious on his back; and another way of cauterizing is to heat the cauterization that has two edges, as we showed in the dislocation of the shoulder; and ease the pressure where the bone is located, where the patient's pain comes from the left side, and raise the elevation at which you release the pressure according to the bone, according to the length of the body, and the cauterization should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After you have drawn the two inflamed edges until the bone is pierced on the other side, then treat the cauterization with fire, and thus there will be four. And if you see fit, cauterize the entire cauterization with three edges.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has been putrefied for a long time, and this is more effective than the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	The term "ydropisie" appears to be a medieval
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not effective against hydrops, except in the manner called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	If your treatment according to the methods we have described in divisions is not beneficial, then you should perform four cauterizations around the waist, one on the stomach, one on the liver, and one on the heart, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in the anus; and the cauterizations should be close to the affected area.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the cautery open for a long time to let the pus drain, do not neglect the treatment of the patient after the cautery; healing would be hastened, and the two intentions (or parts) would be healed together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the stomach should be like the claw that we have shown before; and for the back, it should be oval, according to what is placed before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of stones
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When stones are swollen in a person who is uric, and they are full of yellow pus, you should cauterize just below the big toe between the ring finger and little finger; and gently apply your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And don't enter too deeply with the sharp instrument, so that it doesn't pierce the bright skin, and perform the cautery according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After that, make two cauteries on each leg, at the tip of the sharp blade; and let the cautery be deep, one on the inside of the knee joint and the other on the outside, along the leg; and leave the cauteries to heal on their own without dressing, so that the blood comes out; then follow up with the other treatments we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the joint
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the stomach comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by any means; and you see the patient suffering greatly and having great strength, then do a great cautery on the stomach according to what has been said above about cautery of the stomach, a circumferential cautery; and three cauterizations around the anus with very fine cautery, and two cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, do a cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each place, and three small cauterizations on the stomach to relieve the great pain, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	On the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are of long standing and consist of corrupt, cold, moist humors, they are treated as we have said in the previous divisions, but they do not benefit from cauterization. Make three incisions along the spine of the back, starting from below and moving upwards in a triangular pattern; one incision just below the anus (two incisions deep); and if you think the stomach is cold, the meat does not cook well, and swelling is visible on the face, then apply a strong cauterization to the stomach as previously mentioned, and another to the liver, and yet another to the heart, using cautery cloves; leave the cauterization open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, reset the shoulder as long as it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	from the fleshiness called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you deal with the fleshiness (thelul), if the cautery appears too sharp, cover it entirely with a hot compress; leave it until the heat reaches the vein, thereby causing the blood to flow; repeat this process once or twice, and if there is much flesh, cauterize each area as we have said. After the treatments, use beneficial remedies as long as they remain healthy; and if you cauterize with a large hot iron on the flesh, it will provide greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	from the poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, as we shall relate in its place, a disease arises that can only be healed by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a vein becomes fistulated, filled with pus and putrefied moisture, corrupting the surrounding areas, you must try every subtle remedy, and be sure to know at every step how effective it is.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery to a sharp point, insert it into the fistula according to the amount that the attempt has entered, and repeat the cauterization once, or twice, or three times, depending on the quantity required; be careful not to burn the surrounding nerves or major blood vessels.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	It goes without saying that translating medieval medical texts can be complex and ambiguous due to the passage of time, linguistic shifts, and the specialized terminology used. Here is a line-by-line translation of the given text:
de la maladie des reins	Of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When kidney pain accompanied by heavy urination and no ability to urinate, then it is necessary that you perform a fire cautery on the kidneys from both sides using the cautery knife that we have previously mentioned; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a row, and this will bring greater relief.
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from pain and moisture, preventing the patient from urinating, then perform a fire cautery on the outer part of the bladder where the hair begins to grow, both on the right and left side, making each cautery about as long as a finger; also perform a cautery on the back if necessary. The cautery knife should be shaped as previously described.
de la marris	Of the shoulder
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the wound is cold and moist, it does not allow anything to heal, and the flesh is corrupted and its healing is delayed; and when it comes, it causes great pain. Then it is necessary that he make three cauterizations around the wound, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder, and two cauterizations on the back; and these cauterizations should be made with a clamp, as we have said.
de la hainche	de la hainche" translates to "of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moisture descends into the hip socket and for this reason it becomes stuck out of place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the nerves are found to be weakened, it is necessary that you cauterize the patient over the hip socket with a cauterization in the shape of a circle, and mark before the joint around the socket as it rotates, so that the socket stays within the circle; and the cauterization should be similar to that used for the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present for you, perform three cauterizations with the great olive, and let the cauterization be just as effective as all the others; and treat until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain arises in the back, and it is due to cold and moisture, and the patient is cured as we have stated in the previous section, but the cure is ineffective, and the illness is chronic: then you should purge the patient of thick, foul humors with bitter pills or other similar good pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	Afterward, he performs cautery; and the manner of cautery is according to two methods: that is to say, altogether burning medications, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is performed in many ways, of which one is: You cauterize along the ribs, three cauteries in a triangular shape, with good depth and size, and there should be the thickness of two fingers between each cautery, making them olive-shaped. One never performs cautery directly in the middle on top of the chest, for that would result in four cauteries following this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, cauterize with the cauterization of the circle that we have spoken of in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circle contains all the hip, and all the parts of the heart are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain is confined to the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if the pain reaches the thigh and leg, make a second cauterization at the point where the patient feels the pain, and a third cauterization above the ankle, a little to the left; this can be done with a cutting cautery, and the thickness of the heart can be burned. If the patient feels that the pain radiates to the big toe or nearby, cauterize it at that point, three points or four with a cauterization called "point.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the pain is so intense in the knee and down to the thigh, he should perform cautery with a sharp or circular instrument, and be very careful in all his cauterizations that he does not leave them for too long, lest he burn the tendons and large arteries, and do the patient more harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	I myself have seen many who have performed cautery on the sole of the foot, leaving them for so long that the leg became completely swollen, and the feet as well, causing them to be pierced and corrupted entirely.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After an operation on the belly, he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, apply cautery to one and the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise ones say about cautery for the spine, which is the way to do it: take a piece of iron, as thick as a new dime or slightly less, and make it notched on both sides with spaces the size of a small needle; place the notches over each other on the two parts, and they should be as even as possible, and use a good-quality piece of iron; this is its shape.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heat it until it is entirely red and emits steam, then place it on the spine of the ill patient, and turn to its healthy side; apply cautery once more and leave the wound for three days; then make a plaster with butter and keep the wound open for a long time; after treatment, as long as it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we should use this cautery little because of the fear of its regard, and we see few who use it; nevertheless, these are good cauteries, which he can endure, and place where he is strengthened.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The burning medical cautery is such that you make an instrument with a descending edge along the margin of the door, and it should be made of iron or steel on a long wall, and in the center, there should be two openings, and they should be open from below and above, and join together in this form.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing the board of the hip on the sick patient lying on his side, and quickly covering your hand with the board of the hip, pour between the two circles of hot ash that is heated over the fire a little, and leave it for an hour, and let the patient suffer the heat and burn of it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it has a true burning sensation, just as from fire; and when the burns have passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the affected area gently, leaving it thus for three days, and apply butter until the blackness of the burn disappears; and let it remain in this state for three more days as the final aid after the treatment of wounds until it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, use the instrument with gentle pressure as you did with the hand, increasing it gradually; this is the method of hot water, which I have written about in my treatise on rectifying medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, equal amounts of each, crush them together, and place them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Where there is a small opening, make it larger so that the tip of a needle can enter; then place this pot into another well-sealed pot and add alkali and lime, stirring gently until two layers of powder form on top, as you hold it firmly in your hand. Leave it thus until the water and sediment at the bottom of the sealed pot settle, then take all that water and pour it over the lime and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And it will also be beneficial in many cases of medicine and other cautery treatments, as it acts like fire, and with other medicines such as fomentation, honey, anacardium, and lime with soap, all these ingredients mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a treatment by which one noble was cured of the pain in his back and sciatic nerve, and he said that no other remedy had been used, and that he was completely healed once this cure was performed, and he bathed as he teaches below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he says to do this in the following way: you press and grind fresh and dry niter with a little fat, and apply it to the back and thigh and leg where the pain is, and wrap it; and leave it for three hours or until the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter into a bath as long as the body is slightly warmed, and let him enter into bed, and the pain will disappear completely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use fire cautery with such medications unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's hair, it helps a lot; and the cautery should be done in such a way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take lint and grease it with old oil, and apply it to the fossa between the big toe and the other toe called the falciform.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After taking a piece of dry goat horn, hold it in the fire until it becomes charcoal, and place it on the wound, leaving it until it is stained; repeat this process, and do not stop doing so until you think by sense that it reaches the chest, and that the pain ceases; and this way of cauterizing is called "goat horn cautery.
de la dolor dou dos	of the intense pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from stretching or impact or excessive evacuation, or due to some similar cold material expanding, none of these symptoms warrant cauterization, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after that the patient be freed of foul pills or other similar substances, that one make them on the back, where the pain resides, three lines marked with a signet, and in each line V cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cauteries should be made according to the cautery called "point"; and if you see fit, make III cauteries or IV at the middle cautery following this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This illness often afflicts small children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a tight and painful throat when they swallow, and weakness; you will find in the lower back a sharp pain that extends to the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this, and you observe it being cured, cauterize it with the fire cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	The cautery should permeate each part of the wound equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see that the cautery around the wound penetrates with two or three lines, and the points are close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After the treatment, hold the limb until it is healthy according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply cautery to any numb areas that are affected by nerve damage.
de la dolor des jointes	from the pain of joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of joints is caused by moisture that spreads throughout each limb, and when the pain suddenly comes on, they call it "podagra" rightly so, and when it is due to a cold cause and cannot be cured by medicines, then cautery is used in this manner: make several cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary to prick the sole of the foot, make a cautery in the shape of a 'dot'.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, this happens often, so he applies fire to each knee three times or four times with olive oil; and if you need more, you can do so, but don't hold your hand too tight until the desired heat is reached.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and back, he administers the fire we have mentioned in his chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, you make two cuts around the bones; and if there is no pain left in the fingers, you apply fire to each joint and to each hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, you cauterize each part, and take good care of the patient and apply medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you govern it well and drain the humors, it will be healed by God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the dislocation occurs suddenly, the muscles contract and it is necessary, when you attempt to cure it, not to move the shoulder that day; and it should use things that relax the abdomen, so that the intestines descend from the abdominal cavity. After that, lay it on its back between your hands, and command the patient to keep his breath until the muscles are repaired, and align them properly, and sign below the dislocation on the bone of the forearm, and make a mark in the shape of half a circle above the body; then take the fire cautery according to this form.
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as it is white and it sheds scales.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bones to their proper place; and have the attendants lay their hands so that they do not return to their previous position; and open the patient's thighs well, and place pillows and assistants on his thighs, and another one on his buttocks, which holds his hands; then apply the cautery to the sign over your entire hand, holding it straight and firm until you reach the bone, and if you do not touch the bone on the first attempt, repeat the process again until you do; be careful that the bone does not move when applying the cautery; do not burn him; and ensure that the patient does not die or suffer any other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that if you do not go close to the bone with cautery, your efforts are in vain.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cautery of children be subtle according to their size, and of large people as large according to their measure; after three days, treat the wound with butter until the scald is healed; afterwards, cure other wounds until they are clean, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well sealed; and it is necessary that his movements be restricted for a long time, so that the boils do not appear when he moves to his chamber.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, a well-made bandage is applied to him for another forty days; and he should have good rest, working little and guarding against too much drinking and eating, and excessive noise; and by following this instruction, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And now I will describe the treatment for cutting in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other stomachs and are known to not grow any further, hold the cautery near the wound according to its size, and burn it with a third of the heart's beat; after treatment as we have said; and no old ones said that one must cauterize at three angles with this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the place with a sign of iron and make a line across the width above the fracture, and another beyond it, and hold your hand firm over all the cautery claw.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cautery is lighter and more gentle.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain arises in any member, either from falling or injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and medical treatment is ineffective, then it should be cauterized with the cautery called "point," and the cautery should be applied according to the length of the member, its smallness, weakness, strength, and the location of the twist, as well as its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is healthy after the first cautery, that is good; if not, begin another cautery on that part, for it often happens that it must move in the limb next to it, so you must perform cauteries until the patient is cured.
de meselerie	It seems like there might have been a slight error in the
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	These conditions are never helped by a single cautery; especially the illness that arises from the putrefaction of fluids and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	You must observe it being cauterized, take care if the illness is in its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the previous section, and do not delay or hesitate, and doubt that the corruption does not spread throughout the patient; then perform V cauteries on the head: I on the crown, II on each horn, and one behind at the nape; and leave your hand such that the cautery reaches the bone, and until the skin is removed so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape; and cauterize the mouse according to what is necessary.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if the disease is widespread, it becomes evident that you must cauterize these cauteries we have mentioned in the beginning, and cauterize in some places near the neck, and cauterize on the spine of the back, and six times on the spine of the hip, and one greatly on the knee, and another gently on the shoulder; and two on the elbows, and two on the tender parts of the pis (toe), and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the cavities of the hands; and beware of the nails that are on the last toe, so as not to burn them. Never make a cautery on the bone of the wrist, or another on the stomach bone, or one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more you perform cautery, the greater the aid it provides and the more beneficial it becomes; and understand that the patient feels no pain from cautery as the healthy do, because the body is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cautery be great and small according to the members and joints, as you will find in the ways of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment, wash the wound with wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling appears in any member and is cured by medicines, oils, and bandages, but there is no improvement, then make a cautery on the member according to its size and the extent of the problem; and this cautery should be somewhat penetrating towards the heart; then apply treatment with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And never should a cautery be performed on the hand, foot, or back, at the point where a nerve controls the member, and thus if the swelling is removed; nevertheless, no one should attempt this unless they are knowledgeable about the members and the paths of the moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	Of albars (or albaras)
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is ignited, and the medical skill is useless, then cauterize it with a hot iron slightly, according to the quantity of the affected part, until the whiteness is removed, and its color changes; then cure it with flour of rice and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and collyry (eye drops) made from mullein and alder, each in a portion; mix them together, wrap them in a cloth, and apply to the affected area until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of the chancre (a type of ulcer or sore) with cauterization:
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a ulcer appears at the beginning, and you wish to stop it, cauterize it with the cautery that seems like a circle around the entire edge of the ulcer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	Yet wise men say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the ulcer; however, I do not find this good, as I fear it may become ulcers and corrupted, and I have never seen it work well; and a more correct thing is that it should be cauterized around, in the cautery called "circle," as we have said about many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When anyone has a disease called "adubelati," and it does not yield to death or because of the excess it causes, or due to old age and the weakness of the patient when there is little blood, or for the time; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize around with many small cautery burns in piercing; after which leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	Because it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing through all the cautery, make the cautery so hot that this is how it looks:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of this illness called 'adubelati' as long as the cautery perceives the heart, and be such a cautery that the patient feels released in this way so that the course of putrefaction is eliminated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment, as long as it is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	Heal the fire with iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another type of illness is called 'corrodens', which is nothing other than a corruption of the member, as it destroys the members just as fire dries the wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a limb that can be treated with fire cautery, then heat the cautery instruments both small and large, according to what is suitable for the limb or the disease; after cauterizing from all sides until you have eliminated all the corruption, leave nothing of it, so that everything that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then leave it for three days, and apply oil to the cauterized limbs that are suffering from burns until all the scalds from the fire are eliminated, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of wounds that cause pain.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if after three days the wound does not heal, it is good; and if not, recommence the cautery on that which remains stuck in the corrupted joint.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this method is sometimes effectively treated with hot medicines instead of fire cautery; however, fire cautery is much more helpful, and I have already mentioned the treatment with cold medicines in the previous section: take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	from the vessels that come as pieces
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that a pain arises from a deficiency which we call "close" according to our intention, and it is a great fault which harms the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this disease is according to two manners.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This is to know, the fire cautery, and the hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	The fire cautery is that you heat the cautery knife also like a pen, and it should be made of good iron to penetrate the nail from all sides, and have subtle edges; after that, place it hot on the nail, and turn your hand around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail; leave it thus for three days until it begins to rot; then make an ointment of wild mallows ground with silk, and leave the ointment on all night, and the nail will come off and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the dislocated joint with a hot compress until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	If they are converted by heat, and often occur in the hands and feet, it is necessary to apply hot cautery; and this is done thus: take a cane of iron or steel, or a penknife, and place the nail and the ulcer, that is, the warts, on it; then place the cane around it so that it embraces everything, and pour some hot water onto it, holding your hand firmly, and twist it so that the edge of the cane reaches the root of the nail, and allows the hot water to penetrate deeply to the root; let the patient bear the sting of the hot water for an hour; then leave it in that state, and it will come out at the roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	First, do one after another, until you have straightened all those that are in the body, then treat the bruises that cause pain.
li cure dou trembler	It treats the shaking.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When anyone shakes from cold or quartan fever or another, it is necessary that you make four cauterizations or five on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each spine; and one cauterization at the foot, and one on the stomach with an olive cauterization; if it stops shaking, and hastens the health from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	from pus-filled boils
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Never is it apparent through external symptoms that the body is bathed in foul pus, which comes from deeply corrupted substances.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	if it is necessary to do a cauterization on each boil, one should use a delicate cauter from the wood of a myrtle tree, with which the point is taken in the fire, or a cautery from the root of an herb called aristologe, or a lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And never should cauterization be done at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, lest it grow worse and break off the excesses from which it arises, and becomes healed; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut.
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times, great consequences arise from the blood of an artery that is cut, whether it comes to the wound, or the incision of an abscess, or cautery of a member, and similar things; and this is a very painful thing to endure.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And still, when this happens to anyone, if you quickly place your index finger on the wound of the vein and pull it out so much that the blood is stopped beneath your finger, and no more drips; then take several small and large olive oil cauteries and hold them over a flame until they are all red; then, according to the size of the wound and its location, place the cautery on the vein where you hold your finger, and keep it there until the blood stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if you feel a sudden pain when lifting your arm above the vein, and the cauterization is complete, quickly take another cautery from the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to perform one after the other until the wound is healed; and be careful not to damage the nerve nearby, and let no further harm come to the patient; and know that when the flow from the artery has ceased, it cannot be properly healed, especially if the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have mentioned: either by cauterization, or by extraction when it has not been treated, or by tightly tying it with thread, or by applying medicines that have the power to stop blood; and do this carefully and gently.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever alleviates the pain by applying tight cloths or placing hot things on it, or other similar things, will not benefit; it will only make it worse.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if it happens to someone who has no good medicine at hand, they should apply their finger to the vein wound as we have said, and press firmly until all pain is gone from the wound and the vein; they must not move it, but moisten it with cold water frequently until it becomes very cold, as long as the limb is frozen, swollen, and painful. And make inquiries about what he needs for cauterization and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	We begin the second book of surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about every disease for which it is appropriate to use fire cautery or burning medicine, and about the herbs, causes, tools, and shapes of cauterization; I have placed this chapter on the most important body parts up to this point, and I will continue in this chapter along the same path so that those who wish to learn may do so more easily.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, before I begin, it is important for you to know that this chapter involves more risk and danger than the first one on cautery; therefore, greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many ways of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	so often come those who are so certain of their illness that they die gently due to the hope they find in their treatment and the magnitude of their suffering; and from these one must have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And there are those who give you their attention and say: "Wait, I am sore"; and the disease is painful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	You should not give your consent to those who come to you with this mannerism, but put more great caution in your honor than in your greed, and do not act rashly but prudently regarding those whom you are certain of and from whom you can gain and benefit; and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health is restored; and this will help you achieve good repute, glory, and a lasting memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, our lords grant you good understanding and rectitude, and if you desire the holy inspiration from his hand, so be it.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I have ordered this chapter for you, devising it according to the chapters of cautery that I have previously devised from the beginning up to the foot, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	chief filled with blood
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	You know that this disease often comes to children at birth, and when the grip is too strong around the child's head; and never does it come from a cause resolved because one cannot intervene.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease except in children, and it hastens the death of all that I have seen; and for this reason, I think it is better to leave the work in part, rather than to pursue it completely.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose joints were filled with water, and the head became swollen each day until it could not be supported; the moisture was so great that it led to death, and this moisture is collected beneath the bone next to the syphac, between the heart and the bone; the work should be such that the moisture is drained from between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, so that you make a wide cut through the head, as long as the moisture flows; and see the shape of the sponge:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess larger, then make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the openings of the glands on each side of the head clearly, and there is a strong, sharp pain when you press it with your hand from inside, and it has not yet healed; then you must make three cuts in the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture thoroughly.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After loosening the cracks of bandages and powders, he applies wine and oil, leaving it for up to five days; then he removes them, treating the wound with bandages and ointments, and ensures the head is equally stretched, and gives the patient dry meat from a pouch of moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another method of incision is that you observe or measure the size of the abscess and the arrangement of the fluid; for it never appears in front, nor behind, nor on the right, nor on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Measure then the abscess and the fullness of the fluid, and cut according to your ability; be careful not to block the artery; and come quickly with the flow of blood, so that the patient does not die from the slow drain of blood and moisture.
de reume	Of the root
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When a person suffers from a disease called "cataract" either in one or both eyes, and the disease is old, and medical treatments are of no avail, then the final remedy is cautery by sealing the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you have sealed their eyes, make the patient turn their head; then rub the affected area with a rough cloth until the arteries open; afterward, pull the skin tightly from the patient's head using the entire cloth; then locate where the vein is pulsating, and ensure both sides of the ear are sealed; then mark the locations of the joints, and cut each one with a sharp scalpel from both sides, reaching down to the bone, ensuring it is wide across the forehead.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, turn the spatule beneath the artery and cut through the clot on top, cutting as it should go through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, it bleeds continuously from above.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open when pressed, it is necessary to measure the quantity of space in three parts, then tie it with a thread and cut until it reaches the bone; and this should be done with blood, about six parts, or perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure and the filling of the artery; then inspect the wound: if there is no swelling on the bone where the clot has formed, and if the base of the clot does not prevent it from healing, then strain the wound and bandage it, and apply treatment until it becomes healthy.
de emigrainne	from migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migraine comes with a severe catarrh due to the moisture of tears and heat in the eyes and nose, and similar conditions that cause ancient foreskin and other things, it is treated by various medical cures, but none benefit if we do not drain the arteries of the eyes and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method for extracting them is that the patient pulls out the hairs from his temples, and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, as it opens well with its beating, and is quickly closed except for no man who is too weak; and if it is closed, he pulls the collar of some cloth, then rubs the place with a rough cloth, and raises the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula with this shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then treat it with pinches and detach well the threads that hold each part; and if the artery is thin, turn it to the tip of the hook, then cut off that part according to the quantity of two joints.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, it does not heal without great pain.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And treat the abscess with six cuts, down to three; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it with two threads of strong silk, so that putrefaction does not come before the healing of the wound, and causes complications; then cut off the excess between the two threads at the same time, and if you see fit, cauterize with a cuticle knife down to the bone while the joints are cut; and this is the moving work, if the patient does not have fever and has a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cauterization is aid to finish off moisture; hence it is of greater aid for moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Or for the extraction of arteries, it is necessary that one fills the space with cotton wool and places several well-made bands on top; and when they are loosened, one should be careful to apply dry medicines that produce heat, and use bands until the wound is healed; and as soon as you see the artery exposed, hasten to cover it by cauterization, or use vitriole (a caustic substance) and press with your hand so that the wound is cleaned; and if you don't have this at hand, place your finger over the wound until it freezes, and keep applying cold water as long as necessary, and pull with due care. The more mobile and lighter the artery is during extraction, the better it is to cauterize the vein from both sides to retain its heat for a longer time.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too tight, they retain less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have between the two blades a substantial amount of space, and then when you have marked the two joints with a sign, place the hot iron over them until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two joints; and they should be spaced apart between the two joints because this cautery is not entirely solid throughout. And this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes descend into the veins that are on the top of the head, and no medicine helps, you see the face of the sick person turning red, and they feel movement as if from a fever, and the skin is dry and moist so that the hairs of the eyelids fall out, and the eyelids are scorched by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called this ancient treatment "contused cure". For the patient with this condition, you should pluck the hairs from their forehead, then make three cuts on the forehead evenly according to its length; one cut should go all the way across the forehead just below the hairline, and the other two should be along the sides of the forehead, passing through two joints. Avoid incising the arteries that are on either side of the papers (eyelids). Keep your hand away from the continuation of the jawbones, making each wound about three joints in width. Have a piece of sponge and cloth to wipe the blood, then use the curved spatula part as shown:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is made on the temple down to the second incision; peel away all the skin that lies between the two slits to the very satisfaction that is on the bone, then make another incision from the middle of this one down to the other second, and then extract this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you insert the instrument called "cultellaire" (a type of knife) into the first slit, it should be very sharp on one side and soft on the other. This is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	and place the sharp side of the instrument against the skin at an angle to the bone, and the soft side towards the bone, and cut until it reaches the middle slit.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the veins that descend from the neck to the tips, ensuring the incision is continuous all the way to the heart; then make another deep cut until it reaches the other side. Then extract the blood evenly and press the wound to expel more blood. Place a piece of thin cotton in each cut and cover them with moistened cloths soaked in wine, oil, and ash, and ensure the abscesses do not form again. On the third day, loosen the bandages and apply a strong injection of warm water, then use basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other remedies to heal wounds until they are cured.
dou reume des eulz	dou reume des eulz" translates to "cut the tips" in
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	Whenever any catarrh comes habitually, and you see the eyes swollen and small, weakening sight, and burnt papers; and the hair falls out, or it feels as if a sharp pain is poking, and the patient sneezes, then know from these symptoms that this matter and catarrh do not come from only one vein, but the cure lies in moving the affected part.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And instruct the patient to press their forehead, then make a deep cut across the forehead, and another one quite wide.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begin from the cut on the left temple to the right temple, making the incision down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerve of the temples that move when you blink. When the bone is exposed, wipe all blood with a sponge, then pull apart the two edges of the cut and place old cotton in between, and cover it with cloth. Then wrap moistened cloths soaked in wine and oil over it, and protect from further infection. Once the bone heals, rub the bone gently until it feels warm, then apply astringent substances to prevent further issues.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of wheatflower and three parts of colophony, and make an ointment; apply it to these wounds to soothe them throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	ear discharge
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Anything that causes discharge from the ears is one of four things: grains, animals, mineral stones, or similar objects; seeds such as beans, peas, or other legumes; or fluid-like substances like water and air and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	If discharge from the ear is a stone or any other object that does not adjust itself to the ear or grow in the ear, then place the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see a stone, and it distills any little drop of purple oil or oil of myrrh, then prepare for extraction; and it will cause coughing from the condition, and it stops up the nostrils when coughing occurs, and place pieces of cloth or wool in the ear; and pull the ear towards the top.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Often, this treatment brings fever; and if it does not bring fever, then prepare for extraction with very fine tweezers, whose shape is as follows:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out with the tweezers, that's good; if not, prepare for extraction with an extremely thin wire of small gauge; and if it still does not jump out, make a hook of iron and press the top of the hook into the hole in the ear firmly, and stop up what is around the hook with soft wax so that the air current cannot enter with the hook. Then treat it properly, because often this brings fever as we have said; and if it does not come out in this way, then take a great deal of care in choosing the instruments, and place some cotton in it, and press the lump onto the stone or something similar, and extract it.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not do all these things that we have said, act swiftly to split the ear just as the abscess hardens and the pain subsides; and take care in making the incision so that you first soothe the patient from the cephalics, and extract the blood according to its strength, then place the patient between your hands and straighten the ear above, and make a small incision at the base of the ear where the fat or tissue is attached; let the incision be as wide as a moon until you reach the stone, then remove it with your skill, and suck it into your mouth; and continue the cure until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if there are grains present and they swell, then perform an extraction; and if it cannot be extracted, then use a thin spatula according to this form.
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make no further incision in that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not be hasty to judge if the grain is moist due to earwax, having made many attempts; then extract it with fine tweezers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case where something has entered the ear, it is advisable for the patient to use a gentle sneeze and cover the ear with fine cotton wool.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And lie still on that same ear, whether there is wax or water.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If she jumps through fire, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If the fire is no longer hot, take many small stones along your thumb and forefinger, warm them slightly over the fire, and insert one into the ear canal and try from another side to push it through. Make a cut on another stone with another stone until all moisture is gone, and then jump through fire; if you see that the eardrum has split, take a thin wire, and pull one of the edges inside the ear, and the other edge around the fire until the thinner part is burned; then make several more cuts with different stones until all moisture disappears.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	During the removal of the beast, if it is small like a flea or similar, treat it as we have said in the previous section; but if it is large enough to be felt, use pincers for its extraction; and it is the easiest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	When treating earworms (vers enjanrez) as we have discussed in the previous section and mentioned distills, if the cure is not effective, it is necessary to examine the ear in sunlight. If there are no visible worms, use fine pincers to remove them; if they remain unseen, take note of their shape.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it should be tight from below and wide from above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And then, more subtly, turn the bottle into the ear according to the amount of suffering of the patient, then suck gently along the entire chain; do this often until all the pain disappears.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not want to come out, plug the chain with cotton as I have said in the previous section; and if they do not emerge easily as we mentioned, administer distillations that the ancients tried in the treatment of worms, and you will find them or learn about distillations elsewhere. And distil your oils and medications into the ear using these tools, forming them as you see fit.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And take a piece of silver or gold wire cut into small pieces, and put them over the small openings to distill; and to press inside the distillation with a well-made iron instrument for this purpose, and if you see a blade, wrap it around the tip carefully; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever you wish from your medicines in the kettle, and let the kettle be in the ear; then put the blade into all the cotton within the kettle, and press your hand firmly until the oil is distilled or the ear is slightly warmed, as one distills it into the ear; and let it not be too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	From ear inflammation
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born with any perforation in the ears; and the same thing happens to adults due to a wound or a foreign object entering the ear, and this obstruction never completely closes in the ear unless one can see it; and sometimes the hole becomes slightly larger, but no one sees it.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	When the obstruction completely closes, if one cannot see it, it is due to poor healing in various dispositions, and in such cases, one should place the patient's ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the swelling apparent, this indicates the extent of the form.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And make cuts and incisions all around and behind, so that the ear is not damaged; if the pain is from a bone or cartilage in the ear, then hold it with subtle pincers and gently remove it, until all the bone is extracted.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the incisions are perfectly done in the ear, take a very fine and sharp razor, heat it slightly over the fire, then apply it to the cartilage of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the patient groaning from the operation on their ear, make a slight perforation, and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear; then insert into the ear a plug according to the width of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Make sure the wound is clean, or take a cloth and dampen it in rosewater, and sprinkle it with vitriol powder; if you see an ear swelling, it is necessary to remove the tent and apply another moistened cloth made of rosin oil and wax, until the swelling subsides; then treat it as long as it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if an infection occurs, immerse a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and use other remedies that remove the infection's swelling, which are treated with distillations.
de la char des papieres	from the work of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Collect all the papers that come from joints when they are moist and dry, it is necessary to extend them with pincers and forceps, and cut off the top of a spatula at its roots; then put it in a crucible and grind it.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if, after removing the skin, the lenticular cautery is made gently, and the cauterizer makes incisions afterward, it is often repaired, as nothing remains of its roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	(referring to the previous line) of the scar tissue
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times come to paper certain things that appear twisted in their form and hardness, and for this reason, this disease is called "grandine," which is a gathering of great moisture on the paper above and below; the work is as follows: take care if the grandine becomes silent from one side to the other, and it is a light thing to know; do then with a wide cut, then scrape gently from each part, then take hold of it with pincers and cut.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper slightly, it causes no harm to the patient; and if the split is large, with a seam, treat it until it is healthy; and if it is small, do not use much force, as the moisture will soon restore it and cause infection.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if there is a great pain descending inside the ear towards the top part, turn the paper against it, and the pain will be in claws, and the hammering and pressing from both sides; and if the paper is removed by incision, it causes no harm; and when the pain is cut away, rinse with salt water and cure the wound as long as the patient remains healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	from the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Xerophthalmia is a fat that becomes stuck on the surface of the eyes, and this occurs more frequently in children than in adults, causing great pain to their eyes, leading to cataracts in the mornings, and they cannot bear the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes. Due to this, they close their eyes repeatedly, sleep on them, and their eyelids become moist below the surface, showing signs of inflammation that open up in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the joint with your fingers and feel the extraction between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of the procedure is that the patient places his head in a healthy position; then he takes a linen cloth and prepares a tent-like shape according to the quantity of the extraction from each part, and places it there; and presses with his fingers on both sides so that the extraction is gathered within the circle; then, using a sharp spatula, they make a groove not wider than the wound made in the vein, and make it completely across the extraction; and continue shaping the skin until they reach the extraction; and in various arrangements, the extraction comes out of the groove in the shape of a white fat piece.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Take then a whole piece of cloth between your fingers over the fire, and move your hand to the right and left as long as it is spread; and be careful not to press into the fissure, do not reach all the way to the oil, do not blow on it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the fissure does not open at the beginning, gently widen it a little bit if it appears to be closed; then take it out as we have said, and moisten cloth with oil and water, and apply it to the wound, and straighten it.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And for such men who grind and apply it to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat him as long as he is sane.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the place of the hot abscess, treat it with external cooling as long as he is sane.
des poilz des papieres	hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow in papers (i.e., abnormally) and become inflamed, they cause great harm as if they were foreign bodies, leading to conditions like cracking, softening, and albugine (a skin condition), all of which are caused by the destruction of the natural hairs; the cure is through four methods: cauterization with fire, medication with astringents according to what is mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, or through incision and stitching, or using ligatures, as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You should place the patient's head in a healthy position, then take the paper from the oil with your left hand; if it turns, that is good; if not, insert an needle along all the thread above; and this should be done near the margin of the paper where the hairs grow, along all the paper, and turn it towards the razor. Then cut the paper in the part beneath the hairs, close to where they are attached, from the great tear to the small one; then extract the thread, and place beneath the paper a thin piece of cotton and cloth, and sign on the paper with an image of a cross, as if from myrrh, but it should be according to the amount that you see the paper raise, which is measured at all points.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if at that part where the skill is to cut, they take a great quantity of paper according to how soft it is; then make a cut along all two lines you have marked, and begin with a large tear from the corner to a small one; and let it be a crack near the natural hair in the thickness of a root, then turn the knife in one of the two angles towards the heart, and scrape off all the flesh. Then bring together the two edges with a single stitch of fine wool thread, and wipe away the blood, allowing the excess threads to hang on both sides without anything sticky; if you do so. If not, leave the stitch and threads for three or four days, then treat the wound without stitching with things that dry and constrict, because the paper revives at the healing of the wound and its gathering together, but the stitch moves (as the ancients say), and this is harmful; and if in another way: it is that you mark the paper with a shape like the leaf of mirth, as we have told, at three points according to the form below:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then take hold of what overcomes the small forces equally according to the shape that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the pincers, and the matter is not equal, take a needle where there is thread, and wrap it around the figure; then take another thread through the large wound, and the second thread through the small one, and gather them equally between your fingers; then gently lower your hand equally, and lift all the skin you have marked, as we have said; then sew together the two edges of the wound with stitches, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess forms at your incision, soothe it with ointment or similar soothing applications; and sometimes the hair on the paper becomes altered: it is necessary to use what we have said about the incision; but the stitching in one place and another is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment for broken bones is as follows: take paper and make it inside according to what I have said, then create two bones by art, and two fine bindings just as long as the paper and wide enough with a spatule; as for the parts where you hold the bones, join them together delicately on top of the paper from oil, and pull the two bones from the two joined parts; leave it like this for several days, and the bone that is tightly bound will heal and strengthen and grow.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays and the wound has strength, then treat it while it is healthy; and when the wound is sealed and if you lift the paper and the hairs do not grow back, this is the form of the two bones that you will make according to this figure and this quantity of length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work requires such skill that you pierce the skin with a fine needle, and wrap it with soft and fine silk thread; then bring together the edges and tie them subtly, making the length of the threads one palm length; then arrange in the wound another fine silk thread briefly tied, and fasten the edges with this thread; then place the patient's head on your healthy hand; and make it so the sun shines such that the work is declared free, for it is a subtle and small work. Then pull the needle all through the wound at the root of the hair adjusted, and pierce it gently into the paper until you treat it above the natural hair. Then extract the hair up to the wound, and wrap in the wound the hair if there are one or two or three or more; then withdraw your hand when the hairs come out entirely from the wound in the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hair does not come out with pulling, you must pull the hair root out from its entire length that you have ordered it to be, until the hair comes out completely through the opening and you see it with your eye; then you pull the hair and the thread, close the wound and leave it closed for one or two days, until the new hair grows in its place; and if the hairs are small, accompany them with a long hair from a natural horse, and raise them with that which you leave open, as long as they remain extended and then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the corruption of the wound
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this illness called "aleacrati" or putrefaction occurs in the body, it happens in two ways: naturally or unnaturally.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it occurs suddenly from wounds, or cuts, or cauterization, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the method of treatment in this case is that you split open the wound, separate the edges, and place linen strips inside, binding them until the wound heals; and it is not appropriate to use drying or constricting substances in the care of such a wound.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the illness returns worse than before; but it works with softening things, like fenugreek; and rosewater of water or elderflower and flaxseed are cooked, and applied to each eye, wrapped in a cloth, and the treatment of these.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the true treasure of your cure is that you must be careful not to adhere to the old form; and these works that we have mentioned are only guidelines for this illness, so that it does not return in the same way as before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the moisture that comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This illness, which is dislocation, is truly called "luxation," and it is both natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Accidental dislocation comes from wounds and fractures and cauterization and similar things; and the path of this process is such that if you prick with an needle, it creates a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, piercing from the left eye socket to the right, so that the thread passes through both sides of the skull; then the bone moves upwards over the entire needle, and the fracture is wide at the scalp.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper returns as it should be, that is good; but if not, take a razor and insert it into the crack, turn the paper, and make two cuts on one side of the incision you made, so that the edges of these cuts form two angles of the cut, making them resemble the angles of a Greek letter 'I'. Then remove the charred material, according to how much is agape from both sides, from where the paper meets it. Then adjust the two parts back together and sew them with a thread of flax. Finally, apply the curative treatments we have mentioned about softening medicines and bandages until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from cutting or stitching or cauterization, it is necessary to make a clean cut under the skin between the hairs, and according to what is said above; then separate the two books of the limb, as I have said; and one must perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and skilled masters devise various instruments to restore the natural shape, and the patients themselves, according to what is appropriate for the operation and tools, vary their methods.
dou soudement de la papiere	The phrase "dou soudement de la papiere" translates directly to "cut suddenly from
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suture is done in a certain way that the paper above is smooth with white oil, and it cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must insert the tip of a razor under the paper and lift it gently; hold it like pincers, until you remove what is sharp on the delicate spatula, which should not be too sharp or too blunt, so that the patient does not suffer from the overly sharp spatula; and make your incision lightly, so that the paper regains its natural shape; and all of the gathered paper heals, without ever making the oil bitter or salty, but rather raising it with fresh water and a collar; then place between the paper and the oil a cloth of linen, and on top of the oil, wet wool in abundance; and after the third day use a collar and things that seal until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	from the nail of the finger
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	You know that the nail is according to two manners: it is nervous and resembles a hard, dry substance, and another which is not nervous but appears like white, frozen moisture, that when touched with iron and treated as pincers, one cannot; and both resemble beginning near the great toe, and grow little by little until they cover all sight and all light and the movement of the finger.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	The method of incision is as follows: the patient places his head in a healthy position, then opens the fingers; holds a piece of paper in his hand, then coils the nail like a small pincers, extending it upwards; takes an needle, threads it with a horsehair, or a goat hair, or a cowhair, and a strong thread; doubles the tip of the needle slightly and pierces it through the nail, all the way to the end, and ties the nail with the thread, extending it upwards, and scrapes off all the hair around the nail at its base, leaving only the nail itself, so that no tears come from the usual rubbing; never stretch the nail too much, just use a needle and thread as we have said. Then scrape off all the soft tissue around it, giving it this shape:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be sure that the scalpel does not touch and tear the flesh, and that the knife is not pierced; then, after incising, drop a little bit of broached silk into oil, and make a collar from it with litargyre, and leave it until the next day; then tend to it as needed until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	If the nail is not nerve-related and you cannot insert the needle, often this condition requires medication; as I have described in the previous section, if you see it covered with oil on the patient's body, take a light scalpel as per this form.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And gently remove the nail from above, and if you see that it weakens little by little and the reason presses, let it drop into your mouth an oil made of lightning and a red collar and finely crushed, and stop the oil until the next day; then repeat the other work according to this same procedure, until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing contradicts you about the oil, such as a hot abscess, then apply it, and first treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then continue with the work as before, until it is completely healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh causes harm in the eye by great damage, holding it at the onset and cutting off a part but not all, so that no tears come; then it secretes into the eye a red collyre made of litargir.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	from the flesh that is born on the iris
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Some people are born without any red flesh on the iris, covering it and restraining it under the eyelids, and making it look like a rose of balm; and the difficulty is that the patient must place their head in your hands, then open the eyes and pull out all the flesh as skillfully as possible, maintaining its strength; then cut off the first piece, shaving everything down to the end, taking care not to irritate the eye during the procedure; and use a spatula for incisions, as we mentioned regarding nail incisions and small forces with which one removes the sebum—as this figure after this chapter demonstrates. And when the incision is complete and all the flesh has been removed, apply silk oil or distill collyre red and similar corrosive medicines, and place cotton over it with an egg white to ensure it stays hot from the abscess; and if nothing remains and you suspect a hot abscess, leave the oil and treat the abscess with soothing remedies for a hot abscess. Then return to your procedure as long as it is healthy, and thus make all other incisions in the eye using this method.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nevertheless, it is necessary that you take care of each weak part of the body naturally; and from the accidental path, in the work of iron; and do not push your hand into any of these works until you see that this member suffers from this work.
des voines des eulz	veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	These are red veins that are covered over the eye, they steal from the sight their work and weaken the eye every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Skill is therefore in the first place that you look at the eye, as it is, strong, and there is no other disease outside of the redness; then take them in this way: instruct the patient to put his head on your healthy hand, then suspend these veins all around gently according to your wisdom, and make the incisions delicate and double according to this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And there should be two incisions by degrees in the body according to this form.
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then, gently coiling the veins, wipe off the blood hour after hour until you see the veins disappear from the flesh; be careful not to pierce the oil with the points of the spatulas, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, being very diligent in your task so that you do not stop until the veins are gone; and when you have done this, distil green and red collyre into the oil to corrupt what remains from the blood.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot collect all of them in that hour, make a poultice over the wound with soothing things to ease the pain of the joints, and leave it for no more than a day until the pain is eased and the hot abscess is assured, then resume according to this manner as before until it is healed; and this is the form of the veins:
de la fistule de l’oil	from the fistula of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	He calls these fistulas "arissati": When you treat them with cautery and hot medicine as I have previously mentioned, and they remain unhealthy, there is something within that you must open at the abscess, where he (the patient) is destined to die, and remove all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and blackness, take all the instruments mentioned here and shape them; it is called a "sharp chisel", and it should be made from fire-hardened steel in the form shown.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place the corrupt bone back in its socket, then twist it between your fingers, and press your hand slightly until you know that corruption is gone; do this several times, then return the joint to its medicinal remedies.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the joints are fused and it seems to be born that way, and the bowels' course is also fused and remains so for forty days, and it does not heal or become abscessed, and no other adverse incidents occur, then you know it is healthy; if not, there is another tool to reopen the fistula through incision in a specific way: take a second look at the bone with iron, and by using aqua (medicinal water), and when the bone is exposed as shown here, make sure the iron tip has three angles, and thin it out towards the top as you can see.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then place it on the lost bone of the arm, and move your hand away from the point, then continue with the entire treatment until it pierces through the bone and the patient feels pain because he has to hold his hand against it; and afterward return to using dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the skin hardens on the bone, see what happens to the limb; if it becomes lighter for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the opening of the vein
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the veins are completely opened and do not cause any disturbance to the lung or any impairment, it is necessary that you hold the patient; then apply a healthy poultice, then place cups or leeches without causing harm in order to draw out the blood, then apply oil made from aloes, frankincense, and sarcocolla, and then strain the oil, and paste it on with bandages and cloth; and the manner of the cloth should be such that you make each layer thin and double them up in four's, and place one upon another according to the need of the vein; then strain it from above a hard board, and renew the cups for sucking without causing harm; then remove the cups and leave the poultice applied day and night until it becomes relaxed, if necessary to draw it tightly; then remove the poultice after day and night, and if you see the blood repairing itself, it is good; otherwise, renew the paste, cloth, poultice, and cups until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	loss of thread integrity
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When there is a disruption in the thread (or yarn), it opens and becomes like small grains of resin, which is encouraging to see; then, if you notice this happening, the work required is such that you push an needle into the root of the part below, and another needle where the thread forms a double strand near the tear; pierce through and leave the first needle according to its position; then cut the thread with the double strand and tie a portion of the yarn around it tightly, and pull out the needle, applying fresh moist lint in abundance; leave it until the thread absorbs the moisture, then treat the wound with comforting remedies until the injury is healed; and at no time should the wound be restrained by the yarn in any part of a circular bandage, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the joint appears well-formed, pierce it with a fine spatula that comes from oil, remove the white moisture and relax the joint, then insert it again immediately; then extract it as much as it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the vein (or duct) of oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called "alcunnati" is not only a vein (or duct) that is gathered in the oil, resembling clear water descending, but it is not clear; and the manner of the appearance of the work is such that you make the patient sit up straight, then take the head between both hands, moving it until you see the vein come to the top near your fingers; then insert a needle and do not allow the light to descend or clear, so that the patient sees things as he usually does; and if the discharge from the vein does not decrease, know that it is acute, and the clearing of the vein must be done as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you make the patient rest in your hands, then take the delicate spatula and make incisions on the thin membrane between the cornea and the conjunctiva along with the cornea and the iris, until the bowel is released; and when it is released, it drips into the clear hot oil mixed with honey, or boiling water with fennel seed and honey, then apply another cure as long as it is healthy.
des aigues de l’oil	Des aigues de l'oil" translates directly to "water from oil" in
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have similar waters in the division, and what is necessary to pierce, if done according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	You should place the patient between your crossed hands away from direct sunlight and tie a healthy cloth tightly around them; then place the paper of the oil in your left hand if the nails are on the left side, or in your right hand if the nails are on the right side. Then take the instrument called "almagda" in your right hand if the nails are on the left, or in your left hand if the nails are on the right; then place the tip of the instrument against the crown through the thickness of a single strand at the bluer part of the oil, and press the instrument called "almagda" firmly, and twist your hand as it pierces the bluer part of the oil, and feel that the almagda reaches the empty space. And it is necessary that the measure of the almagda be exactly equal to the measurement of the space from the prunele to the end of the darkness; and this is the crown of the oil; you will see the bone on the paper due to the clarity of the horny skin, and then place the instrument up to where the water is, and press it through one passage after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he feels the patient sinking now, see if he can spot the sick person before him and the instrument in his hand.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After a brief rest, then the second path must be raised, applying force with the instrument, and when it is deeply inserted and does not move up, extract gently by turning your hand back and forth; then place again in the acute position a little bit of precious oil, and remove from this the blood within.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then apply with heat the hot oil or any other moistened in rose oil and plenty of fat, and wrap it with healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, place a warm compress with much heat.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the oil cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, as there are many people with very hard eyelids, it is necessary that you press the instrument called "alberit", which has this shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And then pierce only the conjunctive tissue, without going too deep, but make it subtle, then insert the warm compress, as we have said; and after completing the work, prepare the patient for sleep, lying on his back in a dark place; and let him be free from all movements, and feed him with light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and keep him bound according to his condition for three days. Then release him in the same dark room, and test his vision, and make him see nothing, and then put the bandage back on for seven more days; and it is not appropriate that you perform this at the time of treatment or after incision, but rather lightening it is necessary, because sharp pain rises suddenly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When an abscess forms, you should loosen the skin in front of the seventh day and apply the remedies that soothe the abscess; and once it is soothed, loosen the bandage and place a small piece of cloth on its face to cover it for some time, and then return it to that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	Then leave the house little by little and return to your own life; and know that no disciples should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from Iran, who told us that in their peaceful land they make a tool that sucks out water, but I never saw anything like it in our land, nor do I recall reading about it in the books of the ancients; perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of magic, so that he who does not know them will see them as strange; and they must be of gold properly.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the head be at the greatest subtlety of this same, and the rear in three acute angles.
de la char sor le neis	of the charm on the new-born
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	No newborn should have charms adjusted in various ways, so that there are none that seem like scorpions full of pain; and if there are such with enchanting charms of fine color, or if the charm is soft of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In this case where the wound is hot and not yet healed, you must place the patient between your hands facing the sun; open their nostrils, and pour the ointment onto those parts, and rub them thoroughly; hold what you can bear to sustain in one hand, as long as you know that part is completely healed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains anything that cannot be covered, open it with all the delicate and light instruments so that nothing remains; without hesitating, make the incision as needed; and if it is a malignant abscess, hurry and cauterize it until the wound is completely cleansed and all parts are healed, then apply ice or vinegar.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If he opens his mouth and moisture comes out to the tongue, knowing that it is healthy; and if the moisture does not come out as it should, knowing there is a chip in the upper bone, the instruments cannot cut well: then you must insert a line of linen thread a little thick, and hold it with your hands, leaving between each part a space no greater or less than necessary, and place the patient's toe in his mouth to his power, and pull in an aromatic manner until the moisture comes out through the tongue inside the mouth; and children often do this at school, and it is a light thing for him who wants to do it. Then hold the part coming through the tongue with one hand, and the other part coming through the mouth with the other hand, feeling one after the other as we who are in thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do as you know, purify the infected wound, treat the son (presumably a child), wipe away the blood, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment, then return it to its place as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments have healed all that remains of the infection. Then put a bandage around the neck for no more than a day, if it is healthy, and if medicine is needed, use it; this is the form of the instrument used to purge the head, from which oils and medicines are distilled into the neck.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be of silver or gold, resembling an open lamp, like a funnel, and use it thus; if you make a closed funnel, fill it with tools to purge the head, and have several at hand to hold the head while heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	Of the pain near the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Often near the nose arises a sickness called "telul," which swells and grows very large, so much so that it is a sight to behold; and for this reason you must quickly cover it at the beginning, strip off all the skin, then apply hot cautery or medicinal fire; and if you delay covering it until it becomes large, be careful if it hardens, takes on a dark color, loses sensation: do not touch it with iron, as it is an abscessed joint, for whenever you cover it, great harm comes to the patient. If the abscess is tender to the touch, neither dark nor hard, and you are able to completely cover it without pain or difficulty, then empty the patient and cover it skillfully; cure the wound with dry, restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and sewn together
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Understand that when the continuance of one of these important cartilages is broken, it benefits no one, except perhaps no one at all.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore necessary to close the wound in no way if it is fresh and filled with blood; then sew the two lips together, and treat it until it heals; and if the lips are already separated on both sides, it is necessary to scrape all parts of their core while they heal, then sew the two lips together again, tighten them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder and ground incense on them; and apply a piece of strong or other adhesive plaster, leaving it until it falls off by itself, and then treat with ointment until it heals.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of stitching is such that you bring the edges together: either with needles, as we have said in sewing the belly; or with thread, as I have made known to you.
des apostemes des levres	abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At home, the abscesses on the lips appear as hard lumps, some smaller and others larger, so you must turn the lips and cut into each one, using tweezers to remove the pus and applying vitriole (a caustic substance) to the wound until the blood stops; then wash it with clean water and care for the lip until it heals.
de la char des gencives	From the work of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often, a growth appears on the gums, which the ancients call "albulus"; it is necessary that you hold it with tweezers, and cut it at its root, allowing the bowel or blood to flow; then apply powdered vitriol or other astringent and desiccant powders; and if the growth returns after the incision, and this happens often, especially if the piece is cut again, and cauterized, then it does not return after cauterization; these are the shapes of the tools for cutting.
des sordens	from disorders
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	No teeth are ever aligned at the top of the gums, within the painful and rough ridges; and no teeth are black or yellow or rotten, as long as the corruption reaches the gums, and they stink; it is necessary that you make the patient hold still between your hands, and his teeth should be in your safe keeping, and file away the protruding teeth or ridges until nothing remains; and do this with black and green and yellow and other stains, until they are clean; and if what is on the first surface is removed, it's good; if not, recommence again on the second and third day, until everything is filed; and know that teeth require various types of instruments to file, according to what the work demonstrates, because the tools used to file away from the teeth have different shapes than those used between the teeth; and these shapes and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	You should take care when treating a toothache and delay drawing it out as little as possible, for no one should do so; for it is a very delicate matter, and there is no excuse for delaying treatment.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then, when the patient is constrained from having their tooth drawn, it is important that you are certain about the healthy tooth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the patient complains of pain, thinking that a tooth is infected, and has it drawn; however, the pain does not cease because the infection remains, as we have seen with these healthy teeth. When you are certain about the painful tooth, you should cut around it with a sharp instrument to protect the gums from all sides. Then move the pliers gently at the first sign of movement, making sure they are well-placed, and then tighten them. The infected matter should be placed between your knees, holding it firmly so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, if it does not come out, take none of these instruments and push them gently from every side, and move it as you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	If the tooth is broken and chipped, it is necessary to fill the hole left with cloth or bandage, either where it is missing or through the opening; and if you hold it slightly with pliers, do not pull too hard so as not to break it; and it is very important to work carefully around the gums to remove the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	Take good care so as not to break it, and if a part remains, return it to the patient; for the evil of its root will cause greater pain than at first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And be sure not to act like the ignorant healers who, in their haste and arrogance, break the body's natural balance, and do not heed what we have said; but they often bring on a grave illness due to their foolish talk about the roots of the disease or the broken limbs, as we have often seen. And when there is bleeding, wash the wound with wine or honey and lint; and if this does not stop it, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The instruments used to extract teeth should have long and thick tips that do not bend when pulling the tooth; these are their shapes.
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let the members be strong so that they do not bend when pulled, and be of iron well-forged, and have teeth to hold fast.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains stuck when pulled, it is necessary to place over it moist cotton or butter for a day or two.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the eyes are softened, then apply pliers called 'algefri', which make the teeth look like a cure (or a tool for pulling); they should be made inside the same way as a file and this is their shape.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out of these grips, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh all around the root, and place the instrument called "althali," which is a plier, shaped like this:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And if it is hard and thick so that it does not break, and the root jumps out by itself, that is good. If not, use all the instruments, and the shapes will come as follows:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses this instrument with two prongs, the shape is:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are used in the treatment of teeth, and this instrument that resembles large pliers, whose shape is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	This instrument should be of such sturdy construction that it cannot break, and you must be aware of many other dental tools; likewise, there are other instruments not mentioned here. The most skilled surgeons create their own tools, according to the needs revealed by their work and the condition of the patient, for there are various diseases for which no instruments were developed in ancient times. If a tool breaks or is unsuitable, and he seeks the appropriate instrument I have described, using gestures to convey its form...
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And they should be large and well-gripping to hold the bone, so that it does not escape but can be held and removed; and then return the limb to suitable medicine, and if there is decay in the bone, even small, use all these instruments.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to the body's natural shape, and its form is ugly, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know if the tooth has grown after the normal teeth, and is not in the right place, and cannot be filed or polished: then extract it. And if it is painful with the tooth, take this instrument whose form resembles a small beak, and made of sharp iron:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And take a little pot and hold it in your hands for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that it can be filed, then file it from one side as this shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is also like the file of which they make needles; and file the tooth little by little in your hands gently, so that it does not move until it is whole; then in the end, it should be entirely smooth without any roughness, and if the tooth is too sharp, it bleeds the tongue, so you must file the sharpness level until it is even, so that it does not burn or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth aches
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth aches fiercely, either from hitting or grinding, and the patient cannot bear pressure on it, then they should be treated with restricting medicines, but that is of no avail. Then, they should have it restrained by a golden thread, for silver wire turns green and rots, but gold never changes; and the thread must be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the amount of space between the teeth. If you align the teeth, take the thread and wrap it double between the two healthy teeth, then place the aching tooth or teeth in-between, as many as there are, until you reach firmly to the healthy tooth on the other side; then continue the wrapping until you reach the part you started from, and pull your hand gently and sharply until it does not move; and make sure your ligature is at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then cut the edges of the wound with pliers, and assemble them, and close it between the healthy teeth, and place it thus so that the tongue does not bleed; and then leave it thus as tight as it can stay, and if it opens, the thread will unravel, as if pulled by another thread. It should remain in this position for all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of the two healthy teeth and the two molars, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth is reset in its place, one should do it fresh by fresh as we have said; and it should not be done by anyone who is not skilled and patient, and they never form a tooth from the bone of an animal, and place it where there is a deficiency, and tighten it as we have said, and keep it in this way for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To uncover the tongue's ligaments.
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	No matter what, these ligaments that come from beneath the tongue, whether by nature or accident from a deep wound, and the task is to open the mouth of the patient, placing their head in a healthy position, and gently lifting the tongue; then cut the nervous ligament with a sharp knife as widely as possible, so that the tongue is dislocated from its attachment, and if there is any hardness or newness, and it is due to sudden bleeding from a wound, then use an iron hook and cut through that ligament as well; and be careful not to cut too deeply into the fissure, for the artery located below. And after you have done this, raise the affected area with rosewater or ice, then place a cloth made of linen beneath the tongue; and apply it to the patient each night, so that the ligaments do not heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the infection comes from pus, mix it with vitriole; and if the pain subsides, cauterize it with a slow-burning cautery, which is good for this; then apply other remedies until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you see it is red, black, or hard, and the patient does not feel it, as it is a chancre, do not touch it; if it turns pale, and there is moisture, drain it with a fine instrument, and cut it from both sides; and if the pain subsides in your work, mix vitriole until it is stained, then return to your work until you have treated everything thoroughly. Then lift the limb gently and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	from the abscess of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	No matter how often holes appear in the throat that are called "godath", and we properly call them the II amandres, and when you treat them, as we have said in the previous section, if they are not completely healed, be careful: these are small abscesses of a deep red color, so do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if they are red and the root is thick, do not touch them with iron, also to prevent the spread of pus; but leave it until it dies, and then you will remove it, or it would break on its own. And if they are of a white color, and the root is thin, have an instrument prepared to cover it, but first ensure that the abscess is calm and at ease.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then make the patient stand before the sun, and keep his feet in good condition, open his mouth wide, and press the tongue down with the instrument, which gives its shape; and it should be made of silver or subtle gold, just like a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	You cannot press the tongue down with all of this instrument, and if you see the abscess, take the saw and the hook and pull it upwards as much as possible; do not use any part of the strings, then cut it with the instrument, which gives a shape resembling some forces; nevertheless, the handle is curved in one place and straight in another, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument at hand, if it is like pincers, then take them to shape it thus:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And make incisions on one side and leave the other; and when you have cut one of the mandibles, cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision, rinse the patient's mouth with hot water, clear water, and some salt, and if any blood comes, rinse the patient's mouth with hot water or pomegranate peels, or mint leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stopped; then treat it while it is still fresh; and no other abscesses are formed in the throat besides the two mandibles, so cut them both as we have described.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was in her throat, namely a small abscess; and had tightly closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passageway, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had stayed that way for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so swollen that it had forced two ribs through the two openings in the throat where it originated.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I then quickly inserted a knife into one of the abscesses, and drew it out through another opening in the throat, and extracted a large portion of pus; I then did the same on the other side, opening the mouth and pressing the tongue; after inserting the knife into these abscesses, I extracted some of the pus, and only a little blood came out; and thus was the passageway from the throat to the woman opened, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I continued to drain the abscess for a long time. The abscess grew again, filling the space that I had emptied, becoming very large; then I seared it and cauterized it inside the throat, after which it did not grow any more, and I left these parts, and God alone was responsible for their healing afterwards.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the retina detaches from the eye and it is swollen and distant, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is thin and round, it is called "retina".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have discussed in the division, but the cure is not effective, and you notice that the inflammation around the wound has subsided, and it is becoming less severe, it is necessary to apply a poultice; and that which is round and not distant, should be carefully watched. It is bloody or of a dark color, then avoid incising it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the ill patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see this, according to the manner I have said, take the patient's tongue with your instrument, as we mentioned before, and insert the pin into the hole, pull it out from behind, and cut it with one of the instruments I spoke of for making incisions in the two nuts.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is important that you do not cut off more than the surplus beyond the natural limit; for if you do, it causes great pain to speech and movement. After the incision, use what we said regarding incisions in the two nuts, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient suffers greatly from pain, it is necessary that you use instruments for cauterization to alleviate the painful sensation.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The method of cauterization is very sharp.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient should place his head on a healthy surface and then press the tongue with the instrument mentioned in this chapter (cauterization), using a sharp but not too thick or too thin blade; and by employing the movement of this instrument, it takes the form as follows:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the surgeon have a beard, as it were, to apply the medicine, just as one would use a spoon, and place the instrument holding all of the medicine over the eye; and have the patient lie on his side, so that saliva and mucus from his mouth can be absorbed by the medicine without reaching the throat or causing harm. Then hold your hand over all of the medicine and press it onto the eye for about half an hour until you see it begin to work and the stinging of the medicine is calmed; and if you observe, take cotton and wrap it around a tool, moisten the cotton with the medicine, and then press the instrument into the cotton against the eyeball until the cotton dries on the eye. Repeat this several times until the cauterization is complete, then leave it to dry, and after three or four days, wash it out with cold water and use gargles until it heals.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is safer than cauterization, for it is through incision that healing occurs; if it is performed by fumigation in this manner, take plenty of calament, ysope, origanum, rue, chamomile, and avronne, or any similar herbs, and combine them all in a pot, adding water to boil; the pot should be well sealed with a tight lid, as described below:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	It should be of silver or gold, and one of the joints should be squeezed in the mouth of the patient as the vapor rises to the eye through the nostril, until the eye becomes numb; afterwards, it often recurs, while the eye is drying out, and take care not to perform this at the onset of a hot abscess, as many complications may arise; and only carry out this procedure during the decline of a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not available, take a stick and insert a piece of wool in the mouth of the patient so that it is not too hot; for the wool does not allow the heat to reach the mouth, and it is a good remedy altogether.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times a sore throat is caused by bone or fish spine, or some other object. Therefore, it is necessary that you treat what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instrument so that you can see the object; and if it does not open and is stuck in the throat, you should make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps this will dislodge the object. Or the patient might swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread, and then you should extract it by pressing the sponge; and when it comes to the surface, it will be dislodged and then you can pull it out. And if it does not come out as we have said, take an instrument made of salt according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument be curved towards the throat so that it can enter more easily, and hold the head raised high; and beware not to touch the epiglottis, lest all the food go down, and do not push the bone inside; and allow the patient to press the instrument, because he must move it until the obstruction is removed; if it goes down, pull it out evenly throughout the instrument, as far as possible.
de la sansue de la gorge	regarding the obstruction of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	No treatment with medicine should be given for the obstruction, as I said in the previous discussion, except through medicinal cure; and if that does not help, then look at the throat of the patient in the sunlight, and press his tongue with the instrument I told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the wound, pull it with all the small pins or delicate pliers that are suitable for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, take a horsehair, insert it into the throat of the patient, then twist or gently pull on the hair, do this repeatedly.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient has a fever every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it in, making the patient swallow it repeatedly; and if at once as the wound feels the water, it heals.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not break as we have said, and poisons the patient with bad smell from the instrument used in the fumigation of the eye, do this many times, for it will eventually break without resistance.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	The method of fumigation is as follows: you light a pot with burning coals and place a perforated cover over it to contain the smoke. The patient places the tip of a cane in their mouth, sealing their mouth so that the smoke does not escape but rather fills their lungs. The vapor should now take effect; if it does not, repeat the fumigation many times. In the meantime, make the patient thirsty and have them consume salty and bitter substances, without drinking any water. Then, after this treatment, it is necessary for the steam to escape in a specific manner.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the wound, if you can see it, resembles a hooked pliers for entering the throat; and it looks like a eagle's beak, and has the roughness of lime, so that whatever it grasps, it cannot let go; and here is the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many appearances of abscesses are, according to what the memory brings forth in this book, and they vary in size and shape; and there are two manners, one being in its own likeness, and those that retain moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method is through the joints where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscess on the top of the head is different from that at its base, and the abscess in the fleshy part of the arm is different from that which occurs at the joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if, for an abscess, one should not pierce the skin while the bowel is still alive according to its completion; and if for such cases it is necessary to pierce when they are grown, and do not die according to their completion, as with abscesses that occur at the joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when an abscess comes from a damaged joint, and it is left as it is for some time, perhaps the ligaments and nerves around the joint are corrupted, which causes contractions in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Or if the abscess is in the main member, and you delay making an incision until it is gangrenous, it will harm the principal member; or if it is from the foundation, you must pierce it so that it does not spread further, lest it become gangrenous and fester inside, leading to a fistula, and cannot heal fully.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you should know the time of the perforation of the abscess, which is mortal according to its completion; and this is when the pain is soothed, and the fever departs, and the intensity of the pain and redness decreases, and with a gentle movement, and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and you should make the perforation depend on the moment when the abscess opens, and where it starts moving; and it should be a long perforation through the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in the joints and nerves and arteries, and everywhere equally without any swelling.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, according to that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in a fatty tissue, it is good to let the incision heal completely before moving, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it too soon after this, the body will be filled with bad blood from it, and it may become infected; and by chance, the lips can harden and it can fester from him.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if at any abscess that is pierced according to the width of the body, as needed by the member.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary that you make small incisions in small abscesses, and small openings; and in large abscesses, large openings, and many cuts according to the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to dig deep, and cover; when they have grown as thick as drapes, and become numb, then it is also necessary to treat them like boils: and if there are such that are cut in three angles, or such that are covered as if with the fur of myrtle, like the wounds of an enemy; or where a round or other size cut must be made.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who do not have a head, like a superficial and painful abscess, it is necessary that you pierce it deeply; and when the abscess is large and has a great bowel, and you pierce it, it is not necessary to drain all the bowels at once, but only a part; then stop the abscess for another day, and do not touch it again for some time; repeat this many times, gradually, until all the bowels are drained; especially if the patient is of weak vitality, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or old decrepit people.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For often hope jumps at the outcome of the bow, that by chance it kills the patient, and you will not be blamed.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Beware therefore of this chapter with great caution, and when you have felt your abscess, if the wound is clean, and the abscess wound is small; and if it is a large cut, apply linseed or cotton immediately; and if it is a large abscess with many openings, you must put a tent in each one so that they meet; and if you have, within the abscess, a part of hard skin, and you have sealed it around, you must fill it with old cotton or linen cloth without moisture, and bind it for three days; then open it and apply treatment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if blood flow occurs due to an injury, then apply cold water and ice, moisten the cloth, and bandage the affected area repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the bleeding persists, apply a compress and treatment, and use the powders mentioned in this book, especially if it's winter and the affected area or abscess is very sensitive. In such cases, it is necessary to place wet blankets and cloth soaked in wine and hot oil; but if the condition improves and the limb is fleshy, then moisten the wraps with water and cold oil, or wine and fresh oil for up to three days, as we have mentioned before; then remove the abscess and clean and dress it appropriately until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: for I have already told you how to proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	from blood
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Often, small abscesses come from impure blood, and they appear like threads, also similar to the pus of a wound, and there are many of these kinds.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	Some are thick and filled with moisture, just like veins; and some are hard and difficult to cut through, but there is no doubt that if the arteries do not contradict, they can be treated.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work on the trunk is such that you should try all instruments called "entromissory", from which the shape comes as follows, something it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	Because if it contains moisture, they make a hole from above down long.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is evacuated, it removes nothing from the skin that contains the moisture, because it returns again when you leave it; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is available; if not, use water and string, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and this will heal what has been delayed by night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then begin the bandage again, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know for certain that it does not stay during the night; then treat the wound with suitable medicine, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if an abscess becomes hard, follow this form: cut it deeply; drain all the pus, and scrape from all sides, and apply all your skill to draw out the pus where it lies; and if the artery protests, do as I have told you.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do the same for an abscess that is painful, cutting and dressing it as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut the abscess and the moisture first, if it is lighter, because they are filled with little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if none of these abscesses or pits have moisture, and it is one of these hard abscesses that I found on the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess as hard as a stone, sharp and white, and not to be crushed; and if anyone were to try to open it, they would do as much damage as with a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other pits that occur on the head, especially those that come from the top of the children and at the roots of the ears, keep them open for as long as possible depending on their condition to allow the bowels to pass, and treat them as appropriate.
des scrophules	Of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times this abscess appears in the neck, and it breaks open the veins, and infests them with anger, and never comes to any other part of the body, and it is painful, and badly joined together.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly within its bone, as we have said, both the nodules and the abscesses from the head, and there are many appearances of these scrofulas.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and some that are malicious and do not want to obey the healthy ones.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In those that you see with a good disposition for touch, resembling the healthy color of the skin, mute (still) from every side and is not too tight at the neck or in the artery or the duct, and is not too deep; it is necessary that you cut it open from above, and scrape it from every part, and the two lips of the heart remain as they are, if it is needed, as we have said in the chapters about the head; and proceed little by little, and be sure not to cut the nerve or the vein, and do not let the hand slip, and do not look too far ahead, so as not to cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or the artery and it does not allow you to operate, apply vitriole (vitriol) or any powders that stop blood flow, and close the wound; leave it until the pain subsides, and the wound softens, and then begin to heal.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound is stained with blood, return to your work until it is completed; then pay attention to your expert indication if there remain no small pus spots, if you clean and dress them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein in the root of the abscess, it is not advisable to clean the abscess at its root, but tie it with a double thread strong and leave it hanging without harm; then use an old cotton wound soaked in Egyptian ointment and treat the wound.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you clean the entire abscess, it is necessary that you close the two edges of the wound and sew them now, so that there is no delay due to the size of the abscess.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If it is necessary for you to understand how to treat the root of this, and draw it out forcibly, cut it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For those scrofulas that have an excess, pierce them where they appear to be closing; and the piercing should be as previously mentioned, depending on it, then apply these treatments with ointment and similar things, so that it does not corrupt what is left from the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, continue the healing treatment with care, until it is healed.
de squinance	squinance: weakness or frailty.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	They old ones spoke and discussed about the cutting of the throat; but I never saw in our land anyone who did it, and it is their scriptural word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those with squintiness, it is necessary that the cut in the throat, called "epiglote," be avoided; and one should not attempt help through this, because all the veins and the source of pain are in those who have a hot abscess in their mouth, or in their throat, or in both.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the tongue, it is necessary to cover the epiglote to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is necessary, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it in three circles or four small cuts across, between the two circles or according to the size of the cut, without touching the cartilage; and these cuts are very suitable for cutting through the epiglottis so that there is no debris, and the vessels are long.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is cautious, it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat to its entire circumference, then cuts the heart until it reaches the sternum; and avoid any blood vessels, as we have said, and then cut through the substance, so demonstrating by the section of the stream of the sternum that it comes out from the broken place, and by the loss of voice; and leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed and there is doubt about the strangulation, bring together the two edges of the wound with care, and cut it entirely through the cartilage; then administer remedies that induce motion, as long as it remains healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says: One should not proceed until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be near death, lacking breath.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then they should cut the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, thus preventing death; and for this reason, the ancients command that the wound remain open until the evil of the illness has passed, which takes three or four days. And then they order the wound to be sewed up and treated, as long as it needs treatment; and I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a damsel was pierced by a knife and it entered her throat, cutting through part of the tongue; and I was called to cure her, but I found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that was coming from it; I realized that it had no strength or power to flow, but only went directly to the throat, and the veins were exposed through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I acted quickly, sewed the wound, and cured it until it was healthy; and the damsel regained her voice, returning to her normal state; so I say that in the construction of the epiglottis there is no need to be afraid.
de la grosse gorge	Of the great throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Cystic abscesses are called "throat hernias", and they are large abscesses in the form of a white mass, most commonly found in women; there are two types: natural and accidental, or without any cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental is according to two manners: one resembles fat, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that arises from an artery; there is fear, and it is not appropriate to make incisions except in the case of a small one, and test and explore all openings: if you find it similar to fat and cannot be moved in any way, treat it as you would treat a nose, and remove it completely if necessary; wrap it well and cure it appropriately until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	From us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many ways are there of which I will speak, showing all their similarities; now it is necessary that I explain the distinction between origin and outcome.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that the outcome is heat and fever as long as the ebullition persists, and it completes the putrefaction; then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the new, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains satisfaction, which is its own sac and is according to the state of the body, and begins like a grain, and becomes large; and they are according to two appearances, either greasy or moist, and have much color as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you approach the treatment of a new condition, that you test and inquire first about all the instrument called "intrusive", according to its form as it appears in this or that chapter.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	The method of inquiring about abscesses is to press more or less moistfully the place you find the abscess, and move your fingers in and out gently until you know the instrument has reached the center; then do this according to the size of the abscess; then extract the intrusive tool, and be careful not to tear it.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the moisture in a cut is running clear, it has the same color as described for other abscesses; and if the intrusive tool does not bring out moisture after it has been inserted, know that it is hard, so make a cross with it and hold it like pincers, peeling it gently from each side, and take care to remove all the pus. If you cannot do this, cut it into pieces until nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if it does not move, the vein returns to its place many times; and if it moves slightly and does not cause great pain, it uses some corrosive powders and poultices on the wound, tightens the bandage, applies hot compresses, and treats it with various remedies until it is healed; and if the vein is large, it cuts both sides of the wound and treats it accordingly.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein is stubborn or resistant and does not respond quickly, use powdered vitriol and leave it for two or three days until the wound pus forms and the inflammation of the blood diminishes; then reapply the bandage when it has subsided.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See here the shapes of the instruments that enter the wound, and there are three types: large, medium, and small; and there are three quadrants called "albaret", and one called "breb", and they also come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, to surround fistular abscesses; and they are similar to needles with which one sews sorceries, made of bronze, iron, or silver, and those that are yellow work best for surrounding the cores of fistules; and these too come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the extent of the opening.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of the hooks are much alike, as you can see: large, medium, and small; and some hooks have two barbs in three ways; and others have three barbs, also in three ways; and there are hooks with two barbs, or only one barb, and these too are necessary for their proper use.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The head of these instruments is sharp, and there are some that do not cut deeply enough to sever a vein or nerve; and from such insertions, the alemels are withdrawn in pieces, so that the patient does not lose blood when opening abscesses; and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see; and they should never be used on dry flesh, such as legs, arms, breasts, wounds, or similar places; and no other small instrument is made, resembling the cuts of a fistula, according to this form, to stop blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it should never be placed in a place that heals the severing of veins, arteries, and never according to this great form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Never inflate the breasts of any man when they begin to be corrupted, until they seem like a woman's breasts; they remain ugly and swollen, and anyone who wishes to cure them must do so according to this form from line b to g.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape off the fat and apply medicinal poultices with burning charcoal, then bring together the two edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed; if the breast sinks downward, and becomes soft due to its size, as in women, making them appear in two ribs, through two similar openings, so that one holds onto the other at the end of each, so that the larger line encloses the smaller according to this form from line b to g. Then scrape off the skin between the two edges, remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, as well as anything necessary for treatment, until it is healed; if it is not healed, or the incision has not been completely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the discharge of blood, then you must fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive dressing; leave it until it absorbs the returning moisture and fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	from the abscesses of armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Abscesses that come from beneath the armpits are hard scrofulas or have lumps, and if they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, apply clean cotton to the wound and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and continue with appropriate treatment until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scrofula, then do as we have said about incising scrofula, and if the wound opens, apply cautery as we have mentioned before.
de la routure de l’artere	from the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When an artery ruptures and the covering tissue (cuir) is sealed over it, many abscesses often form, along with swelling in the vein, abscesses, and other similar symptoms; this situation is very dangerous and one should not attempt to treat these abscesses, especially if they are deep within the joints and muscles and surrounded by anger (inflammation) or other conditions. It is very grave.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	You should seek iron cautery, and he who is in charge should also be vigilant, and on him who has an artery-flushing wound make a cut from above the skin long; then open the artery from its threads as much as it is uncovered; then insert a needle underneath and pierce it through to the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places, just as I have taught you for pulling out the two arteries found in the temples; then mark the place between the two threads of an instrument until there is no leftover part that can cause further harm, and treat the abscess; then apply the cure as it grows, until the link tightens; then tend to the treatment of any resulting injuries, as long as they are clean; and if the abscess is through cutting a vein, hold your hand over the entire area of the abscess, then insert the needle underneath the place you hold, and pierce it, and make a double thread so that you can pull it from the other side; then bind the abscess as I have told you, or the link to one of the two sides with two threads; and if you doubt that the thread has not gone far enough, insert another needle through all the thread underneath the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tighten the threads in three places; then cut off the surplus part of the abscess until the leftover part is gone, then cut off the excess skin and leave what is attached; then cover it with a moist cloth dipped in wine and oil, and apply bandages and treatments with ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	from abscesses of nails
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Similarly to how abscesses occur in arteries and veins, nail abscesses also form when they are damaged or subjected to excessive strain, among other things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And these occur more frequently in joints and limbs, causing dislocated joints which appear as abscesses with the color of the skin, and are full of pain, not completely intact, and move abnormally in every direction, neither forward nor backward, neither downward nor upward, and those in the joints should not be covered with iron; for it might cause contraction. And those on the head or forehead cause the skin to contract.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, and it has a claw, pull it out at its base; and if it's large, suspend it with a hook, then peel it off, then cut through the flesh and heal the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	Des grosses boces pendans" translates to "large, dangling lips
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	It never appears in the belly alone, but is a disease called "fungus" due to its outward appearance, it has subtle roots, and large droppings; there are both small and very large ones. I have seen people with two or more funguses in their bellies that looked more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, they were white, had fine roots, and were constantly moist.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I collected and found in one eighteen ounces weighing, and in the other six Z., and the work of the incision is such that you watch if the patient is moist, and the color of the artery is white and moist and of subtle root; if it cleaves with a wide spatula, then perform fire cautery in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For when cutting there often arise great complications of blood, and if it bleeds without stopping, then haste to cauterize; and if you see the patient hoping and fearful of the incision, take a well-made plug of thread, and bind the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days; then tighten it, and do not cease to pull the thread until the artery is cut off, and each time without effort; and if the roots are thick, be afraid especially when cutting near the belly, but you can well plug half of it, then cauterize so that it does not return; then cure the wound, and take care not to plug the vein which is of bad color and poor sensation and milky appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an abscess enlarged, and I will come to the treatment of this ulcer later.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the wound is closed due to crusting
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the crusting comes from cauterization of the wound or fissure of the flesh, and it is on the abdomen and not in any of the bowels, as occurs in other openings, or from blood letting or cutting of veins or arteries according to what is before, or from flatulence; and if it is due to the opening through the syphilitic flesh and the emission of the bowel, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a slight thing without pain, and has various openings.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when it is pressed at its openings, it returns, and sometimes becomes tight, greatly expanding at the entrance of the bath or through hard work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter and opens easily when pressed in the hand, without constraint; and if it is due to blood, it appears through these signs: a large and hard abscess, fixed according to its quantity; and if it is due to flatulence, it feels soft upon touching, and the strain indicates whether it is the blood of an artery, a vein, or flatulence.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it is necessary, let the healing take place.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For in the case of abscesses, as I described in the chapter on veins and arteries, there is often doubt and fear, which can lead to death.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	If the appearance is due to an intestinal or bowel issue, instruct the patient to keep their bowels motionless and stretched out straight. Then, make incisions around the entire abscess; then command them to gently move it back and forth between your hands. Then, wrap the affected area with a strong thread or firm silk cord, ensuring it is securely fastened. Open the other half of the abscess that is stretched over the ligature and insert your finger, exploring the intestine. If you find it caught in the ligature, release it and extract the intestine from outside the abdomen. If it's the bowel, cut it at the oncine (a specific point) and remove the excess. If the artery or vein objects, gently move around them. Then return to your task and use two needles, inserting them through the cruciform opening you made; then pull the abscess in four parts using the needles, and if visible, remove the needles and let the area heal until it has dried out and the dead flesh has fallen away on its own. Finally, cure the wound as necessary and complete the treatment of the abscess as we have said, extracting blood or moisture you find, then treat the wound accordingly and sew up the abscess.
dou chancre	A cancerous ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have described in the previous section the signs of a cancerous growth, and how it should be treated with medicines, and how to avoid the use of iron in its cure; and we say that cancer will develop in the marris, requiring great caution in its treatment, and [it is] advised by the ancients that when a cancer appears in a place where it can be cut out, such as one found in the breast, or the foot, or similar areas, it should all be removed when it is in the early stage; but for one that is large and old, it is not advisable to approach it, for I have never been able to heal any of them; no one has ever healed any before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And for the work, when a cancer is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, it is that you never purge the patient of black blood; then make the wound healthier if there is any sign of filling, and cut out the cancer from the good flesh to perform the operation; then pour on your poultices or cancer, and shave all parts, and remove it from all sides, leaving nothing; and let the blood flow out completely, and check the flesh with your hand or anything else, and if any signs of bloodletting occur during the incision of an artery or a vein, cauterize it until the wound is healed; then apply another cure until it is healed.
de ydropisie	From hydropsie (or dropsy)
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have previously discussed the signs of hydrops and in what way the accumulation of water occurs, as well as the symptoms of each condition, the treatments using medicine, and those using iron; these are distinct issues. And one should not apply iron to these two conditions: namely, tympanitis and ypoharche, for they are deadly. Therefore, when treating this hydrops condition, called 'eclites' with medicine, if the cure does not benefit the patient, consider if the patient is weak or has another illness in addition to hydrops, such as stomach turmoil or similar; then do not use iron, as there is doubt. And if you see a patient of strong constitution and they only have hydrops without any other illness, and are neither too young nor too old, then proceed thus: place the patient gently on your hands, and ask the assistant to press the abdomen towards the lowest part of the pain, then take the spiny spatula in this shape.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And make incisions from both parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Insert the point, but do not push it too far so that it can reach the intestines when pushed in, and do not break it; then observe if there is any droplet formation towards the intestines. You should make a cut three fingers deep directly below the nipple, and if the hydrops is due to liver disease, make the cut on the left side of the nipple; and if it's due to jaundice, it should be on the right, and do not let the patient lie on top of the cut so that the excess does not flow to the weak spot. Then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and the bladder, and gently press your hand on all the pus between the skin and the gland, just as you would when peeling, to the quantity of a fingernail or more; then continue piercing the gland until the pus flows freely, which is the sign of an infection. Then pull out the instrument, and this is the shape:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it resembles a thin silver chain, light of iron or gold, and in the center it has a small opening; on one side, three openings; and on the other, two, and another on the other side; and the part is cut as if a feather, which is the form of the incision that scribes make with their pen.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top of it, there is a seal, so that when the instrument comes into contact with water, it sinks immediately onto the instrument; then empty half or a third of it, for if you empty more than is necessary at this moment, by chance the patient may die due to the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he might lose his palm, or approach death; but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient indicate, and his pulses; then take the instrument and hold back the water, and it is held back now by the stop that covers the opening on the syphac, of which I spoke, so that you pierce in this way; then repeat the instrument on the other side the next day, if you see the patient suffering from it, and draw out a small amount of water; do this every day, and be careful not to let it dry up completely.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the patient, and leave much water, either by burial or hot sand, or by much sweating or a bath or in the sun, and become discolored; then cure with drying medicines until it is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after extracting the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	from the obstruction of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born without an obstruction in the penis, or if the obstruction is small, or it is not properly aligned.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary at any time that he cannot pierce through all the tissue with a very subtle instrument according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	then insert or open the subtle plug from below, and hold it and keep it thus for three days or four, and when he wants to urinate, remove the plug and let him urinate, and then put it back; and sometimes it is not necessary at all, because the force of the urine does not allow it to stay closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the opening is small, it is a gentle plug for the urine as we have said, then it will enlarge.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have a perforation in their place are bleary-eyed, for no one is born with a perforation at the top of the shaft, so they cannot urinate until they raise their penis; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot reach the base, and it is a bad illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the procedure is as follows: the patient should lie on their back, then the shaft and the head should be straightened and made as thin as a feather, so that the perforation opens up as it should; and be careful of the bleeding that often occurs, and if it does, stop the bleeding with what stops blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	from the pustules of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	This condition often appears on the penis, and it presents as an ugly stain; it can be either malicious or benign. You must prick them gently with a needle, drain them, and clean and dress them with moist cotton in Egyptian ointment. Then apply the healing ointment diligently until they are healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	If the condition is malicious, with a putrid black color and discharge, it requires cautery treatment.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	Once you have drained it and if the condition is deep in the penis, affecting both the inner and outer parts, you must first remove the pus inside; then treat the external part.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it all together, make sure the base of the bone is not pierced, and blackness and decay appear in the bone and joint; then it is necessary to remove everything that is black and corrupt, then apply a plaster made of honey and flour from grated red apples and times, and continue with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if decay from pus occurs, apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery helps in two ways: that is, for the decay of pus and corruption; and if the base of the bone is corrupt and withdrawn, then it is necessary to insert or drive a cane into the bone, and pass urine through it for the patient; and when the skin is dry at the top of the bone that has not been circumcised, or there is an abscess or a wound, then in this case you must peel it with a sharp instrument until the ligaments are loosened and it is freed from the base of the bone on all sides; and if it is a difficult matter to devise, then you should peel it with a small spatula at the top of the bone and the flesh; then carefully separate them and put a fine cloth moistened in cold water over it so that it does not dry out.
de la circoncision	from circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a dislocation like other wounds; however, when we perform this operation of our own will, particularly on children, it is essential that we make the best and lightest work for their healing.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision for their children because they did not practice it in their laws, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen most of the masters and elders who practiced circumcision around that time, and they did it with force and all new tools; it was risky because there are two layers, and perhaps one could cut off this one and leave that one behind.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or she returns with increased pain, and the point of the affected member is not assured during cleaning, and in the case of fingernail cleaning, the iron may escape and damage the work, and often they heal without requiring further cleaning, which I have seen.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the cleaning done with force on all the ligament, I have found the benefit of experience, for the forces cut just as well from above as from below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because when you press your hand, if the cut is even on both sides; and the thread should be well twisted around the skin; and the manner of the first operation should make the child think that you are only tightening the thread around the stick so gently, then you should relax it in all ways that you can; then stretch it straight between your hands, and place the forces between your hands or beneath your feet so that the infant does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then press your hand against the stick and blow into its heart, and pull it up until the part of the stick is entirely clean; then cleanse it well from the filth that is collected on it, then tie it with a double thread, and bind it to another ligament; and hold it by the second ligature at the index finger and the middle finger, and cut between the two ligaments, then lift the heart gently and pull the chief of the stick; then let the blood flow slowly, for that is how it heals; and apply powder above and below, and wrap it with a gluey membrane from a half-boiled egg mixed with rose water, confit with good rosin oil and fresh herbs, and leave it until the next day, and continue treatment as long as it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of purification is this: both shoulders should be held still and cut open, and the shoulder blades should also be large and evenly cut.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in purification occurs when the blood vessels inside are cut; then you should extend your finger to avoid infection; and clean it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, use tweezers, and then clean it again.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it persists for three days, and the area under the blade is swollen, leave it until the abscess has healed, gently peeling off the skin; clean it as best you can, and protect the part of the blade, which will do no harm.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat therefore the wound suddenly caused by a powder, which we have spoken about in our treatment of powders, and if one takes too much care, it will go above, and will not harm; treat it then, as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to a stone, or frozen blood, or bowels, or a deformed urethra, or similar conditions, as we have mentioned in the previous discussion; and if the urine cannot be released, and you notice that the retention is caused by a stone in the bladder or at the neck of the bladder, it is necessary for the patient to be bent over his knees; and pressure should be applied to his lower back, and he should stretch his belly upwards from the area above his back, and constrict the patient as much as possible. At this point, the neck of the bladder is forced to expel the stone located above, allowing the urine to flow; and if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you should help him by using a syringe, which has the shape of a bird's feather. It should be made of fine, light silver, approximately 3.5 inches long.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the method of urination is such that you take a double thread, tie one end with wool or cotton at the opening of the urethra, and insert the thread into the syringe; then cut off the excess wool and insert it back up to the top of the syringe, afterward greasing the syringe with oil, butter, and egg white, and placing the patient on a couch. Then gently insert the syringe into the urethra until it reaches the root of it, then fold the urethra over the end of the syringe; next, withdraw the syringe before the bladder, and let the patient feel the urination until it empties, and this is not done correctly unless the direction of the flow is followed; then pull out the thread bit by bit through all the wool, and the urine will follow the thread, then extract it forcefully, and allow the urination to continue. Repeat the syringe process until the bladder is empty, and comfort the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	Of bladder ailments
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When blisters or blood come to the bladder, where putrefaction is gathered, and you see it release water and medications, do so with all the instrument called 'clepsydre', and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if it has three openings: two on one side and one on the other, as you see; and the hair of the container by which the medicine is poured out is such that it effectively stops the flow without addition, if one can drain the moisture and push as much as needed; and when you see your medicines settle in the bladder, place the head of the vessel into the moisture and draw out the liquid that is inside. Draw out the moisture until the vessel is empty, then refill it and pour it back in with force; the moisture will enter within and immediately reach the bladder, so that the patient feels it; and this is the form of the subtle enema by which one enemas the bladder: thus:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or gold, and the joint is higher; then open the chest where the ribs separate; take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the moisture you wish to use for enema; tie it between the two breasts with a good double thread, and warm the moisture over fire. Then insert the nozzle of the enema into the anus, and press your hand on the bladder until all the moisture has reached the bladder; and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle of it, and pierce it roundly; then thread a strong string through these holes, assemble the circle as one would a dal, and put inside what you wish to use: oil, moisture, and water. Tie it with the instrument, and do as you did with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	from the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already discussed the methods for dealing with stones and their extraction, along with various medicinal approaches; I have also explained the distinction between stone formations in joints and other signs, and specified which types of stones require surgical intervention, be it in the bladder or the urethra; I will now describe these matters clearly and concisely.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I assert that kidney stones, which are trapped in the bladder, occur more frequently in children, and this is a sign of acute urinary tract infection, resembling clear urine in its subtlety; it opens the urethra, greatly paining the patient, and often causes frequent urination, leading to difficulty; these infections erode the urinary tract's foundations. The cure for children suffering from such stones is relatively mild until they reach four years of age, but it becomes much more difficult in older individuals, particularly those between youth and old age. The treatment is lighter for patients with larger stones compared to those with smaller ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient with a purge to draw out all the impurities from the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it often gets stuck when trying to remove the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet and straighten them and move them downwards so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, never rising back up; then place him between your hands with his hands beneath his thighs, so that the bladder is tilted downwards; then tie him and feel inside. If you sense the stone in a certain spot, hurry now to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not come out by pressing, moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand, and the patient is in pain, or your middle finger, and the patient is young and strong; then press it back into its socket, hold the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, if it is at the base of the bladder; then press down on your finger, and push the stone out from where you saw it cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with their hand, and order them to extend their right hand above, and remove the skin from their left hand beneath the bladders where the cut was made; then pull out the stone, which shapes itself as follows:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And they make an incision between what is between the cheeks and the foundation, not in the middle but on the side of the left nipple; and it should be straight on the stone, and your two fingers should be always on the foundation, and the blade should be cut wide outwardly and narrow inwardly, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; so that the pressure from the finger on the foundation causes it to come out without effort; and know that there is a stone with angles and margins: then it needs to be pulled out; and if it is in a place below, similar to a glans, and round, whose exit is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	If there are angles and margins, make the cut larger; and if it does not come out, you need to use pliers that are as sharp as a file at the tip, in order to pull the stone so that it does not escape; or you can insert a delicate curved instrument at the tip; and if you cannot do it this way, open up a little the wound, and if it is covered with skin, pull it out with vitriol; and if there are more than one stones, first pull out the largest one from the neck of the bladder, then cut around it, then pull it out, and the smaller ones after.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, as it should be treated carefully, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things can happen to the patient: he dies, or his urine flows again through the wound, because the muscles cannot close it; but nevertheless, make every effort to pull out the splinters with tweezers, as long as you are pulling them piece by piece, and when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it tightly, and place over it a moist cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then dress the patient's neck and do not loosen the bandage for three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you dislocate it, if a lot of warm oil and water arises, then apply curative ointment and basilic ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses and corrosion appear in the wound, and congelations of blood in the bladder, and it is retarded by urine, which is known to happen without effort with the urine: then press your finger into the wound and extract the blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder and cause putrefaction; then clean the wound with water and herbs, and aid it in every way you know, until it is healed; and remember that whenever you treat it, you should bind both thighs together and apply medicines to the affected area.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small and it is passed through the urethra, and stuck inside, and urine cannot pass; if you treat this as I say, cutting many times, then one is excused from cutting due to this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have tested it thusly.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take the iron at the forefront according to this form, and insert it into the stone at three angles in one firebrand.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the urethra beyond the stone, so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then push the iron lightly into the urethra until it reaches the stone; and turn the iron in your hand slowly into the stone, as much as you can, so that you pierce the stone from another side; and soon urine will come out, then press your hand on what is remaining of the stone inside the urethra.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is sometimes broken and jumps out with urine, and rubs the patient; and if you cannot do this for any reason, then insert a thread into the stone from below and above, then make the stick into the stone between the two threads, then pull it out forcefully, and loosen the thread, and clean up the congealed blood in the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of women's stone" 
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It is first that a stone is formed in women, and if it happens at all, the cure is difficult, and it is hindered by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; the second is that it is not possible to find a woman well-versed who uncovers herself for treatment, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	The third reason is that it may be impossible to find a woman well-versed in this art of healing; the fourth reason is that if the stone in the woman is larger and more firm than the man's, then a deeper incision must be made, and great caution is required. If such necessity arises, you should engage a skilled midwife, and if you cannot find one, seek a woman who has some knowledge of this art, or a woman wise in the ways of women; she should be instructed to perform what you command regarding the examination of the stone. You must pay close attention to whether the woman is a virgin. Then she should push her left hand down into the abdomen and press on the bladder. If she finds the stone, she should extract it from under her thumb and recommend that the patient press his left thumb against his bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she has a stone, it is necessary that she move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder to the inside, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then cut into the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle towards the inside, where it is moved and feels the stone in that part; and do not move your hand over or under the stone, nor make the incision too deep at first; then press the thigh, if you feel the stone so sharp in the wound, as long as the stone can come out, and know that there are many types of stones: namely, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those with ribs.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	knowing these things, to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the wound does not heal, put vitriol powder on it and keep it there for an hour until the wound is cleansed; then return to your work while the stone is still hard, and have the tools I told you for removing stones from humans to assist you in your task; and if the wound does not heal, and it's an artery that's cut, apply powder to the spot and press with cloth and bandages, and do not repeat this, leave the stone and do not try to extract it, unless the patient dies; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed and the eyes open, return to your work while the stone is still hard.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia flesh
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Moisture is nothing other than a gathering of white or sweet fluid, which comes out from the heart of objects, containing the vital force; and it is called 'white' (or 'sweet'), and never properly part of the vital force itself; and this is the skin of the object between the white (or sweet) fluid that we have spoken of; and there is no harm in this.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this fluid is due to weakness that affects the objects, and this material expands.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And it never comes from impact on the objects, and this moisture has many colors: sometimes it declines to jaundice, or is without color, or black, or clear white; these are signs that this gathering has occurred, because if it is the white (or sweet) fluid we have spoken of, then the abscesses are red, long, resembling a vital force, and do not open the objects, as they are surrounded by moisture.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the wound, if the abscess is red with part of the flesh, then one thinks it's another flesh; and if the moisture is between the skin and the white tissue, it smells well; then, when you want to know the color of the moisture, test all the depth of the wound, from which its form will be known.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Accordingly, after testing the wound, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healed according to his ability and the fullness of his body; then put him on his back, on something slightly raised, and place many sheets under him; then sit him up on his left side, and command the assistant to sit at his right, and extend the stick to one of the two ribs in the heart of the chest; then take the scalpel, and cut the skin of the chest from above to below the knuckles, making a straight incision by drawing the skin of the chest up to the white part, scraping it gently according to its strength; then make a large perforation in the tissue with water at a wide opening, and drain all the water, and then apply the bandages, and pull the tissue upward; and do not touch the heart of the ribs, but only the tissue; cut around him carefully, in pieces as thin as possible, so that if you do not cut it sharply, the water will return; and if the flesh jumps out of your hand, put it back in its place when you have completed the work with the tissue; then sew together the two leaves of the heart ribs with a stitch, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the heart corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you hold the vessels that are suspended, in doubt of the flow of blood; then cut off the coagulum from the entire suspension, and extract the blood, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the blood is mixed in two parts, knowing that these are two branches, cut off the other part just as you did with the first, then dry the wound and place it with clean lint moistened in rose oil; and put another layer of lint moistened in wine and oil, and place the two compresses on top of each other, and cover them with double-layered cloth, and bind it tightly to all parts according to this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two strips of cloth, made of chopped wool according to this form, and sew them together at the throat of the trousers, one strip covering the base up to the back, and the other on the palm side; then another two strips over the two legs, and bring them all together in the loop of the trousers. Never use this cautery with a metal tool of iron size, but rather take a delicate cautery knife, cut through the skin of the coions, and heat it as we have said, until the white substance that holds the water is exposed; if you take the cautery in this way, pierce the syph (white substance) as before, and scorch with this delicate hot cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the cup should be used in all ways that you can, as long as you drain everything; and be sure that the fire does not touch the wound; and know that this work is safer; and move carefully to avoid blood let down, and consider the work of surgery; and if anything goes against you, whether it's an abscess or blood let down or another complication, then treat what goes against you, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	If the patient is afraid and does not want to undergo this operation because of its horror, then perform the perforation as I have told you, and make sure that when you are certain through the signs that we have mentioned that the bleeding has stopped, place the patient in a high seat; then incise the abscess from below, in the deepest part, making a wide opening throughout the abscess, and insert the perforation deeply into the flesh; let the discharge of pus flow freely. Then apply cotton on top and bind it, allowing the remaining pus to drain; treat the wound until it heals. If a clean bandage does not prevent the pus from coming out through the wound's opening, you should insert a needle or an instrument used to draw out water from dropsy patients, in the shape as mentioned before; open up the abscess again, and know that the pus will return and gather after six months or so, and when it gathers again as before, then the patient's condition will improve.
de l’aposteme des coions	from the abscess of hairs
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Knowing that in this branch there are numerous dangers, which is why it seems better to leave it; and I will tell you about the work and the similar conditions of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I therefore say that many abscesses occur where hairs are involved, and most often with hair; and this is in many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to know about the excessive acidity and ague that extends to the hairs, or from impact; and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the flesh; it does not cause pain, and it is a serious abscess; and sometimes there are many dark, pus-filled, and red abscesses, and they do not come from any new artery or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from an artery, if it is contracted by the heat of an abscess above, when you press it with your fingers; and it is not appropriate that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	The one who is made of vein inflammation is contracted by the arrangement at the expression of the touch of the fingers, and can be cut well in this shape, and in other parts; and it is what you take the heart of the clots, then the heat is above, and the pain goes away from all parts of the heat.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the heat is already solid with these inflamed parts, then it is necessary that you drain the heat and cut it; and if it is away from the heat, or in those who are inside the veins, then it is necessary that you free all of this tension, and cut it properly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the source of pain is behind, it is necessary that you remove it entirely and extract the foreign body, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, immediately apply woolen cloth soaked in rose oil and wine to the wound, and then use other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a covering similar to a boil, with the testicles swollen and painful; it renders the patient severely ill, almost as much as the one mentioned above. Nevertheless, we will tell you the work of its treatment, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	You should make the patient lie on an elevated surface, then hang the suspended parts below their arms, extending them fully; next, with a large, sharp spatula, cut across the vessels, as long as they remain uncovered, and peel away from each side, as we said in extracting arteries located in temples. Then insert a needle where there is a double thread, tie it to the first joint where the vein appeared, and then tie it to the other end; straighten the parts correctly, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture. Treat the wound like any other, so that none of the vessels leak; for this causes no harm, and all vessels will receive veins, so it is necessary to draw the vessels through all the vessels, so that the oesophagus does not lose its nourishment due to vessel incision, dries up, and cannot help itself.
de la routure dou syfac	From the rupture of the sinew.
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The symptoms of this condition occur either through the rupture itself or from the extension in the abdomen in the region of the angles, causing the intestines to descend from that rupture into one of the coils; and this rupture is either due to the sinew's section or its stretching, and these two modes of occurrence arise from various causes: impact, a jump, straining, lifting heavy objects, and similar actions; and the signs when it is due to the stretching of the sinew include a gradual occurrence over a long period and not suddenly, and the abscess remains equal towards the entire depth, since the sinew pushes the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is from the incision that sudden pain occurs, and diverse abscesses appear beneath the skin near, and this is due to the exit of intestines and flesh from the syphilitic fire.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never remove the stitches with the intestines, which remain stuck and cause great pain to the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these poor treatments with iron, for which one must be wary.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the method of treatment is that you command the patient to move the intestine with their fingers inside the wound, if they can; then carefully lift it onto your hands and gently press on the cuisses; then stretch the skin above, and cut through all the skin from the long side; then pull the intestines towards you; open the wound and ensure nothing is trapped or constricted; next, insert your index finger into what follows the intestine, between the white matter beneath the skin and the flesh of the testicle, and between the second matter, and remove what is behind the testicle, and between the second matter. Then move your right hand inside the scrotum and extend the white matter in your left hand above it; gently pull on the testicle towards the abdomen if any intestine or white matter is trapped. Take a needle with a thick thread of about four threads and insert it into the rear part of the testicle after the skin; then cut off the visible parts of the thread as much as possible. Assemble the remaining threads in a cross pattern, and tie them firmly from both sides; then wrap the testicles with the threads and tie them together so that no foreign bodies can enter the wound. Place the first long tie two hand-breadths away, and after these two ties, leave the skin beneath the testicle free for about the width of a finger; then make another tie at a distance from the first one as indicated by its length. After all this, cut off the excess skin beneath the testicles, as we have said before; then apply moist wool to the wound and dress it with thread, as mentioned previously.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never should the white skin be cauterized as we have said, after incision, out of fear of blood flow.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens often, and leaves the wound open until it heals on its own; if it takes too long to close, then apply hot water, as we have said, until it heals; then treat the wound with another remedy, until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	hernias
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this illness, never has anyone dared to treat it with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients say that it is made like a root that is assembled with a joint, in such a way that you bind the vessels after cutting them lightly on the inside, then cut through the middle and treat the abscess of him who opens, until the vessels stop bleeding; and cure it as we have said, while it is healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	No rupture should occur from a violent attack, as we have said, and open the vessels; nor should any intestines drop out as if they were severed, and if they do, it is bad, and repair them every hour; however, if it persists too long at this point, one may think there is an abscess or gangrene, until the intestines drop out; and this happens due to the spread of gangrene in the wound, as we have said, for it extends, then softens and swells the vessels and opens them; and its cure is by cauterization, as we have previously said; and never should it be cured with iron in this manner. And so, the patient should lie on his back, then cut the vessel of the rupture deeply according to the quantity of three fingers' width; and then extract the gangrene that lies beneath the usual skin, then take a stick and put it over the visible part of the gangrene; and press it firmly in the abdomen, then cut both the two visible parts of the gangrene on top of the stick, and remove them; then remove the stick, and do not cover the gangrene or extend it or anything else, as I have told you about the cure for intestines; then cure it with the cure for wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you treat the wounds, if they become infected and heal the wound, as long as it is clean.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The remedy is restrictive, and has no appearance in the fracture, but the cauterization moves on this side, and is closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the hard skin on the joints
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Often, the skin of the joints becomes soft in no particular man, because the muscles within are relaxed, and it is easy to see. If one wishes to cure it, one must make the patient lie on his back and cut away the softened skin from the natural skin; then bring the two edges together with a stitch or three firmly, depending on how much of the soft skin needs to be removed; then cut between the stitches and treat the wound as one would any other, until it heals, and pull out the thread.
dou chastrement	Dou chastrement (Double castration)
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	You know that castration is condemned in our law, and for this reason I would not like to talk about it in this book; there are only two ways to deal with it: one is that you respond wisely when asked, and show wisdom in the cure; the other is because we often need castration of certain animals to help us, such as goats, sheep, cats, and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that castration is done according to two methods: either by attraction or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the method where we use attraction, make the animal sit in hot water until the testicles are softened and relaxed; then grasp them firmly in your hand until they return to their normal state and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	From castration by sword: You must tie the animal and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensory cord, and cut each one to the root when you have well lacerated them; and leave no seed there, especially the subtle seed on the veins; and this method of castration is superior to that which is done by attraction, because at attraction, by chance, something of the testicles remains, which excites lust in the animal; then treat the wound until it is healthy.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	A hermaphrodite is in two manners like men: one is when between the two testicles the opening is also shaped like the figure of a woman, with hair, and he never urinates with a penis.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And another way is for women; it extends from the wrist like a rod and has two joints.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for hunger and thirst is to release all the blocked channels, and treat them like other wounds; in the second way, for men whose urine comes out through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the goiter
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Goiter is a blocked channel in the natural part, so ugly to see; no woman can move it as much as a hand, and that is its treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you hold the excess of the tendon in your hand or with hooks, and cut it lightly; do not cut too deeply, so as to avoid complications from bleeding, then apply other remedies until it is healed; and for another condition that arises at the mouth of a wound, and spreads, and perhaps jumps, and resembles a cow, and for this reason the ancients called it "cow disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	It is necessary that you cut it, as we said of the tendon, and treat it until it is healed.
de erratique	erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic is the nature of a woman if her condition is not properly understood, or if the opening is small; it is either innate by birth, or accidental due to illness that comes upon her; or it is caused by tight clothing, or some subtle or extreme pain, and it occurs in any part: in the stomach, side, or back, or wherever; and it affects conception, childbirth, and perhaps even the flowers (breast milk) to be had; and knowledge of these things comes from observation of the body.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the inflammation is close to the surface, it may be due to your own doing or to some external cause.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a soft and subtle muscle, close to the bones, if you act quickly, thus: place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back, spreading her legs; then form both sides of the muscle until the soft tissue is completely healed, and pressure can be applied. Then take wool, moisten it in oil, and apply it to the area, making the woman lie down at home each day so that she cannot move.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the muscle is hard and thick, then it is necessary that you cut it with a scalpel resembling a sheet of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the swelling is from heat, suspend it with a splint and bandage; have medicines that stop blood flow, such as horse chestnut, dragon's blood, incense, together with abundant egg whites; then apply a broad poultice so that the wound cannot heal; and thus for a long time, and then apply a dry linen cloth; and continue other treatments until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when fever comes from heat, if it is not an abscess, then cover in this way: if it is not a severe case.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an abscess that is severe during fever, do not attempt to treat with fire.
des emorroides	Of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that, without usual care, can become severe; and in this division, we have previously discussed the appearances, signs, and I will now describe those that receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and their complications, when they are completely in the anus, and they do not appear by touch, can only be cured with heat.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the opening of the anus can be felt; these are those that can be treated.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is necessary that you place the woman in a cold house, then stretch her limbs with tongs, and compress them at their roots, then sprinkle medicinal herbs to stop blood flow, such as oak bark, dragon's blood, incense, and similar things; then bind her feet to the wall for an hour, then immerse her in cold water. And when blood comes out, let it sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate peel, gall, and similar things, and then take oats flour, mix it with honey and wax, and make paste to apply on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it becomes saturated, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If no, then make the patient inhale cups on his back and on his breasts without causing harm; then take cloth, and dampen it in the juice of plantain or in the juice of hawthorn with old wine, and apply to the place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has healed, continue the treatment with the dressing as long as it remains clean; and that which is called "albathir" is red and resembles a hard lump, so it should be covered as I have said in the previous text; then treat it until it is clean.
des apostemes de la marris	about abscesses of the mare (presumably referring to a female horse)
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses occur in the body, such as the chancre, and previous abscesses, and sores, and blisters, and fistulas, and hemorrhoids, and hot abscesses, and many other illnesses that I have mentioned in the section.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore, in this treatment, we should address the hot abscess that occurs in the body, which is not like other abscesses that are bow-shaped; and if you have experience with making incisions, pay attention to when the abscess begins to form, and it is full of heat and fever, and turns red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Then do not hasten to pierce, but make the patient suffer until the pain is eased; then have the afflicted person sit in a comfortable position and rest his/her back, bending the legs slightly away from each other; let the knees be bent, and place the arms beneath the genitals, binding them well with a good bandage. Then insert the blade towards the right side of the wound, and use the instrument to open it, from which this form arises; and you must first stick the point into it, in order to know the depth of the wound, so that what enters through the instrument does not go further than necessary, causing harm to the patient; and if the instrument is too large, then cover the depth of the wound with cloth, so that the instrument does not hurt. And you should place the tip of the instrument above, and keep it lubricated.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess opens and it is incised with a gentle hand, if it is necessary to cover the wound, use a spatula; and when the bowel is emptied, it is necessary to place moist cotton in rose oil or dry green oil in the wound, all the way to the edge of the wound, and then cover it from outside with a clean, wet cloth, soaked in cooked mullein or alder bark; then treat it after two days of dressing, as long as it heals; and never lift the bandage and the wound with a cleanser of water and honey, and then water or cooked lily roots and alder bark are used. Then return to dressing.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is healed in the bed, it is necessary to be careful not to use fire, but treat it as we have said in the previous section.
de l’enfantement	From childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Knowledge of childbirth is the first step for understanding the natural form of childbearing, and its signs are when you see a woman in labor, pressing down, and desiring to smell the air: then hasten the baby's exit. Then know that these children are born according to nature, coming out head first, and seconding with them; and when you see these signs, gently press her stomach so that the child comes out quickly; for as it descends onto its head, it seconding with him, and the mother delivers her excesses through good cleansing; and this is how it should be, otherwise it does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it comes at no time upon his feet, but pierces the body or the bone, or the hands, or comes upon his belly, or back, and turns by chance upon his neck, and in other evil forms; therefore it is necessary for the surgeon to be wise and subtle in these things, and wary of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how he should help.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the evil comes upon his head through natural causes, and a woman is in labor and her strength is weak, then she should be placed on a bed or held by other women; and take the nature of oil or fennel seeds cooked, and then apply the small spatula between her fingers whose shape is as follows:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and cut through the second joint, and saw off its finger as much as the moisture that is stuck inside; and press the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to enema the woman with fenumigall of fenugreek mixed with oil of sesame; then make her sneeze and blow her nose for a while, keeping her mouth and nose closed for an hour: now the child will come out.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if both hands are stuck out, it is necessary to gently dislocate them one by one; and if they still cannot enter, put the woman on her back and raise her feet upwards; then remove the support from the ground and make the woman lie down so she does not try to stand up; and if her hands cannot enter, and the child dies inside, cut off the hands at the joint closest to the body, extract the child, and dislocate them in the same way.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the birth of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child is born on its feet, it needs to be pushed up, and then pulled back little by little until it is even; then press on the feet and extend them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	Have them jump as high as their feet allow if commanded to press, and make them sneeze by the condition; if they jump far, God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not happen as we have said, pull it back little by little according to nature.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it becomes slightly better.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come as we have said, take a small amount of musk, oil of rose petals, and gum resin, and grind them all in a mortar; then apply this preparation to the woman's vulva both internally and externally, and let her sit in warm water up to her ribs; when she is moistened, make a collar of myrrh and place it around her, leaving it for an hour. Then have her sit on a seat, and have her sneeze, tighten her mouth and nose, and gently press her abdomen, as the child is now ready to be born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the emergence of the child on its knees.
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, he should move his hands little by little; then rest on his collarbone, and let the feet hang down, lying on his side; and he bends his hands little by little, then takes hold of the hands on the belly, and removes the cushions from underneath until it is completely uncovered downwards; and if the child does not jump, take hold of the feet and move them, then lift the belly upwards, and turn the hands inside out; and gently deliver the child little by little; and tell the woman to press herself as the child emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the birth of the child who comes with a strong hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I know how to bring the hand back: if it cannot be brought back, then have the woman sit up and try again; if she cannot go, place her on a bed with her legs bent; then apply the muscle relaxant I mentioned; and if she still does not give birth, have her sit on a chair, and study how to bring the hand back; deliver the child according to nature, and make her sneeze, and tell her to push as hard as possible.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the birth of the child on its chest, with its hands spread and its face turned away from its mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I want the patient to hold their hand, then twist it little by little and gently; and when it is even, he should apply a light, muscly compress of herbs and oil, as we have said, then instruct him that it moves little by little; and when you have done this, let it rest on a pillow, and command him to press; and make him sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same way for all the rest
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to handling this in the same way for all parts, if the seconding (presumably a bandage or dressing) is stuck to your fingernail, allow the moisture to drain; and if it becomes fixed to his face or neck, cut it from the corner of the mouth so that it does not hold on, and the child may die. Then, remove the child, ensuring you have placed him as appropriate, and command the woman to press herself at regular intervals. Afterward, gently untie.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the opening of the joints
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	You know that twins are born many times, and never three or four; and this is not a strange thing, and it often happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Twins are strange things and do not live, they have no name; I know that they are multiplied, and their destinies are determined by the will of God who created them, who is bound to the womb; and they never emerge as naturally as any other child, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they are born severely deformed, as we have said, and the treatment is subtle, making slow and gentle movements, it should be done as it deserves for their salvation.
de plusors enfans	from many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	They should never be formed in the marris I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more than XV, and are entirely shaped like a child according to the measurement of his wise heart, and it is necessary that the experienced doctor knows all this, for sometimes a similar thing may occur; he must act accordingly.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat a woman who has lost her child, as I mentioned in the previous section, and there is no movement, and you are forced to act by hand; it is important that you know if the woman is of healthy constitution and has not suffered any ill effects from the loss of her child; she should be placed on her back, with her legs inclined downwards and raised; the physician should apply a poultice of two parts, or keep her in bed so as not to disturb her during the descent of the child. Then, moisten the mouth of the womb with oily eye drops mixed with fennel and linseed, and apply this mixture to the midwife's hands. Next, gently press the womb, then remove any foreign bodies that might be blocking the passage, and take care that the baby does not descend onto her head; if it is, pin or tie it to her body, and place the cord between her two fingers of her left hand, gently pressing the womb with her right hand until the object becomes free. The shape of the instrument used for this process is as follows:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then find another joint, where you need it most, so that the extraction is even; and then equally move it from side to side to get it to come out, and it will be notched for holding, just like this form.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	If a part remains, apply no oil to its joints, and press it in that part, while pulling the other part; and if nothing remains, place this joint higher up, and do this until it comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes forward before the other and cannot return due to tightness, you should wrap it up with a cloth until it comes out completely; then cut at the joint of the plant or the finger, and do the same for the other hand, and hold the feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the child's foot is large and twisted at birth, and has a sharp point collected, it is necessary that you insert the spiny spatula between your fingers, and make the twist and extract the water; or you can use the instrument called 'almidach', from which the form comes with the instruments of this chapter; and thus do the same for the child who has a large head naturally; and then pull out the bones with pincers, and if the foot jumps out and is constrained by force, it may be split, until the moisture at the worst exit is gone; and if it cannot come out, cut it into pieces as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, pierce it until the moisture runs.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the fever is on his feet, it is a light attraction, and the direction towards the mouth of the wound is gentle.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is twisted in the belly or the bowels, then you must extract it with the hand wrapped in a cloth; and make an incision in the belly or the bowels, as much as the moisture that is there; and if another member is dislocated and the stool remains, he should press his hand from the wound towards the mouth of the wound, and pull strongly; then he should use a knife or hook, and pull it out; and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed by the hot abscess that has come, it is not appropriate to work on it, but rather to apply moist and greasy things; and apply poultices, and immerse in lukewarm water that softens and moistens.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the dislocation is on his side, you can put it back even, as we have said about a living child; and if that is not possible, break it into pieces and leave nothing of the broken part.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, apply what we have said about abscesses that come from the wound; and if bleeding occurs, place it in strong restraint, and apply other remedies.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose stomach had been cut open, and another was made over it, and I removed the other wounds.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, there appears an abscess in the cheek, it swells until it opens, and begins to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called upon for treatment, and I thought for a long time, but could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong poultice, and an bone emerged, and after a few days, others followed.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very amazed because this belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I thought this was a bone from a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I examined the wound and found a bone in my hand, as long as the woman's arm was; I left it there for some time until it became a little less painful. And I have never recorded this chapter to be used only when a master encounters something strange and knows how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the wife back to her place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	After this comes the form of pressure, with which books are bound; and at its turn to the other side, it goes to the two ends of the strings.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle in their tightening, and made of ebony or box; and the mouth opening should be two fingers wide, and the margin of the wood one palm and a half long; and between the two sides there should be an adjustment of this same horn, which is firmly attached to both, about halfway through a palm length or slightly more; and this adjustment is inserted into the mare's mouth when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, resembling pliers; and it has two adjustments, as you can see, one palm length long and two fingers wide; and when opening the mare with the entire instrument, have the woman lie down on her side, with her legs spread apart, then insert both adjustments into the mare simultaneously, holding the base of the instrument between her thighs; then open your hand over the entire instrument, just as you did with the pliers, according to the amount that opens the mare's mouth, until it reaches its desired position.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	The surgical instruments are all diverse, and they have many similar appearances; and when the expert has arranged them, the work is quicker performed, and requires greater skill from the operators for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Even if you do not understand the instrument, you should not use it without arranging it properly, as its necessity is no excuse for improper handling.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the secondine (a device used during childbirth) is in place, it is important that you instruct the patient to hold her breath and then exhale slowly while squeezing her hands to her mouth and nose. If she does this, it will be good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If it is not possible, take I a hot compress or poultice and apply herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, such as calament, rue, anis, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or any of them, should be cooked or steeped in water over fire. Then place one hot compress over the wound and the other over its opening, and keep it there until the vapors go into the wound; then make the patient sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the dislocation is severe, proceed with the next step.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	If, after this treatment, the dislocation persists but is not too severe, instruct the patient to moisten their left hand with sesame oil or alum water and then wrap it in a bandage. They should hold the dislocated part gently and stretch it out little by little straightening it, so that the joint does not pop out when they release it; but they must move it slightly to the right and to the left and then treat it. It will come back and realign itself.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the wound is too tight, we have said the remedy of sneezing and herb fumigation; and if it does not respond to all that we have said, be careful not to drain it; but he who has a wound in the mouth, should tie it to the woman's thigh, then cleanse it with a four-ingredient ointment; it will heal and return, and go away, but nevertheless, when it opens, there is a bad smell in the stomach and head, and turns blue on the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore, suitable fumigations should be used: no one among the ancients has tried fumigation with arugula and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which a woman is restrained from bleeding and pain is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is made of glass similar to a tube, and the narrow end is placed in nature, while the wider part is over the fire; and the steam should be on the coals until they are burned out, then another one begins.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who have not had their foundation pierced, but it is covered with a thin layer of skin: therefore, the nurse should pierce this layer gently with her finger, and do not use an acute instrument, and hold the wound closed so that she does not touch it; then apply moist linen dipped in wine and oil, and treat the wound with medicine until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it does not return, if you insert or remove a plug from the nose, and leave it for several days, and when the child wants to go to sleep, it becomes dislocated.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And this sudden stop of the wound or abscess should never be left untreated; if it is a sudden closure, then it must be treated as we have said about the plug in the nose.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from its origin
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistules that originate from beneath the fundament are larger and more significant than those that come from above; in cases of a single or multiple fistula, and when this nodulation is ancient, it opens up again, still moist with white or subtle pus, and these fistulas do not heal; they are recognized by the discharge or air coming out when the patient evacuates, and sometimes they burst spontaneously.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if the ulcers pierce through to the bladder, and half of the penis; and reach up to the hip joint, and even to the calve muscle.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus you recognize the ulcer when it penetrates deeply and is not superficial: and then you insert your index finger into the anus and push a thin needle of iron or steel into the fistula, when there is no curvature.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has curvature, and you insert a thin probe or a horsehair, as long as you feel the resistance of the probe or hair with your finger; and if you do not feel anything, and there is no expulsion of pus or wind, as we have said, know that it does not penetrate; be careful in treating it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula persists up to the bladder or up to the urethra, if it lets go of the urine and cannot be healed with medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is cut near the joint of the thigh, then the veins are exposed up to the place; if there is no twisting or pain around it, and it remains bent, and medicine nor any bandage helps, then there is no cure for these persistent fistulas other than effort and futility from foolish people who meddle.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the case where it is not persistent and not ancient, there is hope for healing by fire, as I have experienced, and the patient lies on their back between your hands; then stretch their legs up to their thighs, and bring their knees towards their chest; then insert a thin arrow, or a needle if there is twisting, as long as you know where the fistula is.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain in the foundations, it is necessary that you press your index finger there, so that he feels the point pierce; and if you discover any discomfort or pain between your thumb and forefinger, then know that it is persistent; unless it works itself out, it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	Nevertheless, no one can be completely healed of this, but it happens rarely; and the aid that is done consists in applying a gentle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as has been said above; and burn the entire area inside the fistula until it comes out from the foundation; and do this two or three times, until you know that these charred marks have healed, which resemble an eagle's feather; then apply moist compresses, until the wound is completely healed, then finish with a treatment that promotes healing, drawing and sealing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is in such a state, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If the wound is not clean in this way; and if there is a gap between the edges, and it does not pierce to the bone which is the foundation, place a thick covering of cloth or something similar between your two fingers and the gap, and you will see the fistula following the covering towards the heart; if it reaches the beginning of the fistula, remove it immediately before the covering, and then apply cautery afterwards, as much as it goes to the top of the covering; and the covering will be delivered and healed; then beware of those false signs that resemble a bird's feather, and do not hesitate.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if it causes you pain and cuts between you and the work, cauterize it with fire or medicated salve.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For fire cautery combines two good things: namely, the burning of these prepared parts, and the absorption of blood and the drying of moisture; then treat the wound with moistened butter or crushed herbs, as long as the bowels are soft, and pull out the burned parts from the bowels; then heal the wound with hot compresses and dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it becomes healthy and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula appears all the way to the bottom of the foundation, and it is removed from the body, if you press down on its origin or foundation, it will hurt.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tentation, and between them is the cloth or the bandage or the charred, or it is ready to pierce, if there is no other way of escape and hope, through the administration of one of the three methods: you cauterize it as we have said, or cut it all the way to the bottom, or if you can, remove the tentation and cure it as before; do not go too deep, that you do not cut into the tissue holding the foundation, and the discharges come through the other side against your will; then cure it as we have said. Perhaps it will heal, or you remove that cover and clean it after it has been cut away from the base, either with a tent or another pointed instrument; then disinfect the infected wound, as best you can; try to restore the wound, and keep the fistula at bay in the area beyond the base. If it is a lighter matter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And never are ulcers formed in this manner: and it is when you push the tent into the ulcer, and it is on the side near the foundation of the skin above, then take a tent-shaped knife at the top according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And then insert the thread crookedly in two places, and push the tent all along the ulcer until it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is still stuck at the base of the skin, then pull out the thread from that hole, and insert your finger or the base again; take hold of the thread's end, and bring the two parts together, pressing them against each other, and leave it for one to two days; do not touch it, until the threads have healed and the wound is sealed and clean.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not open, try to pierce it in every way you can, but if it is too closed, it will not open.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For if it is not properly opened and then treated, as we have said, until it is healed, it will not be effective.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the sharp, spiky tissue from which the fistula is made, if it is very thick and on one side only and cuts; on the other side it is neither too deep nor too shallow, as you can see.
des emorroydes	Of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids exist in two ways: either they are inside the anus, resembling grains of resin, with small or large ones, causing bleeding, and located near or at the anus; but those that protrude have little moisture, sometimes a bit of citrus or salt water, and appear red. The treatment for hemorrhoids located within the anus is to instruct the patient to lie down in chambers until the anus opens and the roots become visible; then use pliers or your fingernail to grab them, cut them off at their base, and apply a hot powder that acts as a cauterizing agent. If the hemorrhoids cannot be removed this way, give the patient a cleansing enema with harsh water to wash out the anus so they can come out easily. When the patient sits down or if the roots are deep within the anus, treatment is simple; you prye them out with your fingernail or pliers and apply the cure as described above until the hemorrhoids heal and there's no risk of incision with a knife.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary for you to administer the stitch in this manner: take a twisted thread and wrap it around an needle, then draw the thread from above and pierce the needle from the other side, and pass both ends of the thread under the needle, and if it is too wide, tighten the forming thread, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do so for all others, leaving one for draining the excess blood; then place a moist cloth or ointment on the wound base, and cover it, and instruct the patient to rest; and then leave it until they heal, and when they fall, apply treatment and other remedies until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	The phrase "dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement" translates to "the gently from the roots or
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is a drying up of fluids in the intestines, due to nature's constraints, and when the illness is old and no medicine helps.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary that you scrape the skin with a spatula or your fingernail, if it prevents moisture; then treat it as it should be until it is dry; and if it cannot dry, repeat the scraping stronger than before, until it heals and is not cut; then treat it until it is healed.
dou fremit	Dou fremit" translates to "it trem
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Ants are a small, fuzzy appearance before the body, and they move very quickly; when the wound freezes, it feels as if it is dead from trembling, spreading throughout the body, and affecting the hands more than any other part.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a thin quill from an ostrich feather or a strong vulture feather, and place this quill on the trembling until it turns red throughout; then turn your hand over the entire quill until it heals completely, and remove the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see that it is a quill of iron or silver in this shape, be subtle and draw them from below and above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	I do not feel any pain, so that I can hold the hand firm and press it. And if you see, cauterize the tremor, as it is mentioned in this chapter of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of a douche
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never should a enema be made with silver or gold, or melted lead or iron wire; nor should these small and large instruments be used according to those to whom they are prescribed.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those, therefore, that are prescribed for the treatment of infants who are weak and in pain, should be small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	He should seek a warm bath of little depth but wide expanse, binding his abdomen according to this manner.
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and if there is a desire for defecation, as you see, and the excretion is within, then he should have one aperture on one side and the other on the opposite side; and the abdomen should be filled with medicines from a bladder of an animal or parchment, and it should be punctured all around by small openings, with one space between each opening, and then thread through these apertures a strong thread twisted in the shape of X or any pattern, and tighten the abdomen like a bowstring; and when the medicine is inside, he should tie the instrument to a strong thread in front, then perform the enema; and this is the shape of a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and apply a warm compress of oil or lard from a chicken, or something similar, then wrap it lightly; then the minister should massage with both hands together until it is completely relaxed, then remove the compress, and have the patient rest his legs against the wall, and let the medicine escape as much as possible; and if he sleeps soundly for one night, that will be greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you use the enema for a disease of bloating in the belly, and the medicine quickly escapes, it should be repeated until it is cured.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoid is at the foundation or abscess, it should be treated with as subtle a cleansing as when a child is involved; and this is the form of the very subtle cleansing where the skin is tightened around it.
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already spoken of the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments of hands and medicine, according to accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to the place where the wound is made, and from what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by the use of stone, and sword and knife, or lance or spear or arrow, or similar objects; or they are made according to the laws of the body, such as a wound that breaks through the collarbone, or on the head, or the side, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, be careful if it is from a stone or similar objects, and the skin is nevertheless torn and the wound is great, and you doubt an abscess forming: do this as soon as possible to make the wound healthier, especially if there is little blood loss from the wound, and on the contrary, treat the affected part; and let the patient avoid wine and rich meat.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to heal, let his flesh be reduced, and do not make him drink wine, nor eat any meat; and apply a poultice of rose oil alone or of vin stipticum (astringent wine) to the wound; if there is a hot abscess, apply it to the fresh wound while all its blood is still present, and do not let the air, powder—which I will mention later—touch it, but rather use some ointment while it is still clean.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like a sword's width or similar, and the edges cannot be brought together, then bring them together with stitches, as I will describe for wounds of the belly, from the stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed through bone, it bleeds profusely and lasts only for a short time if not treated; then treat the wound with medicine and replace the skin with hard wood, and instruct the patient to eat substantial foods, such as roasted meat, bread, cooked grains, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find putrefaction in flesh or leather that does not reach the bone, it consumes the putridity completely and oozes; then treat it, and if there is an artery in the wound or a vein, from which no blood stops, and medicines cannot arrest the flow, cut through the artery, and if you sever it, bind it with a thread; and if this does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: and it is that you put this powder which sticks so that the fire moves it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	The method for the powder is as follows: take one part of incense; two parts of dragon's blood; three parts of fresh charcoal, and mix the powder finely, applying it to the wound and tightening it until it spreads well and joins together with all its blood; then bind it tightly and leave it unbound, unless it swells; for the medicine is not removed as long as it remains healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never should charcoal be used alone, unless one has incense or dragon's blood, but the fire must have moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the fire has moved the wound, especially if there is no powder applied; but place some prepared ointments or a paste of oats made with water and honey, until it is soft; then apply other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if a bone fracture occurs with the wound and it is small, then extract it with delicate pincers; and I will tell you below about fractures of the skull.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the collar (or neck).
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound occurs on the neck and it is simple, with no distinction between this and that from the top, but if there is damage in the neck where the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is an artery, then there is no other remedy than to let it heal, and do not put anything restrictive, as it hurts the artery and causes it to retract; do not apply any sharp objects to the wound, because the substance of the artery is cold, and its continuation is connected to the brain, which is the highest member. But apply medicine accordingly, such as washed chalk in sweet water, mixed with rose oil, and clean bandages also in sweet water, and other stones in the same way, and moist compresses.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is great, cutting it open with a knife and binding it, then heal it as long as it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and infected, filled with pus, pierce them or cut them lower; if an artery is severed, and blood flows, if you deviate from it, and the proper law and cauterization methods, and if the pain in the throat is cut, or the heart, and its conduct is preserved so that the flesh does not adhere too much to the throat bone, and do not touch the throat but set it back according to its natural form; then apply the best healing treatment for as long as it heals; and if the wound has pressed into the bone, pierce them if necessary; and if there are pieces of bone that you cannot remove completely, leave them until the wound decays, becomes dry, and lightens its issue; and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on the powder I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones or a fistula in the wound, treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a lance or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a lance or knife, and deep, then consider the direction of the flow of blood as only the patient can: then know that the wound is mortal; but if it is not deep, and still full of fresh blood, do not apply powder in the first hour, nor bind it to prevent further bleeding that could harm the patient and return to the body; instead, apply a soothing dressing and change it twice a day. And if you have no dressing, place old cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture, and have the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; if there is no spasm, no shaking of the body, or any strange feeling, then know that the wound is healing.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure the wound with various remedies and others, as long as it is healthy; and if it cannot heal, then know that there is a fistula; so treat it as needed.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	If the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is shallow or deep, on the front, back, or side, treat it accordingly; if large, use stitches; if small, apply powder; and if it penetrates into the bone, with fragments, clean the wound thoroughly and treat the foreign bodies if necessary; and if they are not suitable, let the wound heal on its own, lightening the extraction; and for other wounds in other limbs, judge as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	disruption of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The disruption of the belly is great and medium and small; from a large wound, no time does the intestine, or the nerves of the intestines, protrude; and stitching is more difficult, and never worth less the small wound than the great, because one must handle the intestines with more care if they are not stitched together from top to bottom; for the intestines soon swell, causing pain, if they are not handled with care, and due to this, it is better to stitch the smaller wounds first, so that we can then properly handle the intestines as needed. And know that the rupture of the belly occurs in four ways: common stitches have a rupture in the stomach's stitching, and the stitches for other body wounds and other specific stitches are common to other wounds; nevertheless, they are more suitable with the stomach's stitching, and I will describe each one and explain them.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small and nothing of the intestine is affected, and it is a difficult thing to reset, then it is by one of two methods: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to the injury.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: moisten a sponge or a thin cloth with hot water solely, or cook water with squinant (a type of herb), and cypress, and spice, and raise the intestine until the swelling is removed; and never use this wine to constrict, but let it be moved so as to relieve the swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, if the intestine is filled with water or other fluids and the hemorrhoids are cooked, for this lightens the entry into the rectum; and if it cannot enter, then make a slight cut in the wound with the instrument used to treat hemorrhoids; and the first cure is to move the feces, that we should not cut them unless there is great need; and this is the instrument to split: slice inside the hemorrhoid and push it out if it does not come out on its own, and see the shape.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged and the intestine is pushed out, if you can return it to its natural shape in its proper place, do so if you have the ability, for it is beneficial.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large and located below the stomach, you should have the patient lie on their back and raise their legs higher than their head; if it's in the lower abdomen, place the head and heels higher than the affected area, and ensure that the injured part of the belly is in one of the two sections, so your focus is on making the sore section higher than the other; thus, you should follow what I've said for both large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, prepare what you will use; take in your hands a gentle and clean medicine that will cover the entire wound, and close the lips; this is the common method of stitching, using one or more needles according to the size of the wound, leaving two spaces at the head of the wound for the needle, and threading a strong thread on it; then pierce the two layers of skin with the two prongs of the scalpel, which are located under the skin, until you have pierced from that part, and join the two prongs of the scalpel together; then wrap the thread around the needle twice, and join the edges of the wound neatly, and continue in this way using as many needles as necessary until all the wound is closed; the needles should be medium between fine and thick, for fine needles capture all the flesh, while very thick ones cannot enter properly; they should therefore be medium; do not push the needles too far from the flesh or skin, otherwise they will tear the wound before stitching; then cut off the ends of the needles, place tent or cloth under them to prevent the patient from feeling discomfort while sleeping, and leave them until the wound is healed; this stitching method with needles is preferable for small wounds, because it only requires one or two stitches, and you join the two layers of skin and the two prongs together with a medium strong thread; when you have finished stitching in one place, return to the beginning, sewing like cloth; leave a space between each stitch about as thick as a finger; this method served a man who had a deep wound on his belly, caused by a knife, which was over a palm in size, and it was more than two palms away from the intestines, and was a large wound.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought the intestine back as it had been for twenty-four hours, and the wound healed completely within fifteen days, and it was cured, and it became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And they marveled that he did not die, and it was a miracle; I did not cure him with any treatment, for I was in a place where none could be found, neither any medicine; and I applied clean cotton to the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching: take the needle, and hold it at the edge of the wounded part from inside to outside; when it has pierced the tissue directly, tie the thread tightly at the point where the needle emerged, and pierce it again from the inside to the outside, and continue this back-and-forth movement until the stitching is complete. The technique should be similar to how a tanner stitches leather, leaving one end of the thread on one side and taking up the other.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second way of stitching, which Galen properly calls, is like any that joins the two parts together naturally, and applies one end to the other in this manner: take a needle or a pointed instrument near at hand, and pierce only through one side, leaving the two parts of the seam; then turn the needle, and pierce from the opposite part towards these parts, as far as they extend; and after that, pierce both parts from the opposite side inward to the other parts (of the seam); and it is in this manner that the stitching is done, and it is the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen calls this procedure, and many testify to it—stitching the abdomen with two needles, each having thread attached to it, and one needle should be passed from one side, and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who stitch wounds; and know that when the rupture is within the abdomen, the stitching will be more difficult than for other abdominal injuries.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is like the judgment of other wounds: and it is that when you puncture the fresh wound until all its blood flows out, and the fire has moved it, if the interior is disturbed, and the tissue, and the pain; then apply a healing powder mixed with charcoal, and if the fire has moved it, apply any remedy at hand, as long as the wound is open; and bind the thread, and make sure the dressing, and the mirra; then treat the wound like other wounds until it is healed; and if you have no medicines, put a piece of old cotton, and move it twice a day until it heals.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you need no other medicine in addition to these arrangements for simple wounds; and if you doubt that the wound does not affect any principal member, it is necessary that you apply a light linen cloth soaked in hot seasonal oil or rose oil, and place it around the affected area, and under the armpits; and if it feels pain or putrefaction in boils, and this happens many times, they should be enema with black wine, especially if the putrefaction reaches the intestines. Puncture it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small intestine.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The inner part that is called "young" cannot heal when it is weary, and this is due to the weakness of the veins, and the subtlety of all the body, and the nearness of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	If the pus jumps out of the wound, reset it just as the intestine is reset while it is fresh; and if it has become old and turned yellow or black, you should tie down the black part to prevent further blood let, since there are veins and arteries in it; then cut through what is between them, and place the two edges pendant from the outer side of the wound all the way out to facilitate the extraction when the pus comes out.
de la routure dou boueil	From the rupture of the bowels
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestines are torn and the wound is small, it cannot be restored in any man, as I have seen a nobleman's navel or stomach pierced by a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, it became infected and fistulous, and there issued evacuation and flatulence; I applied remedies as best I could, and did not cease to apply treatments until he was healed, and the scar healed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it healed, I doubted that the patient would not suffer pain in his stomach; but he felt no pain, but improved in condition and appetite and drinking; and some experienced physicians said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be treated in this manner: take a large plug, then bring together the edges of the wound, and when the plug opens its mouth, place it between the two lips so that it pulls away from his mouth; then cut off the head of the plug, and let it remain in such a way that he cannot untie it, then insert another plug in the same manner until the wound is completely closed; and then dress the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the bowel's chief is entangled in the intestine and causes no harm to the patient, it can be tied with a fine thread cut from an animal's intestine, in this way: take the chief of this intestinal thread, which is much stripped, and tie it to the chief of this thin linen thread twisted, then wind the thread onto the needle and sew up the intestine, and arrange it in the rupture; and this method of stitching is only applicable according to reason and hope. If the wound is large and wide, especially when it's in one of the major intestines, there is no health, only subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	or whether it is a fistula, wherever it may be.
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	You know that any wound or abscess, when it opens, is generally called a "fistula", especially if it has hair and is deeply infected.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	A fistula, according to the truth of its formation, is hard and white, without pain, just like the feathers of a bird; sometimes it opens clearly, other times it becomes thick; sometimes it oozes, and other times it remains thin; and I have already spoken about this in the division of wounds. Every wound that does not heal, and there is no pus, is only due to one of the nine causes: namely, either a small amount of blood or pus; or because of its bad nature; or because there is too much hardness inside, and on the lips, which do not allow any pus to form; or there is excessive bowing; or the muscles are rotten, and the material is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good for curing it; or because the corruption has the manner of a plague; or due to the proprieties in the region, digestion is delayed, health is slow, and recovery is hindered by nature; or there are veins or bones. I have already described all these causes, their signs, and the cures with medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary that I make you know the treatment of a fistula which is performed by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	You know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that affect large veins, arteries, and nerves, or the small intestine, bladder, or any of the ribs, or the spine, or any joint of the hands or feet, and if it affects the dominant member and its associated parts.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all fistulas of this nature are difficult to heal, and there is no cure but labor and ignorance; if there is a fistula that does not come to the place I mentioned, and you have confidence in the cure and understand it, take a piece of iron or steel, if the fistula is straight; and if it is crooked, seek a subtle plug for it, because the pressure should conform to its curvature; and if the fistula has an opening through which you cannot properly insert plugs, clean it with a catheter from one of the openings, as moisture flows from one opening to another, cleaning it. Then cut it thoroughly in your power, knowing if there is bone or nerve, and if it is fully healed, and ask the patient about the pain he feels when pressing your hand, and the place where he feels it; and once you truly know its location, whether it is far from a joint, nerve, artery, or vein, or in any of the places I mentioned, cut it as I have said, and remove the corruption and foul matter inside; then heal it as much as possible, and apply moistened medicine plasters to it, pressing them close to the fistula until the medicine corrodes the excess that is left at the bottom; and then put fresh, healthy bandages over it while it heals; and if this does not work, cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, cut it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerve does not affect the main member as we have said, and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackening, the king must be treated until the corruption is entirely removed, then cure the ensuing complications as long as it is healthy; and if it remains unhealthy and bowed as before, know that you are not yet free: expose it and keep it clean until you reach the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore it to its place; and if it becomes healthy in this way, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If this is not the case, know that the corruption is too deep for you to treat it; if there is no other cause but to let nature take its course; and if there is a small corrupted bone that you can extract with tweezers, using an appropriate instrument for it, and if there are many bones, break them one by one, leaving none intact; and if the moisture opposes you, and there is neither error nor fear, bind and moisten it, and cure and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, put something corruptive on the wound and let it fester around the bones until they become lighter; and if it is a large bone, like that of the leg or thigh, scrape off the corruption as much as possible until all blackness is gone, then dress the wound; and if there is a great part of the corruption extending almost to the bone, cover it completely until the corruption is healed, and then treat it until it is secure. And I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that you can take an example from it and provide aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	He was a young man around 30 years old who had a pain in his leg due to something coming from inside the body, causing substances to reach the leg and resulting in a large abscess that could not be opened; but because of their foolishness, they pricked the abscess so much that it became infected with many substances, turning into a fistula, and creating numerous openings (pertus) from which pus flowed, causing bowing and moisture in the body. Many tried to cure him for two years without any knowledgeable person in the art of medicine; until I was called upon, and I examined his leg and the medications used to treat it, and what was corroded by the pertus on a large scale; and the young man's skin turned red, with a citrine-like color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these gaps, and then I searched all the gaps, and I found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I then quickly seized one of the gaps and cut as deep as I discovered a piece of bone, which was rotten and broken off, and the corruption reached right down to the bone; I understood what appeared to be the corrupt bone, and thought that there was no other corruption except for this one that I had removed; and I began to treat the wound with medicines for a long time, but they would not adhere; then I examined it again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, so I treated it and then re-set it, and bent myself to secure it in place; but I could not do so until I had cut around one palm's width of the bone, and pulled it out completely, then I treated it with more medicines. It healed soundly and securely, without wanting to start the operation again except for the weakness of the patient who could not bear it, and for the fear of death that I had from him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For in the evacuation of blood, it often becomes entirely healed, and a hard callus forms in its place, of good disposition, causing no harm or opposite effect at all, neither to going nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if a bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this manner: take a thread, and pull the end of the bone that is open, and command no one to extend it upwards; and tie another thicker woolen thread upon the first, and fasten it to the flesh that is beyond the bone, pulling the flesh away from the broken part, so that you expose the flesh beneath where you see the injury, and do not allow the flesh to heal over the broken bone; and place charcoal or a table (or cloth) under the bone to cover the corrupted flesh; and it should be treated as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and in this way again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if a bone is corrupt and will not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then expose all of it; then place hot coals from one side to the other over the corruption, as we have said; and if the corruption is in a joint, cut out the corrupted joint, and remove the bone from the other side; and if the corruption is in the connection between two joints, there is no other way to treat it except by cutting; and if the corruption is in the wrist of the hand or the ankle of the foot, this is very difficult, but you must inquire about the corruption how it opens, and purify it in every way that you can, as long as the vein or nerve do not oppose it; and know that there are many instruments for cutting and binding these bones, according to the position of the bone and its appearance, and its thickness and thinness, and its size and smallness, and its hardness; and for this reason, it is necessary to match each work with the appropriate instrument; and know that the work will show you the instrument that you need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the manners of the diseases; choose therefore the instrument that you need, as it is right.
dou feu	By fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The joint dislocates internally or externally; and when you have treated the inflammation with medicines but they are ineffective, it is necessary to immobilize that limb until the inflammation subsides, so that the patient escapes death or harm from the weakness of the limb, and the signs are that the limb turns black, as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackening, the inflammation spreads from joint to joint throughout the body; therefore act quickly in immobilizing it, and if it is due to the bite of certain venomous creatures, such as a sea scorpion, snake, or similar, immediately treat the dislocation at the top of the limb, and do not give it time to return.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it reaches the hand, strike the joint with the bone so that the corruption does not reach the arm; and if it reaches the arm, strike the cut to the shoulder; and if it passes the shoulder, it is death, and no cure can be found except according to its strength, and thus it acts in every corruption: if it comes at the first joint, strike after the other joint; and if it comes at the foot, strike throughout the foot; and if it ascends to the leg, strike at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to leave the patient to die; and the manner of striking or binding the member is that you tie it from above and below, and stretch one assistant with the lower ligament, and another with the upper ligament, and you remove the flesh that is between the two ligaments with a wide spatula, until the bone is exposed; then strike or bind, and place on each side a piece of linen cloth, so that the linen does not touch the healthy part, and causes further injury and abscess to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if the flow of blood occurs when you open it, carefully cauterize the wound and do not apply any constricting powders; then return to your medicine until it is complete, bind the affected member with a suitable ligature, and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you that it happened to a man in great pain: he had a blackening that seemed like a burn from fire, and this corrosion first appeared on his right foot, until it discolored the entire foot. When he saw the corrosion, he covered his foot and was healed; but after a long time, the corrosion returned on his left hand, and he came to me, and I placed things against the foot after purification of the body, and the corrosion would not stop; and he asked me to cut off his hand, and I did not want to do so, as I had hope of causing the material to retract. And I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die, since the man's strength was weak; and he became completely desperate, returned to his land, covered his hand, and was healed; and I have never heard of such a case except for this, if it is necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	No abscess should form in a fleshy part and remain there so long that it creates great swelling; then it bursts and pierces the flesh, remaining like a vase; and the skin over it is as delicate as fine cloth, not penetrating to the bone or nerve, and such a condition is called "sain" (healthy), not "fistule" (abscess). But if it penetrates all the way to the bone, it is called a fistule; and the skin should be cut away around it entirely, especially when it is delicate like fine cloth, and it will not heal due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if the skin ruptures and the corruption is not fully healed, and the flesh around it is hard like fine cloth, treat it with an enema as follows: Check if the swelling is large and if the bowel odour is foul; then prepare an Egyptian medicine by mixing equal parts of asafoetida and oil, heating it over fire until the medicine turns red and thick like honey. Then, take as much as needed and mix it with water and honey, and give this enema to the patient, leaving it for two hours before draining it slowly; repeat this process until the swelling is cured and the corruption is gone. If you do not have Egyptian medicine, prepare a mixture of ashes from vine shoots and water, then strain it and use the liquid for the enema; be sure that the swelling is completely cleansed. If the patient cannot tolerate either the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, give an enema with honey mixed with a little bit of powdered lithargirum (calomer), or with wine, as honey has purifying and cleansing properties while wine helps to expel impurities. After performing these steps, if you are confident that the swelling is cleansed, give an enema with a mixture that causes warmth in the bowels, using rose-scented oil and vinegar; or use any other medicine or ointment mentioned in the section on treatments with herbs. If the rupture in the bowel is very small and the catheter cannot enter, enlarge it slightly with a hot iron, and apply the Egyptian ointment (or basilicon) to make it larger; if the wound is too large for the catheter to pass through, cauterize it from above or below until you can insert the catheter.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Because when the bowel is in perfect condition, it does not allow gas to form; and if you cannot cover the opening of the bowel as you see fit, arrange it in such a way that the bowel moves down to its lowest point, for when the bowel is perfect, it does not allow gas to form, and if you cannot cover the opening of the bowel as you see fit, arrange it so that the bowel moves gently downwards, leaving no part of the bowel behind; and take consolidating medicines to apply over the wound, and place them under a linen cloth that covers the entire wound; then press with force onto the aperture in the side of the bowel a bit wider than before, as treatment for the wound, and apply soothing medication on another cloth according to the size of the wound, and place it over the aperture in the bowel to ease the strain, and do not remove the large linen cloth outside until after many days; and whoever is over the aperture in the side of the bowel often removes it to release the pressure, and knows what comes from the bowel, whether it be poison or a little bit or enough, or digested or undigested; and be careful if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when you see how your medicine has spread in such a way and observe the nature that appears over the aperture in the side of the bowel, then you know that healing has begun, and bring it closer to health; and then unbind it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you unbind the wound, change the cloth, and renew the treatment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast becomes bowed and indigest after many days, knowing that the breast will not open.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons fester after a long time, do not despair of health, for health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are some whose spirits grow weaker over time in their wounds, and others who do the opposite; and if the breast becomes bowed and indigest after many days, knowing that the breast will not open; and if the breast is slow to open, and is distant, then use moist medicines with a subtle action, such as those containing vitriol, which is the last medicine; take the diaphanous ointment and mix it with rose oil and equal parts of old wine in substance; then conserve it and use it; and do the same with honey thickened with cooked grain, when diaphanous ointments are not available; you may take mirra, aloe, and incense, crush them to a powder over honey that has been heated, then spread it on the breast; at no time should you apply allicin or celestial lily roots, which are similar to flour or cornmeal; use simples or compounds: grind them to a powder and mix with the honey I described, and apply; and if the cure is prolonged, and this treatment does not heal, know that corruption has taken hold, pressing on the bones, or the hard members, or the ligaments—just as we said before regarding fistula treatment.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	from the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	A gangrene is an abscess that forms under a nail in the hand or foot, or occasionally elsewhere; and when it becomes old and one does not take care, it develops a pus-filled abscess, and swells and leaks until it destroys the root of the nail, and perhaps even the whole nail; and the corrosion extends to the bone, causing intense putrid pain, and the flesh around the finger becomes swollen and discolored.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the previous section, and the treatment is not effective, then you must remove all the dead tissue from under the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cautery is very great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is sound; and if the nail pierces the skin, and begins to point, and becomes blistered, then it is necessary that you place the edge under the nail that has pierced the skin, and press it upwards, and carefully extract the nail, and apply hot and corrosive medicines to remove all; then treat the wound with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corruption is in the bone, cut it off and pull it out, for as long as the bone is corrupt, it cannot heal; and if you see both bones corrupt, remove them as mentioned above, then treat it until it is healed; and if it is burnt and blistered, and causes great pain, it must be treated first; then carefully cut the nail with a sharp tool at an angle from above, and ensure that the cutting does not reach the skin beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if necessary, apply something to soothe it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain pierces through the whole body.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	He who is born without the hands in anyone's care is usually very fleshy, and perhaps has some bones, but never any nails, and none come out at the root of the joint, where birth should be in no way constrained.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	He who is born without any joints in his hands does not move, and he who is born with joints at the hand may not move; the size of the fleshy one is so small, in a similar way: cut him off at the root with a broad instrument.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure: if you keep him covered.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For he who is born or has an injury to the last, it is necessary that you first cover the wound properly up to the bone, then cover the bone with a suitable thread, and then heal it as long as it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The injuries that come together belong to birth, or the adhesion of a wound, or the burn of fire, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If it is necessary to close this wound, so that it must be repaired according to its natural form; then place between two moistened cloth or drapes, made of rose oil, so that they do not adhere; or between two pieces of fine felt, as long as the edges are sewn together, as appropriate.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If the dislocation occurs in any of its joints with the palm, then close this wound as appropriate.
des vils	des vils" is not a complete or
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	These veins are thickly wrapped, full of melancholic excesses, which come upon many members of the body; and they occur more in the legs of those who walk, work, and carry things, than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary for you to administer purgative once and then the health of the colon.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cure of iron is according to two manners: one is with the use of cups and drawing out the black blood; and the other manner is that you open the vein and drain it completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The incision is according to this manner: first, raise the afflicted leg with hot water very strongly until the thick blood becomes thin; then extract the lower leg from the thigh up to the knee joint; then cut the vein in one or two or three places with a broad blade, drain and squeeze out the black blood in your hand from one end to the other, as much as the sick person can endure; then bandage it and command that he be fed with food producing black stools; and repeat the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, causing harm to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	They should raise the affected leg and if there are many hairs, then immerse it in a bath, and heat the leg with hot water until it turns red and the veins swell; and if you do not have a bath, heat it over a fire, and then compress the vein from the top of the thigh down to the ankle; then cut the skin at the point where the vein appears, and strip it from both sides until it is exposed; and it will appear red and black, and as if it were a white cord; then stretch it downward from the ankle until it is raised from the skin, and then compress it lightly at the second point; then cut again in another place, if necessary, and raise and compress it, and cut it at the third point, and pull and raise it until all the veins are completely gone, and then cover it; and if you cannot pull and raise it, insert a very sharp needle through the entire thread, and tie and pull it, and stretch it downward, and turn your hand back and forth until it comes out; be careful that it does not cut, for if it does, it cannot be pulled or raised, and this brings harm to the patient; and once all the veins have been pulled out, place a moist woolen cloth soaked in wine and rose oil on the wound and dress it until it heals.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if you see that it is contracted and twisted and wrapped together as one, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must break it crookedly, but do not cover it; treat it as we have mentioned above.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The way to do it is to bend the eye gently so that it does not cut into the vein; it should be of great curvature, because if it were thin, it would pierce the vein, but since it must be thick, as we have said, then this is its form.
de la voinne civile	from the natural vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is located in the legs, in hot parts where no herbs or trees grow, and on land where there is no moisture; and sometimes it appears elsewhere than in the legs, due to putrefaction that arises from below the skin, as it comes from within the body, winding and entwined between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein appear, it is characterized by a very great inflammation in the leg, then the color changes, and the vein begins to protrude strongly, just like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the vein opens, it is necessary to wrap a piece of cloth around it, from one and a half to two fingers thick, and leave the cloth on the leg; and at every appearance, if there is no opening, wrap the cloth around the leg and the new growth; and if it is too long, cut off a part and wrap the rest, not cutting it at the base, until it is completely removed; for if you cut it, it will return to the flesh and cause abscesses, putrefaction, or other illnesses. For this reason, it should be treated little by little, up to the root, and nothing should remain in the body; and this vein appears when it has grown five or six palms long, as I have seen myself, and when you cut it, it draws one or two fingers down, and pierces all the way to the bottom, so that everything comes out; and the material inside should be emptied, and medicines applied to the wound to prevent putrefaction for as long as necessary, then treat the abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never again touch this vein, especially when it opens at the ankle or foot joints, and causes a great deal of bleeding; treat it then as we have said above.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	worms that emerge between leather and flesh.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called "beef disease" in our land because it often affects cattle, and it is a small worm that emerges between leather and flesh, traveling throughout the body, causing pain from one limb to another until it ruptures through the skin where it originated, and moves with great force; and it is caused by putrefaction of certain humors, as do worms, snakes, and lice in the belly; and its evil nature is uncertain, for when it travels through the body, it ascends to the head, reaches the eyes, perhaps retreats, and destroys them. This happens frequently.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it healing and draining, it cannot be done unless the blood flows: therefore, you must bind the limb above and below with a strong, tight bandage, then cut and drain it deeply, and if it bleeds profusely, cauterize it with fire until it stops; and the greatest harm it causes is when it makes the oil flow, as we have said; and if you see a blister forming near the wound, tighten it from below, then cut and drain it; and it is necessary for the patient to use purification of the body with solvent medicines to remove bad humors, and to wash with putrefying meats.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	The pain that comes from flatulence.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This illness is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to no specific member, and then moves from one member to another; and I have seen what I have told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and I examined her arm, and saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and after that, I noticed something moving up the shoulder, as quickly as anything, like a live silver thread when it cuts through the skin; the pain left the arm and moved to the shoulder, and then spread throughout the body, until it reached the other arm; then she told me that she felt it moving around inside her body.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marvelled greatly at how she moved each part of her body, for I had never seen this disease in such a way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Nevertheless, I had observed many cases where the pain moved from one part to another, but I did not understand how this happened, as I saw it in a woman; and I thought it was because she had dry skin, exposed veins, and that constraint caused this discomfort; and I did not see it according to this reason for those who are suffering, and have moist skin and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see this disease heal and the patient feels this pain, if it opens up as we have said, press on it from above and below gently, then apply a poultice; and cauterize the wound; and if you do not have these remedies at hand, cure it with those that release the constraint of the wind, such as foul-smelling pills, serpentary pills, and others like them.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows vary, according to their appearance and the parts of the body from which they originate.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	Their diversity lies in that they have varying points—some large, some small, some serrated, and others smooth; and there are those with double edges, and those with elongated tips, and some have fragments; and they pierce different parts in two ways: either through a principal member, such as the head, body, liver, kidney, intestine, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it comes out in any part of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, appears: it is necessary that you fight for the extraction of this arrow, because death comes after various preparations; and when this bad sign does not appear and the arrow is not completely extracted, pull it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when the arrow comes out and pierces the bone, and there is a sudden relief on the top of the head, then it turns black, dry, and shrivelled, and there is inflammation and redness in the eyes alone, and spasms and confusion in speech, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps the arrow comes out through the nose or ears; and sometimes it loses the power of speech and voice; and there are pus-filled white wounds that look like boils, and also excessive bleeding; if these signs appear to you, and you are a healer, then extract the arrow immediately.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of an arrow when it breaks or withdraws, is that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were embedded in hard matter, neither hollow nor empty; and sometimes the arrow itself becomes silent like the pulse, accompanied by black blood, coldness, and cold sweat, and fainting; therefore know without doubt that death approaches.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow that the proton never swells is that there is no foam or discharge from the wound, the throat swells, the patient's face changes color, he breathes heavily and stops moving.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow breaks in the covering of the pit, it leaves small pieces; it causes great pain and suffering, and the patient breathes heavily and his entire shoulder muscles spasm.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrow pierces through the stomach, perhaps some digesting meat will come out from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow pierces through the belly, and there is no healthy tissue from the intestine, there is little hope for recovery or in removing the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow pierces through the bladder, and urine comes out in spurts and leaks out, and the patient feels intense pain, know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, as they make and feel hot and cold and pain in the throat, shoulder, aid (presumably a term for an affected area or symptom), back, hip, knee, and legs, and appear strangely, are safe according to various dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery and it is not poisonous, as I will tell you that happened to me, because you do otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	An incident occurred in my home where an arrow struck the ear or the cheek: I attempted to remove it, and pulled from the other side under the ear fat, and it was completely healed without pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And also, by chance, an arrow struck in the fat under the skin and through the paper of the skin, and the arrow was lodged, only the tip towards the wood, and it was a large arrow with a turquoise bow, very light without any harm to the ears; the wound healed, and no ill accidents came.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And pull a dart from the throat of a Christian, which was an Arabic dart with ears: I cut the barbs, and removed it as far as I pulled, and healed the Christian.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And I pulled out a dart from a man's home, which had pierced his stomach, and thought he would die; but after thirty days, he showed no change in condition; so I cut the dart, wrapped it, and pulled it out, without any ill effect.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a man with a dart pierced through his back or chest, and the wound is deep; and the dart remains inside him, and he shows no change in his natural condition, nor does he experience any discomfort in his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And see another man to whom an arrow has penetrated his face, and the wound was deeply embedded; and he endured great pain without relief; and many others like him.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And I pulled out an arrow from the body of a prince, the king, which had penetrated him in the middle of the night, and was slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrow was completely embedded. I was called to cure him after three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very deep.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I desired it as a subtle probe, and felt nothing; but he felt a sharp pain and discomfort beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the tip of the arrow. I placed a soothing poultice on the wound because the swelling had not subsided; and I saw the shaft of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I left the poultice on for several days, and thereby healed the wound; thus the patient endured long pain until he felt the arrow inside his nose; and it came out.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied to the wound a corrosive medicine with good hands until it was open, and I probed it, and felt the tip of the arrow firmly in place; then I adjusted the opening of the wound with that same medicine, until the base of the arrow became visibly apparent; it healed well within four months, and then the wound flared up so much that I used pincers, pulling from both sides, but it wouldn't come out; then I did not cease to try subtle and ingenious instruments, until one day, as the shape of the treatment appeared at the end of this chapter, while I pulled on it, I turned the wound around.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And they say that the nose cartilage cannot be restored; so I straightened it, and the wound healed, and the patient was entirely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or this has told you the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you place your care on what I do not say, for books cannot fully encompass everything; but wise masters compare well on small and significant things, and on what is present and defective, they seek a new work and new tools at the descent of strange things that occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not come from members unless they are fixed in one of two ways: either through the place where they enter, or from another part; and that which comes out by this side, where it enters, is an arrow entering into the flesh, and never comes out again.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not currently come out, let it grow until the wound is healed; and also, if it is stuck in the bone and cannot be pulled out, leave it for several days, and every day move it slightly; and then it will come out, and if it does not, pierce through the entire flesh with a sharp needle until the bones around it are widened, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	If the arrow is stuck in the bone so deeply that it reaches one of the ventricles of the brain and none of the treatments mentioned above for the patient are effective: do not pull it out, but let it remain as long as it stays straight without moving for several days; for if the arrow comes close to this point, death follows.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is embedded only in the bone and does not come out satisfactorily, it keeps the patient without any bad outcome for several days, if the skill to pull it out is good.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply embedded and cannot come out, then apply herbs around it, as I have told you; then heal the wound as long as it remains healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is embedded deep in the body and one cannot see it, one should try with all efforts; and if you feel it, pull it with any suitable instrument; and if you cannot because of the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there are no bones or nerves or veins nearby, then leave it until the wound becomes large; and pull the arrow as much as you can, and if it has roots by which it is embedded, break off the part that is deeply embedded, so that you can pull the rest of it. Be careful not to break the arrow itself while pulling it.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, so that the limb around it is completely relaxed, then draw it, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the signs of bloodletting work against you, then apply what we have said about treatment in that chapter; and be careful with the incision on the nerve and vein, and use any means you can to safely extract the arrow, either immediately or later, or firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the position it was in when the arrow entered, for this is the greatest help, and if you cannot, then do as the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	He knows the arrow that comes from another direction, where it opens anything within, and the flesh is swollen in that place as one sees or feels apparently: then cut above, as far as the pincers can grasp, and then pull it out: if it still projects outward.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	If it is stuck in the bone, turn your hand round, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot be pulled out, leave it for now and then try to pull it out again until it comes out; and if there is an arrowhead in the wound, let it remain, and then use a tool to press against it, so that the arrowhead enters the channel of the tool; and then push it out, and if the arrow has been removed, press the tool with the pointed end entering together to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is embedded, it is necessary that you clean all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, and then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow comes out in the side or the abdomen or the bladder or the ribcage and it is close to a vein or nerve, and you can reach it, then take care to remove it; avoid touching the vein and nerve, then extract it, and clean the wound as required, and treat it until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The tool used to remove arrows resembles an eagle's claw, and here is its form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrowhead.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of it pointing towards the hair is like the feather of a bird, to push the arrowhead to the tip, as this is the shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of pliers, to push and to grasp if this is the way:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	From veins from which one draws blood, there are XXXI, of which the chief is XVI: these include the two battens located behind the ears, called "herbech"; and the two arteries appearing in the temples; and the two veins in each arm, called "aspires"; the vein across the forehead; the vein at the top of the head near the nose; the two glands located on the collarbone; the two veins above the lips, called "augeherich"; and the two veins beneath the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins commonly drawn from each arm are five: one is the cephalic vein, located on the left side and called by the common people "vein of the head"; the median is called "fast" and is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins; the basilic is located on the right side and called by the common people "vein of the belly", and it lies beneath the fascia, being the vein that appears most clearly when opening the armpit.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the saving vein is the one between the index and middle fingers, and if it rains; and in the leg, there are three veins: one below the tibia on the left side, and the second is the superficial vein at the ankle on the right side; and the third vein is called 'nere' which is also at the ankle on the other side; and in the other leg, there are three veins below these.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The health of veins that are located behind the ears aids in the healing of old cataracts and migraines; and the quality of the healer, as I have said, is to raise the patient's head and rub the affected area with a rough cloth; then tighten the bandage around the patient's neck until the two veins behind the ears appear in two parts extending from the head: hold them there with your hand, and where you feel the pulse beneath your hand, it signifies progress; then take the lancet and puncture just below the vein, up to the bone, then lift your hand along the entire vein upstream, cut and the skin and flesh, and carefully traverse the vein twice as deep as necessary, and let out the blood until you see; then drain and bind it until it heals; and I have already spoken of incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	He heals the two arteries that are in the temples, using an old and clean, accustomed eye socket, and at the source of hot tears alone; and the quality of the healing is as I say: he pulls the patient's neck until both veins open wide; and feels the pulse beneath his thumb, then signs with a cross on top of the vein above his index finger on his right side, and inserts the lancet beneath, lightens the vein at the top, and the clot, just as you did with the other veins, and makes the blood flow according to your need; then releases the patient, and places his thumb on the vein for an hour, then applies cotton; then forms the wound, and leaves it until it heals; we have already spoken of their mending and extraction, at the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The surgeon of the vein on the forehead is as valuable as the surgeon of the head, for treating old facial diseases, migraines, and redness; and his quality is such that the patient pulls their hair tightly by twisting, until the vein appears. Then take the tool called "disserter," which has this shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand or another tool, allowing the blood to flow according to its quantity; then gently pull the hair of the patient away from the vein, tying it tightly until it heals and there is no sign of a wide wound.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, one should not let the flames be too intense; and if the wound is across, since the bone is close, and perhaps breaks the flames when they are thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The wound of the two veins that are in the arms is treated with special care, as well as the tongue, and the blush, and the eye in the socket, and facial diseases; and the quality of their wound is such that the patient tightens his collar without straining any ligament, as before. Then, the treatment, it should be neither too thin nor too thick with the flame, for there is no room for error.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is subtle, it may break; then apply pressure to the blood, as much as needed, and then bind it with cloth, tightly.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The health of the vein near the nose is valuable for headaches, sudden pain, and facial ailments, such as migraines and redness that appear on the face, especially when it is an old problem. The quality of the health is such that the patient squeezes their collar and pulls their nostril with their left hand, takes a subtle flame, and inserts it between the spaces of the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well enough, and the blood will begin to flow. Don't press too hard, and apply pressure with the sanct according to your need, then bind it for a night, as it is quickly restored; this is the shape of the flame.
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The holy oil of the two guindeges aids in the constriction of an ulcer, and at the onset of illness, and with many diseases, and impetigo, and corrosion, and herpes, and boils; and the quality of the oil is such that it draws the patient's skin away from each other, as we have said, and the master who is on top of the patient's head, and the patient sits in a certain place, then clean the vein with long-drawn blood slightly, then treat with blood tempered with warmth, or as needed; then repeat this in the other vein, then untie the ligature, and tighten the veins moderately so that the patient is not strangled, and leave it until morning, allowing the wound to heal.
de la sainie des leivres	from the cleansing of the veins
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The cleansing of the veins above the lips helps to heal in the mouth, and the corruption of gums, and cracks in the lips, and pain and swelling around it.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the qualities of the cleansing are to have the patient sit before you, holding his collar as I said; then turn the lip, and look at the veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, which you recognize by their black color and the small black veins around them: so cut both, and if you do not know them and are in doubt, cut the thicker one from each side, and do the same with the two veins above and below, for it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	from the cleansing of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The cleansing of the tongue is most beneficial after the purification of the head, and it helps with conditions in the throat, and diseases of the eye, and ailments of the mouth; the quality of the cleansing is such that the patient should feel a pulling in their hands towards the sun, and they should gently move the tongue, looking for any dark veins beneath each side. Then cleanse one and both, but do not press too hard as there are arteries beneath.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the neck that are commonly cleansed are done in two ways: either by gently pressing all along their course with moistened fingers, or using a thin, sharp instrument (called an "anesil") as if cutting incisions, and they are wide or narrow according to the size and tightness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	It forms a bright red spot, very well known, and is broad as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the large, flat veins that contain much blood and have a dark color; and this is the form of an olive flame.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more precisely pointed, and is for healing the fine veins where there is subtle, yellow-colored blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The healing of the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, is very helpful for diseases that are beneath the throat, and the collarbone, and the chest, and the abdomen; and it is important for the healer to heal gently, and to wash the artery below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it touches the artery, and blood loss occurs, as it is necessary to stop it, as I have said; and the flame should not be gripping, but cutting like a blade.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the vein does not open clearly, it is necessary that you extract it and choose another one; or if you prefer a better outcome, you can cut the vein in the arm; it will open clearly, and cut it with a blade as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you learn to recognize the vein, it is necessary that you extract the arm, touching the vein until you feel the pulse; then sign the place with a mark, and bind the arm, and cut the vein with a blade; and be careful not to hurt the artery when you see it swell, for it is the artery: flee from it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see a discharge from the top as urine from a child, and the wound is red and tender, know that it is an artery: so hurry up, and place your finger for a long time, then remove your finger when the bleeding has stopped, which often happens; hold the arm still, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient; be afraid, and do not move until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the wound does not stop bleeding and it weakens you, and there is no medicine at hand, if the artery opens itself, due to its constriction; stop the bleeding of the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a piece of chestnut bark, and cut it, and take one half and bind it tightly to the other side; if it feels comfortable, that's good; if not, cure it with powders that stop blood, for the stoppages are not too grievous in many arrangements due to the small size of the wound, and its strength from the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The treatment of the vein in the middle is very beneficial if it stops blood from the top and from below, because it is composed of basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said; and the healer should wash himself by the nerve that is below, and if he does not clean it thoroughly, and finds the nerve, it swells and the healing is hindered, and perhaps it cannot heal; and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any person due to its subtlety, then it is necessary to use an antiseptic instrument; and be careful with the nerve in your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two bones, cut it from end to end.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The treatment for the head is to draw out the blood from the head, which helps the pain and promotes healing; it is beneficial to apply olive or myrtle flame, as this is the safest of all veins, as it does not contain any nerve or artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, it is advisable to seek the lightest joint, and do not be discouraged if it feels uncomfortable the first time, just try again; sometimes, the joints may swell up for some people when treated for the first time, but this should not cause concern.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the blood depends on your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about bloodletting is that it should only be done to preserve health and prevent future illnesses; and it should be performed through one of the three veins: the cephalic, femoral, or basilic. One should bleed a patient at the beginning of meals during summer and autumn after eating, when the sign of fullness appears; and it should be done on the first day or third day, after two or three hours.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	Bloodletting to treat illnesses does not have a specific time frame; it should be done as needed, at any hour and in all seasons. It is not advisable to bleed children under 12 years old or pregnant women for four weeks after childbirth until the seventh week.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	One should not consider the old, who have passed sixty years, as fully healed.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when anyone wishes to be healed, in whatever way possible, it is advisable to cleanse the intestines with a light enema if they have retained much feces, so that the veins do not draw out excessive and harmful impurities from the primary limbs; nor should one consider as cured those who are overly salty from meats or too dry, as long as it persists. After dealing with colic, vomiting, abdominal distension, frequent sexual activity, hard work, watching, fasting, and similar things, then carefully balance the humors, if they have accumulated excessively through foods, drinks, and medications; then enter a bath, if nothing prevents you from doing so, to purify the blood, and heal the veins from below towards the third hour, as we have said. And guard yourself that day against work, worry, luxury, and similar things; be relaxed and joyful, and consider yourself healthier than before, and rub your arms twice or three times, then gently press the ligament above its middle, for if it is too tight, it cannot heal itself; then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell and you can feel them. Afterwards, moisten the healing bandage with a little old oil, then place your left hand's finger on the vein below the joint that needs to be healed, so that the vein does not break or cause harm.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	Because there are veins that flow as if they were strings in the body, and if they are of a type that is plagued by pus, when flame is applied, it retreats from the flame, and cannot open the vein, thus one becomes affected; and if the vein is opened, the wound is too narrow, therefore it is necessary for the physician to be knowledgeable about these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens the first time, that is good; but if not, it must be tried again from a slightly different angle, or more gently, if the veins are not inflated.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the veins are inflated and the patient is afraid, let it be for one or two days without compression; perhaps it will form an abscess later. Do not immerse him in water; then resume treatment as it pleases you; and if the perforation is small, cut gently and subtly, lest you doubt that it does not bleed as much as you see, because of the pressure from this same perforation to all the flames straightening; and work a little more gently, so that the vein is inflated; for this happens often when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the vein inflated, do not immediately restart the healing process, but apply a little oil to it, as it lightens the body of blood, and the oil moves in this vein the substance that the oil possesses; and thus administer the oil in each wound that you close veins, to stop the flow of blood; and the same method is effective and beneficial when applied to the shoulder; then the blood thins and spreads when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if a large abscess forms, which often happens, especially when the vein is only slightly opened, act quickly and apply a wet sponge with hot oil or silk for an hour; it is important that you do this after the blood has drained from the vein, and if it remains in place after several days without turning black or green, it will not cause harm; and if you see any signs, apply aloe or myrrh mixed with calament juice, or similar substances.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there is an abscess and swelling in the holy basil: then place your hand upon it, and if you feel the joint soft under the pressure of your hand, this is a bad sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, be careful not to place anything on it that we have mentioned, for it may turn out to be without an artery; but make a dry plaster to harden the joint, then apply another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each case of pain according to the quantity of its strength and the colour of the pain.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the pain is sharp, let it be felt until it turns red; and if you see it swelling, let it continue to swell until it becomes smaller; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And for one who is strong and robust, and has the skill to extract blood, it is necessary to make a wider wound, with broader incisions; but for one who is weak, do the opposite, making a smaller, deeper wound, which should be healed more frequently and cautiously, cutting across, not into, to avoid damaging nerves, and this method of healing is safer from gangrene and nerve damage, and more effective than long or wide wounds.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And to him whose body is afflicted with sickness, it is necessary to give a moist mixture of pomegranate juice; if he is overheated, he should take three or four incisions and draw out the bad blood. And if he has a cold complexion, before the sickness, he should moisten his mouth with a syrup made from mused (or strained) grapes, or a syrup of aromatic honey with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and dates, and a well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he suffers from sickness, after the release of much blood, it is necessary that he inhale a mist of bread soup and fragrant syrup, and use other things as we have mentioned in the previous section or chapter on syncope for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to extend his arm and heal it later, as necessary, when it is weakened by much bloodletting, he should apply pressure little by little according to the amount of its ongoing strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wishes to extend their arm after the initial bloodletting and has a strong constriction, should apply pressure for seven hours after the first bloodletting, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wishes to heal from another direction should heal on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is much blood inside the body, which has already been heated, and it brings fever; so you must draw out a great quantity of it and widen the wound until it ceases to bleed; then, after fulfilling all the conditions for healing, place your hand on his pulse when he is well, that death may not come in its place, and this happens often when healing is neglected; and you must not, when you see the arm being released and blood coming out again, and the wound is closed, press hard on it; nor if it is curved, should you stretch the arm painfully, for that would be harmful; but leave it until it ceases to bleed a second time; or if there is fire at the tip of the wound, as long as the blood frozen in the vein does not come out, put a little string soaked in water on it and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is inflated, leave it alone and do not squeeze it until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it becomes necessary to drain the blood again due to the abscess, either in the same place or in another vein or arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthier in place of the vein in the head because it is composed differently.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the method of venipuncture is that the patient should hold his hand in hot water until the veins are red, then bind it lightly so that the vein appears well, but not too wide or too long; and the puncture should be near the joint of the hand, and if the blood does not come out, return the hand to hot water and let the blood flow in the water until you have enough; and if this is done, do not pull the hand back into hot water because it is put under more heat than necessary; and this vein is safer of all veins, as there are no arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The healer of the salvation of the right hand is good for all diseases of the soul, and this is the manner: stretch out the hand, and immerse it in hot water until the vein is filled, if you can see it; and if the wound is across, and you cut it with everything completely, then nothing should disturb you; do not make too much effort, for the nerves are all bare of flesh, and then put the hand back into hot water, if the cold has frozen in the wound, and it cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as best you can, then apply oil and silk to seal the wound tightly, and do so for each person.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The healthy person holds the mouse with their left hand for the benefit of the sore on the right side, and does it just as I told you for the left side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The sage of the soul holds the body against all diseases that affect the skin, such as marital diseases, retention of flowers, diseases of the kidneys, and old legs and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of his health is that the patient drinks warm water and rubs the vein until it disappears, binding it over the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and goes much towards the toes from above the foot; so, when healthy, one should use a wider bandage or one around the ankle, depending on what is more effective.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you apply this to a sore foot, take care to protect the toes that are exposed, and massage it gently as if you were rubbing; and the pain should lessen.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	If the pain cannot be relieved, immerse the foot in water and let the vein drain completely.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	If the treatment needs to be repeated, do so a little higher each time, because the nerve ends are salty; do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and follow the same procedure for the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein's lion is at the foot's joint, and its pus causes pain in the hip when it is hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its pus is such that the patient feels pain in the bath, and strains from the foot, three or four times by twisting, because otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, wash it in all ways as well as you can, and pass a hand through; and move it gently, for the lion is safe, and it is much relieved by many hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not clean it, no rain of pus will open on the back or side of the foot, towards the little toe, and be careful not to hurt; and make sure to clean the pus as well as you can, then loosen the bandage, put cotton on it, and tighten it; now it is healed.
des sainies de ventouse	from the suction cup treatments
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Suction cups are made of horns, or wire, or glass; and the suction is created in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	This non-invasive suction method is performed in two ways: either using heat or without heat; and it involves 12 different locations on the body: on the top of the head, in the middle of the chest, on both sides of the chest, under the jaw, on both shoulders, on both legs, on both ankles, and on both wrists. This type of suction does not involve pricking any blood vessels, only small ones scattered throughout the skin, and it should not be applied to any part of the body that has recently been filled (e.g., with food or drink), as it could weaken the patient, just like with a vein treatment; nor should it be performed with excessive heat or cold, under any condition.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if by necessity of illness or habits, it is necessary to open the veins every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and each time; for there are such who, when they need to open a vein, have a heavy head; and those who experience swelling and redness on their face, and on their head, and on their neck, and darkness as well; and such who experience a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and bleed; and there are those who dream, and see red blood and nausea and pain and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially in the middle of the month, we order the vein to be opened after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The physician of the body should aid in the treatment of the pain in the head... that comes from the joints, and it is not appropriate to do so after evacuating all the body; this ventilation is for the health of the brain, and it is not appropriate for those of cold complexion, or who have scrofula, for their condition brings them much harm; therefore the elderly should not use it, nor those with a cold head disease.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who have successfully treated it often become forgetful, and for this reason, a cup should be placed a little lower in doubt of oblivion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation of the chest is beneficial for the health of the heart and basilic, and therefore it causes constriction of the pis (probably refers to the urethra or a specific organ) and opening of the channel of the penis, and in general, and repletion (possibly refers to an abdominal condition). It needs to be done carefully, as if it grips too tightly, it can cause harm to the stomach and body.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	Ventilation of the chest between the ribs brings relief from head pain, eye aches, migraines, strangulation, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and is beneficial for the health of the heart and basilic. It is important that you instruct the patient to gently place their hand on the area, avoiding pressure on the artery, to prevent complications such as bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The inflammations of the jaw are beneficial for mouth diseases, and the corruption of gums, and similar ailments in the mouth; it is located in the health of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Inflammations of the shoulders are beneficial for diseases that arise from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	Inflammations of the veins are just as beneficial as three large veins in the arm, because they attract blood from these thick veins; and instruct the patient not to compress them too tightly, as the vein is bare of flesh, and knows how to drain and contract.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup that is on the rump is as valuable for drawing blood from the depths and for treating internal ailments, and it should be large and made of iron, so that it can extract effectively; and if it is too thin, it may break and cause great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups on the legs close tightly as they draw blood from throughout the body, and they are effective against chronic pains in the joints, back, bladder, and kidneys; they remove inflammation, and are located on the two hips, two ankles, but after long use, they weaken the body and cause numbness in various parts.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying a vacuum is as follows: you should first apply it when it is empty, and suck gently, then place it firmly and move it equally, without ceasing to do so until you see the skin red and swollen, and open the veins; afterwards, remove the cups, and take care with the condition of the skin, for there are those who have very thick and others who have very thin skin: only apply once, make wide incisions, and make them quite deep; suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the vein is thick, it is necessary to pierce twice: first to open the path of the thick blood vein.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the pain is very sharp, it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we want to draw out blood little by little, we suffice with only one strike.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want a lot of blood, we must often strike; and if the pain is sharp, by striking well, we reach the end so that the veins are suddenly pierced; it is suitable for those who have thick and hard skin, and who have hairy pores, to apply oil to the suction cups: if it be violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or oil of pumpkin seeds; and if it be in winter, parsley oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or another similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, take amber oil, or balsam, or donkey oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if anyone has a skin that is tight and has small pores, it is not necessary to put oil on it, but rather wash it after the application of rosewater, or cold water, or water from the morelle tree, or water from the cucumber, or porcelain water, or any similar water.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those with excessive moisture, let them rise from it using myrrh water, and sumac, and similar substances.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have great superfluities should rise from old wine, or holy water, or a decoction of nettle or chamomile, or others like them; and one should not use a vacuum before the bath or after, but rather an hour or two after the bath; and one should not sleep after the vacuuming, and it is necessary for him to wash himself when he needs to be vacuumed and when he has been vacuumed.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And be careful that those who are being healed have no anger or too much heat; it is necessary for them to apply cold things like pomegranates, endives, lettuce, and similar things; and eat little, and drink chestnut wine, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And he who has a cold complexion, should drink syrup of honey and fragrant wine, which is neither too old nor too new, and eat small amounts, and small birds and pigeons; and on the day that he takes the wind, he must drink more than he eats; and it is appropriate to give any man at any time triacle or musk before or after ventilating, in order to strengthen the principal limbs; but it is not right for those who are hot to consume it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The poultices that are applied without causing harm are those placed on the liver, and the spleen, and podagra, and the belly and the bowels and the kidneys and the hips, for these members do not tolerate being harmed in any way; they are only applied to draw blood from one member to another, as we place poultices on the breasts when a child is born; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we apply poultices to the belly and bowels to reduce a swollen member; and it removes pain when there is congestion or a stone, for it may by its attractive virtue draw away the congestion or dislodge the stone from its place; and thus it works when applied to the liver and spleen when there is retained wind, and these poultices are prepared empty to suck up only, and never hot, nor mixed with cold water, as in cases where there are tears of pain, and in such a way one fills the poultice with hot water or water in which suitable herbs have been cooked.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the cup (ventouse) administered by fire is this:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	It should have a width of two and a half palm lengths, and on one side, near the center, it should have a small hole, as large as to fit an needle, and be made of metal, smooth so as not to hurt the patient when placed on the body; and in its middle, there should be a crossbar of metal, either iron or steel, to hold a cloth grip, and their sizes vary according to the illness and age of those who use them; for the cup size for children is different from that for adults, and for thin people it's smaller than for fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one should thus place this suction cup over the member: take the wax or linen cloth and put it through the hole in the suction cup, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the cup to not burn the patient; then place it over the member, and your fingers should be on the opening we have mentioned, so that when you look, the vapour goes out, and remove the suction cup; and take up the linen cloth as before, and repeat often if needed.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the case of the suction cup used to treat pleurisy, or any acute condition, it has no hole or opening, and is only effective when it is completely full of water, and is placed over the member only then; its shape is as follows:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Without wounds that cannot be treated with poultices due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar ones; and in the case of wounds devoid of flesh, like those of a dog or a cat, or others similar; and regarding the condition of the patient, if you find poultices on clean, fresh wounds without putrefaction, take them off; place them in fresh water until they become moist, and then treat with vein and poultice, rubbing the member until it turns red, and apply the poultices again; and when they start to hurt and swell, if it is a wound that can be treated with a poultice, apply one, as this helps greatly.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If the limb does not rise easily from the wound, first soak it well in water and then wring it; and if the wounds are still infected after removing the poultices, moisten a linen cloth in cold water and place it on top, until the swelling subsides; and if the swellings multiply, put on vitriol or gall, or similar substances, until they subside; or you can use the half of peeled beans, leaving them on the wound until they harden, which will also help. If you need more, take other poultices.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the veins do not want to be taken, so rub the fresh blood vein with a needle until the vein opens, and then place them back, and soon as they feel the blood, they will contract; and when you see that they are squeezing, sprinkle some alum and fine silk powder or ash on it, and they will stop.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book on fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, for the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that the wise men of this treatise, who have dedicated themselves to it, have discovered things from this chapter that have never been seen in any ancient book, nor read in letters; and for this reason the knowledge has become strange in our land, because I have never found anything good about it, and know nothing of it, except through the study of ancient books, where I have dedicated myself so much that I have treated the science, and by experience, and through the habit of my life; and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and abridged it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments used, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore appropriate that we begin this book with a prologue that explains the essence of its teachings and the chapters where the wise apply their understanding, focusing on truth, so that those who study it gain knowledge and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when fracture, dislocation, or torsion comes to any part, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on both sides, if nothing else helps, such as weakness of the body, illness, or old age; or if the temperature is very close, or too cold. Avoid cold things like cold baths, and food from goose and hazelnut, and do not drink wine, nor consume any greasy foods, and do not fill yourself too much with meats that fill the veins, until you have no doubt of an abscess becoming hot, or of material spreading in the member; then the patient returns to his former state as if he had never suffered.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the patient be fed foods that do not cause excessive gas or thickness, such as cooked wheat in water, and laughter, and beans, and pressure, and goat's stomach, and offal, and oysters, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For part of the healing process, movement reoccurs and more often the fracture occurs again.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that old and brittle bones cannot heal or fuse together properly according to their nature due to the stiffness of the members, nor can those that are too tender, such as the bones of young children; however, don't worry, hold onto the broken bone with strong grips that connect the member together, as much as it did before, and don't touch its entire length, and for this reason, it is necessary to nourish with substantial foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures vary in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	Because the fracture from the top is different from the fracture from the bottom, of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all manner of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another when sharpening, just like the edge of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a very small split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each manner has its own mechanism and proper tool for restoration, according to the memory of the place; and the fracture of the bone is known because the limb is twisted, and it opens well under pressure, and sounds when pressed by the hand; and when there is no twist or crack or slight fracture, but only a curve or split or minor fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you do not intend to move it with your hand, but instead apply remedies that will follow, and then gently hold it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the fracture which goes up in an arc, and are the two disjointed parts, they must now be set evenly, so that abscesses do not appear; and if hot abscesses come, it should not stay for any length of time until the abscess is calmed; then set it evenly with gentle and wise pressure, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restorations of where there are broken pieces; then hold it as it should be after this.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if a bone is broken into pieces, and it is dislocated from two parts, whether it is the hand or foot, or some small member, or two tendons, or a tendon and your hand, then place the member according to its natural position; so that when the parts of the broken member are brought together, rearrange all the additions in their proper places as much as you can, and be careful not to cause the patient further injury or pain with your work, and adjust both sides of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And if you feel that the hand is not well positioned, then carefully adjust it, and do not tighten it too much or press down as those who cause abscesses and contractions in the member with their work have done many times before.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is completely numb, be very careful not to move it, neither awake nor asleep, nor when turning, or in any other way; and ensure that the limb is securely held so that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when it feels no pain, it is only completely numb, and you must put it in a position where it feels no pain; and be careful that it is placed correctly, so that no twist comes as it heals; and the quality of the damaged limb will depend on what I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	You should know that the damaged limb can be of different sizes, both small and large, and of various shapes.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Because it has small members, as arms and legs and similar ones: you need to wrap them in soft and thin linen; and those that are larger, like the thigh or leg: you need to wrap them in a wide and firm ligature, for wide ligatures embrace the entire large member and tighten it equally from all sides so there is no movement; then tie softer bands loosely around it, three turns or four depending on the member, and gently tighten your hand over the ligature, then go above the break and tighten less, allowing the break to slightly pull away; gradually soften the ligature little by little, pressing hard enough into the healthy part until you feel satisfaction, then take another ligature and wrap it around the broken place; return to the other side of the break and tighten it moderately, neither too tight nor too loose, as we have said in the first chapter above; then insert between the compressed bands soft linen or cloth, ensuring they are even, then tie everything above with a bandage, and afterwards place your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is an inflammation or abscess, apply a soothing heat to it, which reduces the swelling, and leave it thus for several days; then strain your eyes, and make them half the width of a large needle, sharp, or of wood used for making knives, or of palm leaves, according to this figure.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the thread placed on the break be slightly thicker and wider than the others; and also as long as required for the member, whether small or large; then tighten the threads as you did in the first layer, and tie a thin thread over it, as in the first layer on the break; tighter afterwards, less tight; and the thread should be of medium thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft flax; because if the thread is thick, like those who make their bindings from twisted flaxen strings, this is a great error, for the binding cannot be even if it is too fine, and it does not suit that there be less space between each thread.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is annoyed by the joints of the stars after dislocating them into their sockets, he should place soft cloth or other bandage over them so that they do not hurt.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by a fracture and the veins are broken, I will describe the treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not appropriate to dislocate all the stars of the broken members on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the members are large, it is not appropriate to put stars too soon, but after 5 or 7 days, or more according to your judgment of the hot swelling coming; and here is the ancient method of pastes for restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsions: take flour that clings to the walls of the mill, mix it with plenty of egg, and make this paste, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it; this is the common way of the paste that restores fractures in many positions, especially with women and small children, because it is neither too hard nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way to make a plaster that restores fractures and dislocations and twists: take equal parts of bear's fat, lard, ointment, henna, gum arabic, myrrh, aloe, ales (a type of spice), and powder them; mix with egg albumen. If the patient's constitution is hot, use this plaster, as it is a good composition and restores broken bones effectively, benefiting many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another plaster for twists: take myrrh and calamine, in parts X; mirre (myrrh) and aloe, in parts 9; akebia (a plant) in parts 6; Armenian bole (a mineral pigment), in parts X; grind well and mix with water or egg albumen, then apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another way to splint joints and straighten bones out of their place, easing the pain that comes with it, and using bandages on the bone, and splints: take a new cloth, moisten it in hot water and oil, and wrap it around the joint.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Cyst splints do not restore, but they are good for easing hot abscesses and properly removing pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to splint broken bones: take dry fig leaves and terrestrial pavon leaves, grind them together, and make a paste.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of plastering to restore the broken bone and thus lessen the pain of the wound.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take the root of chamomile, fennel flower, violets, and chickpea flour, each in equal parts; grind them and mix with wine, applying this to the affected member, which should be heated beforehand. Alternatively, mix it with fresh coriander water or water alone and apply it as needed.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another stronger method of plastering when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of alder, and flaxseed, and balm, and melilot, and fennel, and violet flowers, and chamomile, from each in equal parts; grind them fine, and prepare a paste with strong salt water, or fresh water, or wine, according to the warmth of the affected part, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates writes in his book that to restore a dislocated member, one should not use anything but a paste made of wax and oil, and nothing else; it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen states that to restore a dislocated member, one should apply things that are dry but slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar substances, as we have mentioned.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of plastering that is useful for injuries and pain: take moss and sheep's wool, or feathers from an eye, or fur, and cut them equally, and crush them, and make a paste from them and bind it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, a little later, release it gently and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; if, however, by releasing it, there is pain, or itching, or swelling, then hurry up and remove the plaster immediately, and take a light cloth, and a moist sponge from the sea, and dip it in water, and gently lift the skin until the itching stops and the pain is soothed. Then let the member rest for an hour, and apply a dry cloth, moistened with water or rose oil, and bind it tightly, as you are certain of the hot abscess; and thus relieve the swelling in the affected limb, and the pain will disappear. Then continue the process gently, with less plaster, and do not tighten it so much as before; apply it delicately until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is red, swollen, painful, and filled with pus, and you need to apply a poultice and bind it, then repeat this just as you did at first.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	If the limb shows no improvement after what we have said for three, four, five, or seven days—and never lets it heal for twenty days, as is often seen until the fracture is healed and alignment towards recovery begins—then tighten the bandage more than before and fatten the flesh, as I mentioned earlier. If you notice that drying out the limb is unnecessary, then immediately apply warm water each time you loosen the bandage, every third day, and leave it slightly moist. By this means, slowly heal the limb, and avoid the harmful practices of foolish healers who cause further damage by applying treatments incorrectly. It is bad, and such errors are very dangerous; I see nothing else but to give up and do it right.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various methods of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many methods of fractures, with various shapes and distinct causes; for there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, where the bone breaks completely through to the other side, as if cut with a hatchet or axe; and because of this, this type of fracture is called "haichure.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or, the sword may cut through the bone without actually piercing it, and this is called a "complete" fracture; and this type of wound can range from severe to minor.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a shock or compression, or a cut from stone, or from falling on stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a recent fracture, which extends just to the skin covering the bone, or it is on the bone itself, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound that is healed in the bone is as subtle as a hair, and the fracture is small, it is called a capillary fracture; and if the wound is caused by hitting with stone, or falling from a height, or similar, and the bone fragment enters deeply, and the edges of the bone are frayed like the edges of a potter's wheel when they shape pots, then between the bone and the stone.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this occurs more often in those with moist bones in their head, such as a child's head; and it happens in all these ways of fracture that small pieces are dislocated, just as if they were broken; and I will speak of it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all the ways of fractures by pulling on them, and inquiry at their joints, and by corrupt flesh above them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of the fracture is recognized because when we have discovered the bone and rubbed it thoroughly, the black fracture opens up.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fractures, be cautious regarding complications with the patient, and if you notice any ill omens, such as vomiting, loss of consciousness, extension or stiffness, pale skin, ague fever, or other similar symptoms appearing in various combinations, then it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any alarming complications and hope for a recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the fracture presents itself to you, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the injury.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if this happens, if you hastily remove the bone on the seventh day, so that the wound under the bone is corrupted, then the complications arise as we have said.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone reaches the tissue that covers the brain, it is necessary to split the fractured part in this way: you must pierce the head of the patient with pain, and expose the bone in all ways possible, and tenderly uncover the wound when the pus has come to light, or an abscess at its base, if there is help for it, and fill the cavity with moist gauze soaked in rose oil; then allow the wound to rest until the abscess has subsided, and be assured of the absence of further pus. Then begin to remove the bone, and this must be done according to two methods: one method is to make a narrow cut directly in front, and this is its form...
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I choose another treatment even greater than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have many different shapes, some with pointed ends and others wide, all made of indestructible iron; and when in use, do not damage the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and dense, it is necessary that you make an incision around it, so that you can insert the correct size of the tool, not allowing the tip to go beyond the soft part of the bone, and there should be a margin or a circle on top of the point to prevent it from piercing through; and you need many different ones, so that each fits perfectly with the thickness of the bone, making them suitable for all bones; and this is the form of the three types of tools:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality to percé the broken bone is that you apply pressure on it, and return to your task as long as you know the bone is pierced; then place the pressure elsewhere a little later, and do this all around, then cut with incisions the space between the gaps of the bone, and do so as delicately as possible, gently, while still holding the bone in your hand or with any tool you have such as pliers or pincers, and be careful not to touch the brain nor the soft tissues.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And once you have pierced and treated the bone, it is necessary that you observe the tension that remains from the bone to all other similar tools like an incisore, but it should be more delicate and subtle than the others; and if it holds onto any small bones or scales, gently remove them with the appropriate instrument; then dress the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another way of working is that which Galen says, which is safer; it is very strong, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary that you uncover a part of the bone, either where it is broken open or clearly visible, so when you have uncovered this part, you will place the edge of this curved scalpel beneath it, whose shape is as follows:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, but the sharp part should be on the opposite side to the bone; then gently tap with a small hammer so that you slightly lift the bone around it, and be very careful of the tissue beneath; if it is separated from the bone, gently lift it, for it can be easily damaged without great harm or pain.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not reach the skin, and the bone is only cut from above, and there are small fragments, then it is necessary to clean that roughness again, and remove the scales with a delicate rasp, of which you must have various quantities, in order to make each one as suitable as possible, according to the severity and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you encounter great rasps, and then more subtle ones, continue doing this until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other haircuts and subtle fractures, it is necessary to adjust according to their location; and this is something that cannot be fully answered to anyone who has devoted themselves to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if it pleases him to uncover, you must then press a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it with rose oil, and place it over the wound; then take another cloth, doubled in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth; do this as lightly as possible so as not to harm the wound, and administer another bandage above, without straining it too tightly until it only touches the wound; leave it thus for a day or two, until the abscess is calmed, then remove it, and apply medicines such as lion's root, flour of grain, incense powder, and similar things; make a powder from these, and place it over the wound, and administer foreign remedies without cauterization. And ensure that the wound remains clean, and do not leave any dressing or bowing on it, because when bowing accumulates on the soft flesh, it corrodes and hurts the patient, and brings great harm to him, for when a sharp object is placed over the skin, it causes damage.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, if no bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if darkness comes not from the medicine that has been put upon it, but to show its virtue, you should press a part of honey and three parts of rose oil mixed with a cloth on the sick; then cure it in a manner befitting the cure, until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	You should know that the two parts of the bone above are never broken, either entirely or only one by one, for they are two bones; and the inner part is cartilage, which does not break, but only bends or twists, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you insert your small finger or index finger through the gap, and place the same fracture in your index finger, and press gently, until the joint returns to its natural position; do this carefully, and be sure that the patient feels no pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the joint and the fingers cannot be moved to their normal position, it is necessary that you place a thin stick at the top of the joint.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the fracture is in both parts, do as I have said before, and try to restore it on the first day if you can; if not, after the seventh or fifth day, when the swelling has subsided, then place thin linen strips over the joint, if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or turn to another place, if it is broken, and make the splints so thick that they fill the gaps in the neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say that no restoration is required; the splints must be moistened with butter and changed each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I do not think this is good, but it is necessary that they be moistened with a mixture of egg and flour powder; then leave the splints, as long as the bones are hard and the cartilage stiff.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never burn the skin with hot pens or feathers on different parts, and if it stings the wound, holds the break, and blows air into it; or do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses form at the incision site while you are treating them, apply a poultice or moist cotton in rose oil or in a small vial of dung.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses do not form, apply a paste from spelt flour and incense powder, candied with egg albumen, then place light bandages on top and do not tie the skin; and if the rupture in the skin is small and broken into tiny pieces, extract them with suitable instruments, then clean the wound with hot things like char and cautery, and apply suitable bandages and poultices until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	from the dislocation of the mandible
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the mandible is dislocated and there is no external wound, and the fracture is only slightly displaced, not broken into two parts, but only crooked inside, then it can be corrected gently.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is in the right side, you should insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is on the left mandible, insert your index finger from your right hand, gently push the fracture inside, and with the other hand pull it outward to make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is severe in two places, you must then administer extension to the second part, as long as it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movement of the teeth occurs, or rupture, by applying tension with a golden or silver thread or silk, then place cerate on the broken jaw and cover it with a double cloth; put the cloth on a large, equally shaped piece of leather or hide according to the size of the mandible, and secure it with ties as you can, and command the patient to rest and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you notice that the shape changes, after the third day, remove the plaster and then put it back again as it was changed; apply plaster made of finely ground powder or sesame flour after removing the cerate; add a thin layer of the plaster, and if the plaster hardens, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until it heals; it often heals in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess appears, it is necessary to do as we have often said.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is both a fracture and a wound together, the treatment should not remove any part of the bone that is broken; it is necessary to use suitable instruments for this purpose.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, open it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And once you have removed all these pieces and nothing remains, if the wound is wide, close it with suitable bandages to prevent infection, until it heals.
de la forcele	from the strength
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The force can break in several ways, directed towards the shoulder, and these breaks occur in three manners: it may be broken and dislocated into two parts, with fragments, and is easiest to restore; or there is a break with an accompanying wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And if the task is when the break occurs without a wound, you will need two assistants: one should hold the limb with the broken strength; the other should stretch the collar towards the affected area; then, equalize the fracture in your hands, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is no visible or palpable deformity.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to further extend it, place a round spear of cloth or wool beneath the shoulder of the patient, as thick as needed; stretch and ease the tension, hold the spear in your hand, and make sure the break is even, as required.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the muscle away from the deep side, because it is attached completely, then the patient should lie on their side with the dislocated shoulder below, and have a helper press the shoulder upwards, until the bone of the muscle is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then grab the break with your fingers and if you feel any debris, it is alright to cut; gently pull the pieces apart, and if the bone cannot join together despite your best efforts, place a tool beneath the muscle on one of the incisions you made earlier to achieve the desired effect.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and it looks like a spoon, and is not broken, and is as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and it has two parts, as you see, one wide, and the other narrow, just as the break in the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are certain of a hot abscess, if you cut the wound deeply, or if the break is small, then you doubt a hot abscess, if you cover the wound with bandages and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if abscesses appear, then moisten the bandages with rose oil and wool and wine, and place them on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The binding of the bone, when it has wounds or cuts, is to place on the bone a plaster of fine-milled powdery and egg white, and lay light stoppers above, and insert a spike under the armpit if necessary; then take a very wide bandage, one palm length wide, and place the double cloth over the stoppers and plaster; next, take a thin steel rod three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the top of the bandage is hanging; place the steel on the fracture, and turn the bandage back over the collarbone, and under the healthy and sick shoulders; rearrange each part, and as often as you see that the plaster holds well on the broken bone, and you clearly see that the steel does not move upon it, reward it each day, and when the bandages loosen, tighten them again; place the patient on his back, and while he sleeps, insert a small pillow under the armpit to raise the dislocated limb; if this lightens the fracture by aligning the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and no ill accidents happen for twenty days, then reapply the plaster if needed, tighten it, and leave it thus until it is healed; it is healed in no more than 28 days, and less so for no man.
de la brisure de l’espaule	from the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	If the shoulder is dislocated, it does not return to its place, and can only be held in place by touch; if you put it back according to the shape of the dislocation and restore it to its natural form in every way possible, then sprinkle a little fine powder on it with plenty of egg yolk and cover it lightly, and then wrap it in a double cloth; then place a wide and thin plate over it, slightly larger than the shoulder, and fasten it firmly so that the plate does not move from its place, and check it every day. Whenever it becomes looser, tighten it again, and if the plate is out of place, put it back gently, and let the patient lie on his side. The shoulder can be restored in 10 or 25 days, and when this time is up, release it carefully, for it is not a bone that returns easily to its place.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone sticks out and does not come out easily, cut it with a knife and do what we have said to soothe the hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	from the fracture of the worst abscess
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The fracture never occurs in the middle, but seldom; but it often breaks at the extreme.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is fractured in the middle, it declines and sticks out, causing the patient great pain and injury, without any relief, and sometimes bleeds, opening up the wound in the broken bone, and feels much better.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back, and puts a cushion between their shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and brings together the ribs with both hands, and subtly adjusts them in all ways as appropriate, so that the shape of the bone is correct; then apply poultices and compresses over the gentle salt or other light bandage, and wrap it in a cloth, binding it to the broken bone so that it does not move; and tighten the bandage regularly on the back, adjusting it closely, and changing the dressing every hour, and if it becomes soft, tighten it; and if it needs to be loosened due to erosion or itching that occurs at the site, or pain or abscess, act quickly, loosen it, remove the poultice, and address the cause of the problem. Then reapply the poultice and tighten it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	from the fracture of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	You know that the fracture of ribs only occurs in the upper back and at the top, and they do not bend unless they are broken; and this causes great pain to anyone touching them.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is such that you set the fracture back in place as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply the plaster, and bind it with a stick, if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining inward, it causes the patient to feel very great pain, as if from crying, because the bone pierces the flesh; and also weakness in the limbs, and at times, he vomits much blood, which is a sign of grave illness, and the old ones have put much effort into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And for those who say it is appropriate to administer foods that cause bloating in the stomach to drive out the fracture from within.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make any effort if hot abscesses do not come, unless they have already appeared.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, if the healthy [one].
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say none of you should place suction cups over the joint for it forms a vacuum, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt that the suction cup may draw away the superfluities from the joint due to the weakness of the constitution.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say none of you should cover the joint with moist wool soaked in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to even out the space around it, then apply treatment for pleurisy, flesh, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure through the bone where the wound is, then doubt arises in the patient; it is necessary to cut into the broken rib cage, and place an instrument to stop the bleeding; and then one must cut the bone, pull gently, and sew together the two edges of the wound if it is large, and treat it with poultices until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses appear, place moistened oil-soaked rags on them and apply heat; treat the affected area while the heat is on the abscess, and lay the patient comfortably on their side where it hurts, until they are healed.
de la brisure dou col	from the fracture of the collarbone
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No fracture occurs to the collarbone bone at any time, and rarely does it happen that it rains; likewise, to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will recover, be wary if you see their hands becoming soft, swollen, and dead, and they cannot move or extend them, and if you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Knowing that it is dangerous in many ways, if the patient is mute and feels nothing when you press or touch them, know that the joint of the bone is safe, and the illness will be cured if treated properly.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if similar things happen to the spine of the back, and you need to know if it is healthy or not, take care if the feet are weak, and if there are accidents in the hands, and on the back there is an involuntary venting and ejection; and when it is remembered on the belly, there is also an involuntary ejection.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is remembered on the back and he wants to sit down, he cannot do so.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Knowing that it is deadly: therefore, do not labor in its cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not occur, then the matter is more delicate.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that if there is a hot abscess, you apply warm rose or egg oil to it until it is soothed; then place a comfortable and drying plaster on top and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on the affected area where the pain is felt, until it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is displaced, it should be covered with a bandage; then the bone is reduced, and the two edges of the wound, if large, are sewn together with stitches, then treated with an ointment, as described above, until it is healed; and if the fragment of bone is broken off, which is called the 'fragment of the joint', one should press it gently with their left hand, and place it back in its original position with the other hand, then apply the plaster and dressing, as needed; then fasten it, and if any bones are still out of place, reduce them, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	From the fracture of the bone of the spine.
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	If the bone of the spine is fractured, and there is not even a little reduction in the size at the site, it causes pain, swelling, and inflammation at the place of the fracture.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it, as long as you are above the fracture; and know what the fracture is and its shape; and if the fracture is only at the top, then make an equal fracture, as long as it retains its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, it will bend inward, so lay the patient on his stomach until the restoration of this fracture becomes visible.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, place a splint on it, then put a piece of wood or hard cloth over it and hold the fracture still, so that it does not move, and apply heat from the other side of the ribs until the bone is aligned.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess appears and is not touched, it should be calmed down until the abscess is healed, and then apply what we have previously mentioned; and then return to restoration, tightening it as appropriate, if there is no adverse event; this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	dislocation of the shoulder joint
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The aid (or joint) is located between the shoulder blade and the top of the shoulder, and if it is dislocated, it should be restored using one of two methods: one involves taking a thick stick of moderate length, shaped as follows:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And he should hold the two feet, and pull them up, and place the patient on one side; then throw his broken arm over the leg, until it becomes relaxed, and put a strap of wood around it, then stretch it with any heavy object that the attendant holds below; then take both hands and make equal pressure on the break, until it returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And another method is that we place the patient on his back, and tie his hands to his neck, then command the attendants to one hold what is above the break on his hand, and the other hold below every joint, and extend them each according to their part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that extraction is too forceful, tighten the ligature around the fracture, and on the fracture, extend each of the ministers to their respective parts.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the shoulder joint, it is necessary to place a ligature halfway under the acromion, and another towards the neck, underneath the fracture; and if the fracture is on the side of the neck, a light ligature without strain should be applied as long as the fracture remains level on the bone, then the dislocation should be reset properly and secured, without complications.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an abscess forms again after it has been extracted, do not press it for seven days; place a moist cloth soaked in rose oil on the wound until the abscess subsides; then extract it by applying a splint to the fracture, assembling the arm onto the shoulder or chest, and placing your hand on the shoulder or breast; and apply pressure to the dislocated joint and arm so that the arm is at rest, unless something prevents it or the bone does not move.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	If you doubt that the bone does not move and use splints, place a wider and stronger splint on the fracture, ensuring there is a distance of two lengths between each splint, and making sure each splint extends three lengths beyond the fracture; then press on the splints as I have said at the beginning of this chapter regarding the fracture, with greater force and less spacing.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the position of the stars and the constriction, as we have said, when you return the broken member to its place, and you doubt the heat of the abscess, leave it bound for up to seven days, as we have said; then every three days, check the binding, that no swelling or pain appears, so that the healing can come to the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If it is necessary, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accident occurs, and you do not loosen the binding for three days or more, then let the patient sleep on their back with their hands on their stomach; place a soft cushion under the dislocated limb, equally covered in wool, and check it every hour of the day and night to ensure the limb does not move or the binding becomes slack. If it is treated by medical means and given food as we have described above, then when it begins to heal, it will be better.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the joint and leg should be taken up again after forty days, and then one must dislocate and apply baths and medicinal oils to correct the position.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the contraction is severe and painful, it may take several days or even months to dislocate.
de la brisure du bras	of the dislocation of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fossa", one of which is small and follows the direction of the pocket, and the other is large and is located beneath the smaller bone; so it is possible that only the large fossa breaks, or only the small one, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, their restoration and healing is quick; but when large ones are broken, the healing is slow, and more painful than when they were broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the small bones that are broken, then it is sufficient to extend them slightly and align them evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large bones, then it is necessary to pull stronger; place them on a pillow, and position the palm of the hand higher than the others, and the small bones lower than the others, and let the patient cross their arms on themselves, with the pillow in front of them higher than the patient's arm, so that they do not experience any strain. Then have another assistant extend their arm to the side opposite the affected hand, and another to the top.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then set it level, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture each piece is set in its place, and if there is none that grasps the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place by doing as we have said above, then you must cut the bone and reset it.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in a specific chapter; then take the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of restoration there appear abscesses, then I apply a bandage made of rose oil and white wax, not too hard or too soft, and wrap it subtly around, until the abscesses at the beginning are calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the plaster, and apply the pouderous plaster of fine grain with enough egg, then place the needles, making the needle from the break even stronger, and a little wider than the others; know that it should have six needles or more on each arm in various positions: whether the break is in one bone or two; tighten over the break more than elsewhere, but not too far away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and make the cloths covering the break soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and let the thread used to bind it be made of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the ligament after no days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if no bad accident comes to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then you should immerse the member in hot water until the itching is soothed; and let the member not be tightly restrained at rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then repeat the tightening, and if the ligaments loosen and the bone deviates, or any similar thing, address it accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the tightening prevents any relief to the member, because it is too tight, then you should loosen it slightly and leave it for a few days until the swelling goes down, and then tighten it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said help the patient, then he should be released from restriction for twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	If uncertain, tie the hands to the chest, ensuring the collarbones are even, and guard against movement and digitation, and have him sleep on his back. Know that this fracture is healed in thirty days or forty-five days, or perhaps in twenty days, according to the combinations and complexities of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	You know that on the back of the hand and between the fingers there often occur small fractures, and it brings nothing but pain many times over.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary for the patient to cut across the injured area, and hold it straight in front of him equally; then he places his hand on a flat surface, and extends the broken bones with the help of assistants, making them even and well-joined; and applies a plaster and bandages if there are no abscesses, and wraps it with a linen cloth according to the size.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is in the vicinity of the stomach of the plant, make a ball of cloth, and instruct the patient to press it against the fractured part; then take a long strip of cloth, and wrap it around with great care, also making the heart-shaped piece as large as the palm of the hand, and tighten it, as needed.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the open air, you must place a piece of wood above and another beneath the part that is fractured, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand, and stop the bleeding between them.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if any fracture occurs to any of our bones, it is the fractures, if they are put in place correctly; and tighten it with the palm, and if you see that putting a small, straight bar does not raise the fracture, and it does not move; and if the fracture is in other joints, like in the finger or one of the others, if it is put in place equally, and tie it to the healthy joint that follows; or tie them all together, as you hold, or put a bar on top, just as with the bone; and be careful in the restoration and arrangement of the hot abscess, and help those who come to it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	de la cuisse brisie" translates directly from Old French to "of
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The foot's bone is often broken, and one can clearly see it when it returns to its place in front or behind; its restoration is done by binding it tightly over the break, and on the other side.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then extends each limb equally to both sides; this is when the break is between the bones.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the foot, one tie should be around the ankle, and the other tie should be below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And also if it is close to the knee, then the ligaments of the knee should be loosened and the extension below; then place the splint so that the bone is equal in both hands, as much as its natural shape, and then apply the plaster and tie it, so the joint does not move.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside, then return to your work and treatment; the bandage is made in this way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap around the fracture a hard bandage doubled in two or three, and remove the excess, then turn the leg until the heels reach the root of the toe, and insert a long thread between the calf and the leg, below the knee, and bring the end up over the top; then turn again on the leg and calf the bandage, then place the splint with stars, and put a star on the bone of the leg; then use the eighth part of cloth between the leg and the calf to make equal compression, then start binding in three turns or four on the splint; and as you go higher on the splint, less tighten it; then take the two threads that you have inserted between the leg and the calf, and bind three stars that are above, then return to the bottom with the thread, until you reach below the foot; and tighten it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that nothing comes, no abscess or swelling or anything similar.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, and he dislocates it, and turns to what comes next, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that stick, it is necessary, if possible, to pull them out, and if not, it is necessary to break the joint and extract it firmly; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never should the leg be broken in this way with staples, as is done in the case of the arm; however, this restoration does not benefit the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the leg is restored in 7 days, or slightly less or slightly more, depending on the diversity of dispositions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the street of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	You know that in the street of the knee there is little breakage, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, even if it is only a crack or an opening, it affects every wound, and without a wound, and everyone feels well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is when you put each part back in its place as much as possible; then apply the plaster, and insert a round stick if necessary, as you need for each fracture, such as an abscess high up or other similar cases; apply to each case what it requires, as long as it heals properly.
de la brisure de la jambe	from the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	You know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called the "tibula" and the other is called the "fibula"; and a fracture occurs in the leg just as it does in the arm, and its restoration is the same as for the arm equally, and all the work involves this. And if both bones are broken together, the leg returns to its original state from every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bones are broken, they return to their original position.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain, and one can see it well; then remove it from the socket.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then apply extension, and set it even, and tie the stars equally; but still, it is important to note that the break should be clean, and there should be multiple pieces, so that the extension is less severe and lighter; and align it according to your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your task, take two strips of cloth that cover the leg on both sides, extending from the knee to the socket; then wrap two bandages around it and tie them in the middle as well, so that the leg cannot bend to the right or left, and thus is secure. And no one should administer anything along the length of the leg; it should be made of wood, and the leg wrapped to prevent movement. This is done properly at the site of the fracture, or wherever there is a wound or any other accident; and each day, move the leg to check for signs of abscess or other complications; treat it as long as it heals.
de la brisure des os dou piet	From the fracture of bones in the foot.
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but the bones in the foot can be fractured and the joints can become stiff, and it occurs in various positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if the bones in the foot are fractured and you see them intertwined with each other, the patient will feel such intense pain in their foot on the ground, as if they wanted to walk, then place your foot on theirs, raising the broken bones, and press gently until they return to their original position; then apply a splint and tape over it, placing a small, flat table under the stomach of the foot, securing the bandage tightly around the foot, and wrapping other things as needed.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And after three days or four have passed, if it loosens the bandage, for you will find the bones even, either broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if none of the bones are broken, but they are dislocated, as we have said about the hand's joints, then place a stick along the length of the bone, and make it slightly wider, and put under the foot that I mentioned, keeping it firmly in place; and if there are two or three, or more, broken bones, put on each bone a stick according to its amount, wrapped in a strip of linen, and fasten the bandage under the foot, keeping it well in place.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, as we have mentioned; and treat each case as it should be.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	On the fracture of the bone of the hand.
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When a woman's bone in her hand is fractured and the swelling increases, then lean her body forward, supporting her from behind. Fill the hollow part of the fracture with cotton, as much as possible, and let it be so; then raise the woman up slightly and gently press on her back, bit by bit, until the cotton reaches the entrance to the bone, and the bone returns to its place. When she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished, replace it, doing this for seven days or so. In this way, the fracture will be healed, and if you see that the swelling is gone, take a bladder of a goat and tie one end of a cane to the opening, then empty the entire bladder into the fracture; blow on the cane gently until the bladder is completely inflated inside. The nature of the bone will heal itself; then fill it with cotton again, and leave it like this for several days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the hand or of the woman is broken, restore it as we have said regarding the bone of the wrist; and these breaks are not hidden from him who applies his study and skill, and heeds my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For these breaks indicate various dispositions for the right way of restoration; understand this therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the staff, when it is broken, take a goose throat and insert it into the staff; then wrap it with cloth, leave it for three days or longer, and it will be healed naturally.
de brisure avec plaie	from fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is important for someone with a fracture and a wound, especially if it is significant, such as the bones of the leg or shoulder or similar, to seek medical attention now, so that the healing process we have described can take place.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, but there is still adhesion from scar tissue, if you have no other remedy, then begin to restore the fracture in the same hour or on the same day as the abscess formed, so it does not worsen.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the abscess arises again, let it be allowed to heal completely for a new day, as long as the abscess is calm, and do not touch it for even a third or a fourth part of a day, because you might cause an ill effect.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible through the heart's opening, it is necessary that you place it gently in your hands, with a slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not appear suitable to place equally in your hands, take this instrument which is made of iron, with seven or eight parts long, and adjust its width according to the size of the wound; and for this, it is necessary that he immerses three or four times, according to what is needed for each fracture treatment; and be rounded and slightly thick, so that it does not bend under pressure on the member during your work, and be wider at the front, thicker in the middle towards the front, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche", so the dislocated joint must be placed back on top of the visible bone; and press firmly once, until it returns, and be even one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot properly grasp the bone, then you must hold the head of the bone, until the instrument has a firm grip.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back as we have said, with a suitable instrument such as a chisel or saw, within your power, then remove what is delayed in the bone from harshness and small cuts.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, knowing that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you do everything to put it back in its natural place, then moisten the draping with black astringent wine, and arrange it properly; do not put any wax or other substances on the wound that could cause rot and corruption. Then administer stars (possibly medicines) when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, removing the dressing around it according to the size of the wound, and be very careful not to constrict the wound with the bandaging; often, people have made this mistake and brought death or corrosion to the patient several times, so make the bindings softer and gentler than other injuries.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or great, and you doubt that a worse accident may come, as we have said, and you feel pain in place, if it is not suitable to put on bandages; but wrap around, instead of bandages, hard cloths, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound is becoming worse, then remove everything that you have put on top of it, and apply a healing dressing to the wound, such as a four-ingredient ointment or similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you dislocate the member two times a day, in the morning and in the evening, as long as it is swollen and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be dislocated in such a way that the bow of the joint moves slightly downward.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if it persists for a long time, and it cannot heal but keeps dislocating, knowing that there are small fragments of bone, then you must open the wound with care, and remove all these loose pieces that cause the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula forms in its place, or any other type of infection, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is said in the chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when a bone is broken and open in the member, as the bone of the ankle or the shoulder, or other similar bones in the large members, do not pull it immediately, for many times death may come from it, but let it be until it decays; perhaps after 20 days or 30, then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	burns that come from the heat
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come after the healing of the burn, especially when it is near a joint, and it is a ugly sight to see the shape of the member; and by chance it cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care then, if we must administer astringent medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others, either individually or in combination, and preserve them with vinous astringents or with abundance of heat or cold; place them on the wound in compresses, tighten them well, and do not loosen them for several days; then dislocate it and begin again with another until the inflammations are removed; or apply a piece of good plaster, because its property is to draw out all swellings from the limbs; and if the inflammation has already turned into hardness like stone, it must be removed, cutting off the excess above, and making the remainder appear healthy; or scrape it with a razor until it is removed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The weak member after treatment.
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is healed and the weak and delicate member remains, this can occur for many reasons: one is because it was bound too tightly and not properly aligned as it should be; or because there were too many bindings and it cannot assume the normal shape of the member; or due to excessive swelling; or from too great movements, not in their proper time; or because it has little blood in its body, making it weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and stretch the body, until the blood flow multiplies within it; then administer baths, give joy and rest; then apply lead to the member, so that the lead attracts great blood flow, and often rinse it with warm water, until the flow reaches the member; and it returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The dislocated joint must be set straight after its healing.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When a limb is twisted after healing, and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: do not believe those who say one must break the member entirely new, and many foolish practices have been done in our land; and such actions are blameworthy, causing great harm, and perhaps death. However, if the sprains and torments are recent, they should be treated with hot water or softened herbs, such as chamomile leaves, roots, licorice, and similar things; and make an empowering plaster, well-prepared, taking the mucilage of chamomile and confiting it with gelatine fat or sesame oil, and applying it over; or take fig fat and crush it with colon powder and other medicines that reduce swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never should the dislocation be rubbed continuously and for a long time with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And allow the limb to move every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the stiffness is inflamed and hardened, like stone, it also needs to be released with iron, if necessary all the way to the bone, using a delicate incision; and apply compression and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book on dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocations come from a joint moving out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs due to no apparent reason, it is necessary to bring the limb back to its normal position as soon as possible.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the limb swells, and by chance if it is reset at a later time, it may cause pain in the joint; for this reason, it is not advisable to move it immediately when it is swollen. Often, this leads to inflammation and other pains; however, once the swelling has subsided, make the patient better, then leave it until the abscesses are healed; then apply hot water and oil, gently reset the limb, and treat each member as suitable for its condition.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the upper limbs from the shoulder down to the hand.
des mandibules	and of the jaws.
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It is often the case that the jaws become dislocated, and this dislocation occurs in two ways: either they are slightly out of their sockets, somewhat bent, or entirely dislocated, hanging down toward the chin, preventing the patient from closing his mouth, holding saliva, or speaking clearly with his tongue.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is minor, it often returns on its own due to the body's natural movements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it hastingly, and not delay; and in such a way that the minister places the head with the sick person, and pulls the mirror gently from one of his hands to the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, so that the dislocation is on both sides; and the other two hands should be extended equally; and command the patient to soften his jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And he should place the mirror equally, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it returns to its place, especially if both jaws are together, then apply hot water and oil, gently resetting it; do not delay in returning it, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are returned to their original position, and the mouth of the patient is closed comfortably with a mild dressing of rose oil and wax, then bind it gently with soft linen; and let the patient sleep on his back, with his legs between two pillows, so that he does not move them to either side, nor make any effort to open them wider, but eat light food and drink until the pain is gone and the jaws are healed; and then he can resume eating normally without opening his mouth too widely.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be restored to their proper position within an hour and do not return to their normal state, then there may follow fever and severe pain in the abdomen, and possibly vomiting of clear bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is fatal; and many times it kills him who experiences it, within nine days.
de la forcelle	de la forcelle" translates to "of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The fork cannot stay steady from either side in the continuance of it, and is dislocated both better and worse, and is never healed properly outside, and causes great pain.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And its restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then he presses the joint into your palm, and it returns; then he applies the plaster and bandage, and tightens it; and the dislocation which is towards the shoulder cannot stay out of place; if not, and if it does not come out even once, if it is brought back to its place as we have said, then he applies the plaster and bandage, and tightens it, and commands the patient to rest until he is healed; and in this way, too, the dislocation of the shoulder is restored when it is in the right position.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	On dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	You know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: one is when it dislocates at the acromion end; and the second is at the part of the scapula; and sometimes it dislocates above, which is rare; and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inside towards the nerves; and often it dislocates away from the acromion towards the scapula, especially in those with little muscle, for them it happens severely; but in those with sufficient muscle, it dislocates slightly, and moves back slightly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to certain men that they suffer a blow or fracture, and an abscess forms in the hot shoulder, and they think it is dislocated by that.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	You must therefore test it, until you are certain, and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And the dislocation is recognized when it turns towards the axis, and it distinguishes between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a clear difference; and you will find at the top of the shoulder a depression, and by pressing with your finger on the top of the shoulder, as if it were one bone, the patient cannot bring his hand to his side or move any part of it; and also, if it is dislocated upwards, and not concealed, as you can feel it clearly with your finger, this type of dislocation is not easily corrected, especially when it is new or the patient is in pain.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the healer should take the patient's hand and place it above the dislocated joint, then apply pressure from below, and lift the joint with force towards its proper position; and the healer should release the hand and extend it upwards, and place it beneath; this will bring relief.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	If the dislocation does not come off as we have said with strong hands after a few days, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; administer gently a soothing and softening treatment such as a decoction of althae and fenugreek and melilot in water, and then treat them. Then, place the patient on their back and put a soft cloth beneath the dislocated joint, neither too loose nor too tight, then position the heel against the cloth and gently lift the head of the shoulder; pull the hand of the patient with the dislocation away from their body, and another assistant should hold the head of the shoulder to prevent it from moving. The shoulder will return immediately, and if you see that it is properly aligned, know that this method has been successful: and it is important that there be a stronger person present who can handle the patient; place them directly against the side with the dislocated joint, and pull the shoulder away from the joint towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, and any heavy thing is laid upon him, the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And it is also adjusted in another way: take a long stick and insert it into the ground so that the end is as bright as a pistol, neither too thick nor too thin; then place it from beneath the patient, but with soft cloth above, and the patient's arm fully extended on the other side, and the joint will return to its place; and if it does not want to come back for all the reasons we have said, do this treatment: take a stick of two arms' length and four fingers' width that has a bright end, and push it entirely into the joint according to this form.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lay the patient flat on his back, so that the affected area is not disturbed, then remove all padding from the affected area; extend one arm above the head, and bind the limb to the affected body part, starting at the wrist of the hand, then place the arm on the wide edge of a board, extending the palm downwards, and leaving the body hanging from the other side: the joint will now be reset.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is set, in any way, it is necessary that you place under the padding a thin piece of wool equal in size, then apply the plaster with the powder from the mill, mixed with incense and egg white, over the entire shoulder and around, then remove the padding carefully, and wrap the bandage around the plaster, and press the hand against the collarbone, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he move the dislocated part little by little, as long as the limb is comfortable, for it will heal faster; and then move it again after one or two days, and straighten it; and if it remains locked and is not softened, it will be healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is locked due to moisture or any other cause, it is necessary that you apply heat treatments at three openings, as described in the chapter on cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it loosens after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and the patient cannot raise his arm high, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is either cut, stretched, or damaged; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place again.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the worst part, and the joints, or at the rear, if it occurs through a blow, and stretching of the hands, and is attended with great pain, then apply another remedy; and treat until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after healing comes cracking in the limb, and delays in movement; if the patient uses it many times, as long as this cracking persists, it will become lighter and return to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	on the cost of dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You know that the dislocated joint is weakened at times, and then it returns; if it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not fully corrected, as one can see and feel it well; then it heals according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick part with the healthy, if you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	Because the joint is dislocated, and he cannot bend his arm, nor touch his shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it in such a way that the abscess closes and it does not reopen, because if the abscess reopens, it will be difficult to reset, especially when it is at the back; then it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and may even lead to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, if it can be brought back, that you extend his hand with both of yours; and his arms should be spread out, and the palms facing each other, from side to side, and turn the joint at his fingers together, either towards his palm's root, until he returns to his place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his palm, and turn the root of the palm's cut that is misaligned.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, apply strong extension; and have the other assistant extend the arm, and stretch it from both sides, so that it does not move at the extension; then turn each part of the arm, after you have wrapped a double-long and wide cloth; and when you look at the joint, rub it with no oil to soften the joint, then turn the joint firmly, until it returns; and once it is in place, apply dry plaster with egg white, pull the bandage tightly, and leave it for no days, then untie it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place and you loosen the ligament, leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, repeat the splinting and the ligature, leaving it thus for several days until it is firmly placed, then loosen it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if the patient feels better after resetting the joint and it becomes motionless, bathe and gently rub it, applying pressure until it is relieved; or place a grease-soaked woolen compress on the joint, leave it for one day and night, then remove it, and immerse it in a bath. And when it is warm, rub the joint appropriately, apply the compress again, and repeat this process twice or three times until it heals; and if you see that it remains healthy, apply fine, moist warmth with butter and press on it; it will return to its former state.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The hand joint is misaligned and its return to normal is slight compared to other joints. However, it must be carefully reduced, immediately after dislocation, so that the swelling does not worsen or an abscess forms nearby.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And when reducing it, place the patient's hand on a table, extend their fingers, and look to ensure they are even, so that the palm rests upon the joint's surface, holding it until it returns to its normal position. However, you must carefully observe if it is in the correct location; then place the patient's hand, with the back facing up, on a table for extension and reduction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, have the patient lay their back on their hand on a table, and look closely at the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, then it is indeed a sign. Otherwise, if the strain of soothing plasters on the abscess does not cease, and it leaves him without starting over again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after any number of days, then the joint remains twisted; and it does not cause further harm to the patient as long as the hand is softened, and nothing can be extracted from it: then know that a nerve or an artery is damaged. There is no other device than cautery to extract it from this case, and perhaps there is nothing else of value.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is dislocated, if you place the splint as we have said, then pull it and leave it for a day, then loosen it and leave it so.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he cannot move it well and there is no fracture, then apply hot water moisture and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	On the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	The fingers of the hand should never be dislocated at each joint, neither at the back of the palm or on the palm itself; then hold the finger, and gently pull the dislocation to its proper place, while supporting the base of the finger, and bend it towards the side where it is dislocated. Leave it in that position for a day, and then reset it the same way; do not bind it, but loosen it each day and move it, and then re-bind it; and do this often until it is tight, and also do so if it is dislocated on the palm of the hand, doing as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same if it is dislocated on the other side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	dislocation of the spine
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine or the column is dislocated, and there are multiple dislocations, if there is no cure, the patient dies quickly.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the patient's movements are sudden and involuntary, he cannot hold them, and sometimes a limb becomes weak, or both legs or both arms, or even the spine is affected in three parts; the part that remains mute at the back is called "gibbousness". The cure, if the gibbousness has been present from childhood, is as follows: if there is no cure or treatment for all of it.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falling or impacts or similar things, the old ways of treatment speak in great words, but they do not bring much benefit to anyone; but I have abbreviated it according to my understanding and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the stiffness that comes to the penis, no one has a cure; and also that which comes straight to the side, and it is not possible to heal outside of that which properly comes to the back, as I say; and it is that the patient should be stretched on his face equally in the first position, and have strain from below, so that he does not bleed; then I insert a stick into the head in the earth-formed shape, and another at the heel, and tie a string around the afflicted parts, and another at the ankles, and at the knees, and at the ankles; and these ministers know the strings, one on the head and the others on the feet, among the two sticks; and they should be well fastened, the stick as we have said, and the observer places his palms on the formed spine until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return with this treatment, take a board three feet long, cut a groove in the wall from edge to edge, place the patient on their side, and turn the head of the board away from the wall; then place the center of the board over the spine, and put mirrors under both ends of the board, pressing firmly until it returns to its original position; and if you see it moving, do this with a stick that turns in your hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And take two long splints, one for the patient's head on the affected arm and two others for their feet; between each splint, make an incision from edge to edge, about a palm's length deep; and in each splint, have a hole through which the stick can turn, and let the splints be firmly fastened so they do not move; and between the two turning splints, place two small splints, each a palm's length, to turn the stick; then tie the one end of the stick that is among the bound pieces to the head splint, and the other end to the foot splint at the other turner, and let every minister turn his turner along all the bindings, and the master make the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, apply a drying plaster with plenty of heat, then the compresses, and then the end of a tablet three fingers long, which should adhere to the area of the stiffness and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a strap, as we have said, and use the patient's mild treatment until they are healed; and if any thing happens at the end of their healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the method that we have mentioned above; and never should one apply a piece of lead, nor does its appearance occur in the rear spine, and be careful that it is not dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, for which one must not have presumption, because it could bring about death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of dislocations of the spine
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	You know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only cause dislocations, unlike other joints; and the hip joint is misaligned according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and more inside, less misaligned in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation within is such that when you join the affected leg with the healthy one, the injured knee becomes longer and opens wider than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their kneecap; and it is the heat from the abscess that causes the swelling around the joint, because the joint of the thigh comes here.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him who experiences this at death is such that this event is contrary to what has been said before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him who experiences this beforehand are that his leg is well according to completion; however, do not bend the knee too much without pain, and if it is desired for him to walk, he cannot do so until later, and retains urine, and the ankle swells, and when he attempts to stand, he does so on the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who experiences this after are that he cannot extend or bend his knee, and one leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the thigh remains in a position opposite to the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	They should reset this appearance of dislocation if it is that the dislocation is old and remains according to its disposition, as there is no cure; and he should have no presumptuousness.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for the one where the dislocation is fresh, and it's one of the four types of dislocation, you must act swiftly to reset the joint, both internally and externally, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will return, and no other cure is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	If it does not return in this way, you must then apply a strong force, and firmly fasten the leg with two hands or bind it at the knee; another minister should extend his hand from above in such a manner that he pulls both of the patient's hands towards himself, then tightly grasp the heel with a firm hold; another should hold the head with the same firm grip; and all should simultaneously pull upward and downward until the patient is completely lifted off the ground and remains still.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to all four limbs, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If the dislocation is in the joint nearest to the healthy side, it is necessary to place the patient on that side, then tie the affected limb at its root, and the opposite limb above the wound, and towards the strength; then ask another assistant to grasp the patient's arms, and embrace the large joint of the affected limb, extending it to a distant form; it will return to its place now; and this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot hold it in the manner we have said, then you should bind together both feet of the patient with a strong, soft ligature on both heels and both knees, and let the diseased leg be extended two fingers more than the others; then hang it from a post, and let it rest two arms' lengths above the ground; and command the assistant to embrace the top of the thigh, and have other assistants hanging with the patient, who embrace the thigh, for the joint will now come back together.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is external, if the patient lies as we have said in the case of a hunchback, then tightly draw the ligature on the diseased leg, both above and below; then place two hot coals, one at the top and one at the bottom, and insert a third between the thighs of the patient, along its shape; and surround it with moist cloths so that it does not harm the patient, and let each assistant extend towards him, and carefully place their hand on the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it does not return, place it on a table and press it as we have said in the previous passage, and lay the patient on his healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the affected leg forcibly, as I have said; and place the bandage so that the pain is not on the affected side, then press with the other hand, and extend it downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is in the joint, it does not suit to extend the patient down, nor to raise him up on his feet, but he should remain as if his hip was dislocated at the fire, just as we have said before gently on both hips; and on his face, and stretch the ligament as we have said above, and press on the joint on the table; and it will be correct when the patient extends his legs, and they are even; then adjust the thighs, and apply a splint, and tie a bandage so that the hip does not move; and rest for three or four days, then release, and put the splint back; and if you see that they are even, tighten as before, and leave it for three days; then release, and let him walk slowly, until the limb is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	From the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The limb is dislocated in three ways: inwardly and outwardly, and also behind; but not forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if it does not return to its place at the knee, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright and extend his leg if he can, and place him face down on your hands, and put his foot on yours. Then take the kneecap in your palms and pull between your fingers, then bend both sides of the knee joint; and another helper extends the patient's foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it gently returns the leg to the knee slightly; and apply a poultice, and make the leg return to its position at the knee, and fasten it firmly together for three or four days, then release it; and let not the patient move about until the limb is comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not flexible enough, apply firm extension as we have said in the treatment of the spine, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	On the dislocation of the heel.
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heel is neither fully extended nor flexed, and it is dislocated both internally and externally.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and there is tenderness in the area where it is dislocated; the reduction is gentle, and one should lightly extend their hand towards the affected area when it is slightly flexed.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is dislocated slightly, you should make the patient lie straight, and hold the leg with both hands above the ankle; then take the foot in your right hand and pull it towards you twice, then stretch it up high and push the foot up nicely; do this twice more, alternating between pulling and stretching the foot; if it returns, that is good. If not, recommence the procedure, because it will return. And if it cannot be returned in this way, make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and insert a firm stick into the ground between their thighs, and wrap the sheets around them so they do not hurt; then have each assistant hold the healthy leg at its ankle, and another stretch the foot towards its side, while others keep the dislocation in place when it is pulled; then put each mirror over the dislocation in both hands, and a different assistant turn the healthy leg inward at the knee, and the dislocation will return more easily.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when the swelling has subsided, apply a poultice and compress it, stretch the limb, tie it to the leg, and hold the shoes behind the ankle so that the ligature is not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the swelling improves, loosen the bandage on the third day or after a quarter; and he should be able to walk within four days; and if he goes beyond this time, it is not fortunate that he still suffers.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses form, it is necessary to soothe them, as we have said elsewhere, while they are fresh.
des dois	Of two things
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the eyes are dislocated, if they need to be nicely extended without strain, it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any other part of the back or leg, it is necessary that you place the patient on a firm bed or table completely straight, and put your foot on what opens from these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns; and when it is level and nothing opens, place under the sole of the foot a piece of wood split in two, then stretch strongly, and leave it for three days, then release it; and let it rest until it is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	From wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation and we wish to restore it, often the patient dies if you are not careful in treating it, especially if you are not experienced in the art or have not practiced it for long, and if you lack compassion and mercy and act too quickly; then leave the patient in God's hands, if you see no hope of recovery. But when there is hope, realign the limb immediately so that the abscess becomes hot, and treat the wound as appropriate, using dried herbs; and if the dislocation involves broken bones or small fragments, reduce them as we have said for simple fractures, and do not enter a path of fear, as I have advised, for this will guide you according to your Creator, and because of your knowledge of weapons and your body.
Amen	Indeed, let the patient grow
