O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, my very dear children, I have completed this book which is the last of medical science, its fulfillment, and have ended it with explanations and descriptions.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this for you with this treatise, which is the beginning of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And since the work of hands is closely guarded in our region and unknown to most, the science has faded and become sparse, with only small descriptions in ancient books remaining as evidence of the skills of the hands.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes error and vanity, and intentions are closed, and knowledge is estranged.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I will revive this treatise by organizing it according to the order of exposition and explanation, and I will bring together the forms of cautery tools, and other instruments of the work with adjustments to their declarations and preparations, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine has been neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who wishes to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galien says, must know the judgment of the members, their shapes and connections and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and blood vessels and the number of their parts, and understand the movement and rest of veins and arteries, and from where they emanate.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And Hippocrates says that words without deeds are nothing, and actions without knowledge are harmful, especially in the art of medicine.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not acquainted with the things mentioned above, risks error and misleads others; as I have often seen many who engage in this science without knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a great wonder that affected the abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, affecting the arteries of her neck; so much blood issued forth that the woman died in her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another wonder that treated a stone from an old man, and the stone was large; it tore out a piece of his bladder, and he bled internally for three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone; I knew well that if it was cut, he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And also I saw another marvel that took in cure the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break he suffered a wound; the curious ones, full of ignorance, seized the break upon the wound as if by strong bonds, leaving no trace of healing to the wound, and left it thus until the end; and commanded that he should not loosen it; and so he waited until the leg was completely swollen and blistered and came to perdition.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	They called me to come to him, and I hurried to free the leg; and when I heard it dislocated, it was so calm and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But every way of corruption was already confirmed in that limb, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the entire limb was lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I have seen another wonder that abscesses, once healed, relapse and then inflame due to the malignity of their nature.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For the ulcer, when it is free from black humor, it should not be touched with iron unless it is in a place that allows one to completely remove the corrupted part.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, dear child, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: that is to say, work where there is danger in many positions; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Therefore, it is necessary that you guard against it so that the wicked eyes cannot speak ill of you; if you take up your weapons in courage, and begin to confront your ailments lightly but firmly, and use the best means so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and are made whole; abandon the fearful diseases of sorrow, and remove the doubts that your weapons create, and have faith in yourself so that you can pass from this world to the other in glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in none of his teachings: "Do not take any ill disease too seriously, lest you be called a fool.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cautery and medicine agues, and it is ordered from the head down to the feet; and about the shapes of instruments, and the tools for cautery, and everything that is necessary for the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and the use of suckers and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is ordered with the shapes of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar conditions; it orders the use of the main tools from the head to the foot, and the shapes of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus, remembering the work, it is necessary that I describe the qualities of each aid and its harmful effects on these conditions.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and their harmful effects are the longest speech and most subtle science, containing secret answers; on these topics, many wise men have spoken and agreed; and for me, their words are sufficient, as I fear lengthening this discourse.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery helps universally for every complexion where it has matter, whether it is hot or dry complexion: that is to say, the hot complexion with matter, and the dry complexion without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In both hot and dry complexions, matter exists, they devised different opinions, some saying that cautery is great help, and others saying the contrary: that cautery is of no use for diseases arising from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be treated with heat for hot diseases, neither by heat nor dryness; and he who says the contrary states that cautery provides great help for hot and dry diseases that affect humans' bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the color of fire, you perceive the body as fresh.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	Because I have found it to be true through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in every case, no one should intervene unless they have experienced it themselves, and know by long practice the chapter of cautery, and the diversity of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their ailments, and the outcomes and the time of day; for other complexions we have only fear, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all agreed and consented to the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know this, son, that cautery combines fire in a way that is most beneficial for healing, more so than the cautery of burning medicines.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and it does not come from outside the body unless to a part that is hot, and it does not harm any other member.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Burning medicines move from one part to another by causing distance, and they bring diseases of great pain to the member; and sometimes the fire causes the patient no harm because of its high quality and the goodness of its nature, unless there is too much of it.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And if you have found me through experience and the long service and study that I have devoted to this art, and it is in accordance with the truth of things; and for this reason, I excuse myself from the length of my speech, because I do not like to disclose the secret that lies within fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives away illnesses from bodies, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; then receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know this, my son, that they agreed on the time when cauterization should be done and chose appropriate tools.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, because the damage caused by disease is removed with the help of cauterization; and especially cauterization is necessary for pain relief in cases where it is urgent and severe, so that no greater harm comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear child, as they do in folly; for the disease that is healed by cautery has no relapse; thus it must be done; but it is not like what they take care of, because cauterization is only a medicine that changes complexion and dries up humors that cause pain, and works more swiftly than other medicines due to the strength of its work and mastery.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And another powerful thing is that the disease comes according to the complexion of the ill person and the place of the disease and its virtue; and excesses accumulate within him through the acquisition of foods and similar things, except for cauterization applied where there is little excess and moisture, as in the cauterization for pain and similar conditions, and such pain does not recur; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last of medicine; it seems so. But they do not believe that cautery has any value after medicine; their intentions are false, and they consider cautery to be the last of medicine because when we administer treatments for any illness, they are useless, so let us use cautery, and it is effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it is clear that cautery is indeed the last of medicine, not according to the understanding of ignorant people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that gold cautery instruments are more effective than iron ones, and they only spoke of fire for its quality and the nobility of its substance; they said that the heat of cautery does not cause putrefaction, but this is not true because I have tried it and found that it works in no one. And gold cautery is worth more than iron, as they say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet when you heat the gold instrument, you are not certain if it is hot because of its golden color, and as soon as it cools down; and if it is overheated, it becomes damaged; thus there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this, we use the fire cautery that we have made ready for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or, I have ordered this chapter at the beginning so that the way be lighter to find.
dou cautere olivaire	olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	Fire cautery is applied to the head due to moisture and cold, and it is used for various ailments caused by 'soda' (a medical term of the time) and numerous humours that descend to the limbs and ears, and because of many dreams and toothaches, throat pains, and especially all diseases arising from cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the patient is purged with a solvent medicine that cleanses the head, third or fourth degree of heat, according to the virtue and endurance of the patient's condition; and then the head is made red again by the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit with his face crossed between your hands, and place his hands on some weight; after, put the root of your palm upon the root of his neck between his two fingers; and let it be where your two middle fingers meet, if blood flows, and then heat up the cautery that is called "olive," which has this shape:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And mark it on the skin with ink, and move your hand down and pull it back gently, disturbing it; then lift your hand carefully, and check if you see the bone is set; and if not, repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you. After that, take some string, put soft and melted wax inside, place it on the skin, and leave it for three days. Then cover it with cotton soaked in butter, and let it remain until the burning sensation is gone; finally, treat the wound with a medicament called 'tetrafarmacon' as long as it is clean.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the elders say that the longer the wound remains open, the more it purifies itself; and for this reason, it is helped to heal.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say that one should not leave the fire cautery so long that it burns the bone, and then remove what is burned from the bone, and it will be healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And another says that one should leave the cautery so long, and press it so hard that the bone is depressed as wide as a woman's womb, so that the humors can come out; and the wound should remain open for a long time; then it should be cleaned and dressed.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of cautery do not seem good to me in all cases, except for those people who have no fear; and I think I should leave them; for the joint is weakened by continuous solution due to nature, as we witness in other members; and even when the patient's joint is weak by nature, the initial appearance of cauterization seems safer and more movable to me, and from this I proceed accordingly.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	from the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When chronic pain in the head comes on and lasts for a long time, patients should use herbs and pills known as "cough drops", and purgatives for the head and eyes, and bandages; and if one performs the cauterization that we have mentioned above, it is of no avail.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care if the patient's shoulder is of strong nature and not too rigid; then cauterize it from below, as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After this, cauterize each corner of the shoulder close to the bone, as we have said before, and cauterize the one called 'vasselz' (likely referring to a specific muscle or tissue); these are the muscles where ventouses (suction cups) are applied. Keep your hand light so that you do not see the bone. The patient feels much greater pain from this cauterization than from others, and I will speak of it at length; it is important that the cauterization of the shoulders be more precise than that of other parts, and this is its form.
dou cautere dou chief	For fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in a part of the head there is sudden pain, and the disease extends to the oil (or skull), and the condition is purged with medicinal herbs, and all other cures as I have mentioned in the division of illnesses, and nothing benefits: then perform cauterization according to two methods, that is, with hot ague medicine or by fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauterization with hot ague medicine involves pricking a small hole in the skin and removing the scalp and covering it tightly with cloth. Then, make an incision where the pain is located in such a way that you can push the scalp back under the skin. Keep it tightly bound for twelve hours, then loosen it and treat the wound strongly with butter until the redness disappears.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment with medicine as long as it is healed; and if you see that something similar to what I have written about burning medicines occurs, then follow the proper treatment of burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery is done according to this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the fire cautery with this form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "close" because the head has the shape of a close (a sealed container) with a small opening; and place it over the painful area, hold your hand, and gently move the fire slightly, until half the thickness of the heart is burned; and remove your hand when the artery stops bleeding, which is when the wound has healed, and abundant blood flows.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing cotton in the wound and leaving it for three days, then he covers it with moistened butter, and continues to treat the wound until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with a cautery called 'cultellare' (a knife), be careful not to cut the artery in this migraine which is not ancient.
de emigraine	de emigraine" translates directly from Old French
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraine as we have previously discussed in the sections on diseases, and it does not improve, and see that the cautery recommended by medicine is ineffective, then you must heat up the cautery called 'cultellare' until it becomes white; and apply it to the afflicted area with a line half an inch long, lifting your hand once, so as not to cut the artery and do further damage, and be careful of the jaw that moves when chewing, so that the nerves are only relaxed and spasms do not come to the patient, and beware of the blood clotting in the artery after it is cut, especially for those who do not know how or have no experience; leave this task to a halfway finished state. But I will tell you how to preserve the flow of blood when an artery is cut, and show you where this is mentioned in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not suffice against the illness, and the patient suffers, cauterize both parts as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healthy; and if you observe, administer the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on the extraction of an artery, with a cautery having two blades; and this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain in the ears due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ear due to cold persists after applying solvent medicines and other remedies as mentioned in our divisions, then try this cautery called "point," which has the following form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After puncturing the entire painful ear, or both ears where the pain persists in both, and slowly move it a little away from the root of the ear after you have marked the joint's position, and place 10 points around each ear; then treat the joint until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	regarding the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	The torture that requires cautery is limited to those that involve fluid movement, as we have discussed in the sections on diseases; and do not perform cautery on parts that appear dry and numb.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this kind of torment that mutates from fluid of waters and purging from the head and gargarism, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, another a little further back on the temple, and the third in the adjustment of the two lips; and place the cautery in the part that opens healthily, and make it burn into the top of the ear above a bit below the horn of the head, and another on the temple just as far away; and leave the cautery until half of the heart is burned. And this is the form of the cauterization.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the appearance of the cutting instrument that we have described above, but it is a little more subtle, and it is necessary that the knife be a little thicker; then treat it as I have said before, until it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but it does not benefit the patient, and they do not have a fever, then make four cauterizations: two on the two corners of the head, one on the middle of the head, and one on the liver, which is called "vessel," as we have previously stated, and no cauterization on the mouth of the stomach; treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	It seems like there was an incomplete or missing text snippet before
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness, it is necessary to give the patient large quantities of herbs to clean the mind; then, after cleaning the head of the patient entirely, place on his occiput the plaster of horseradish, which is written about in the treatments; and this is the manner of cauterization: if he does it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healthy thus, good; and if it is not, make three cauterizations on each side of the middle in descending to the collarbone, and allow a space between each cauterization as thick as two fingers; treat it like the others, and if you see it becoming inflamed, make one cauterization in the middle; and if necessary, two more on either side of the two horns, and treat until it is healthy; this cauterization is called 'olivare', as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of cold from the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleansed with earth and water as we have said before; then wash the head of the patient, and make a cauterization between the forehead and each horn, and three on the spine of the collarbone; and if you need it, and the flesh is moist and the patient suffers, and the disease is severe, make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; leave it until the most delicate heart is burned, and then remove your hand. After that, treat it until it is healthy, and this cauterization called 'olivare' is as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	from epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cautery unless they are phlegmatic; first, the brain must be purified with years and other treatments as we have described in the section regarding great suffering from long-term medication.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot endure it, they should perform gargling and chewing to purify the brain often with good meats; then, they apply heat to the head in the middle, and perform cautery as we have said before, also on the veins and each horn. If the patient is strong and suffers greatly, they should perform cautery as I have described for those with paralysis and softening of the limbs, on the spine at the back and neck, and the cautery should be olive according to the manner I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is ill, perform a delicate cautery on them according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When, due to melancholy, there are excessive or corrupt moisture and thick fluxes, then perform cauterization with partial cautery as we have said for those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if, due to melancholy, the excesses are declining towards melancholy and the body of the sick is moist, then give them something to drink that cleanses the brain, as it is described in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After preparing the patient's head, make a well-made twist, just like a circle, and place it between the patient's shoulders; let the sick person lie crossed, and hold them firmly from all sides; then apply the liniment, and rub with old beard butter; heat it over a temperate fire, so that he can bear it; afterward, empty the circle inside the head and leave it to cool; and repeat this for the patient each week once, with another good treatment.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or, if you must cauterize it, make several small incisions throughout the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cautery moistens the skin even more; then apply a cotton wick soaked in butter and gelatin.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eyes first show signs of being affected as described in the previous division, then treatment should begin and the patient should be given something to drink that purifies the head, warding off all moisture, and causing sweating or a bath while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After instructing the patient to rest their head, he should perform cautery over the head and make two cauterizations on both temples if the eye pain radiates from them together, or separately if it is only in one; and he should cauterize all veins and arteries beneath the heart, making the cauterization as long as the width of the temple, and be careful to prevent blood flow, and if too much blood emerges, he should stop immediately.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and the caution of incision how to stop it; and never should one cauterize or burn the bones from behind.
dou cors des larmes	two sides of the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears from the eyes have been old and habitual, and are in the veins, one should cut the arteries that appear on the outer side of the head; and one sees that it is from cold, phlegmatic superfluities. Then he applies the cautery as I said at the beginning of this treatment, first cauterizing the forehead, then both temples, and cauterizing below the bone on both sides; and if more is needed, he should cauterize carefully over the eyebrow with small cauteries.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Let the body weep through the eyes.
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat it according to what we have said in the previous section, and it does not benefit, then give the patient three pounds of bad raisins; after that, wash his head and apply a cauterizing olive oil; make two cauterizations with the cautery called "clavilis" on both sides of the wound, slightly removing the hair; and be careful not to cover the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery which is called "olive.
de coi ci est li forme:	Due to which the form is:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you perform the cauterization on both sides of the ulcer as long as the ulcer is, and do not remove your hand until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that does not allow the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Never does it happen that the hair of the skin is turned to rust and pricks the skin; and one performs cautery in two ways: that is to say, with fire or with hot medicines.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then place the patient in a clean bed; afterwards, draw on the paper the shape of the hair, so that it is as full of life as possible, and be the beginnings of the sign among the hairs; then apply moist cotton coated with egg white and musk from the persil to the skin, and heat the fire whose form is as follows:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the affected area little by little several times, burn the surrounding skin; and the sign of the healing of the wound is that you see the paper-like skin retracting, and the hairs standing up at the point of the oil; then gently remove your hand and leave it thus for three days, then apply moist cotton in butter until the burning sensation is gone; afterwards, treat with medication until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs grow back, and the paper-like skin becomes soft, then repeat the cauterization on the same area as before; but if the hairs have turned white, cauterize it again while the skin is raised to its natural state, and even, and let the hairs not poke the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The medicinal cautery of burning herbs requires that you instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; then make a shape out of parchment resembling the leaf of myrtle. Take French soap and bright charcoal, each in equal amounts, and grind them together well. Apply it cautiously so as not to chill, then place the shape over the affected area, covering with paper from the roots; if the illness persists in one spot only, you should operate once, and if both sides are affected, do so twice. Moisten the cotton with warm oil and apply to the sick part, keeping the healthy side clear and showing it to the patient; press gently and slowly every time the patient feels a sting from the medicine, as they will feel stings just like from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	As you have done this for a long time, remove the medicine from your body.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the swelling has passed, gently raise the limb, and observe if you see the skin lifted as it would be by constraint of fire or incision; and if so, it is a good sign.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, apply more medicine to the limb, but make sure your work is even and your fingers precise; then place a moistened cotton ball coated in butter over it until the pain has subsided, after which cure the limb with the dressing called 'dyafenis' and others, as long as it remains clean.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary for you, guard yourself well in your work with great care so that it does not desire only the medicine by itself.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the oil, repeat the medicine on that place which has been softened by the paper, just as you did before; then cure it until it is healed; and this is the form of the poultice with gentle care.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the condition of men is diverse in size and smallness, and according to your constraints; and do not deviate from the right way to him who has the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	On the treatment of a fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have discussed in the sections on illnesses, and your treatments are not successful, then it is necessary that you perform cauterization according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head in a healthy position; then take their arm and hold it between your hands in such a way that their head does not move or wiggle; afterward, apply moist cotton or juice from a fig tree over the oil; then heat the iron cautery until it is hot. Position the cautery at the head, shaping it like a roof tile, so that the edge of the cautery touches the skin; if you see, it should be pointed from one side to the other, and if you see, it should also be shaped like a tent; however, whatever shape it takes, this position is beneficial for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula, open it and drain the pus and dry it; if it closes again, work it open and remove the bowel; then apply hot cautery, holding your hand over the cautery at the affected area without letting your fingers touch it, so that your hand does not slip; place the cautery on the fat of the oil and the corrupted flesh.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you start the cautery close to the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If that does not work, repeat the cautery one more time, and if you need to, do it again, leaving it for three days; then apply moistened butter cotton, curing the wound as long as it remains dry, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, apply a corrosive medicine as much as the bone is exposed; and follow this according to what comes in your chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Understand the fistula, and locate its source; then place a subtle heat instrument into the gap, thereby taking on this form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and it should be the size of a plum; then hold your hand firmly, and do not allow the patient to move, so that the pus does not flow to its place; and it is necessary to put on the wound clean cotton moistened with oil or vinegar: the pus will leave the fistula, and the health will return through wonderful healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed through the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If this is not the case, it is necessary to administer warmth or cold, and return the fistula to the body in accordance with what is appropriate for its own place.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cracks appear in the lips, known as "poil," especially on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these wounds as we have discussed in detail, and the treatment does not benefit, then heat a small surgical knife according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	and place the hot knife into these wounds until it reaches the bottom; after that, treat the skin with wax until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess appears in the throat's root or in the uvula, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it causes putrefaction and rot, becomes inflamed and forms a fistula; then you must treat it as we have discussed in detail, but the treatment does not benefit. In this case, you should perform cautery according to the size of the fistula; after that, remove or open up the fistula's gap, and keep your hand there until the heat from the cautery reaches the bottom, without touching anything else; and do this once or twice, following the treatment we have discussed for wounds, until it heals; and if it heals in this way, it is good. If not, you must expose the affected area and remove the corrupt bone, as you will find described in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	no movement of the joints
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and treatment with medicines is ineffective, then place the patient's painful jaw in your hand; afterwards apply the hot cautery to the area where the tooth is; and hold your hand firmly so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; then release your hand and repeat the cauterization according to your desire; afterwards have the patient fill his mouth with salty water, and keep it for an hour and let it boil in his mouth.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way, the tooth that was moving becomes stabilized, the softened gums are restrained, and the moisture is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	from the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain from teeth comes due to cold or frost, and medical treatments are ineffective, then it is necessary to use cauterization according to two methods: butter cauterization and fire cauterization.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Butter cauterization is performed by pressing melted butter into a metal spoon (of iron or silver), then wrapping cotton around the tip and applying it to the aching tooth until it cools; this should be done frequently until the pain subsides in the root of the tooth, and if the butter becomes too cool, apply fresh butter and heat the metal with fire until the heat rises to the surface of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	He uses fire cautery if it is such that you can press a piece of iron or steel into it, and it is thick enough so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth; after heating the cautery, from which the shape will come as follows, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools; do this often, for the pain will be lessened on the same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary for the patient to fill their mouth with good butter in the haste of that cautery, and then take it out; and this is the shape of the cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery on the part that you wish, according to your ability; and this is the shape of the instrument:
des scrophules	of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula is of cold moisture and is not obedient to medication, then heat the cautery knife with this after which comes the shape, and it should have openings for the fumes to escape from the cautery to the other part. Place the hot cautery on the abscess once or as needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to its size, and leave it like that for three days. Then apply moist cotton soaked in butter until the burning is removed. After that, treat the wound with oil and bandages until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the bone:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture prevails in the channels of the pores, especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be first freed from the moisture by solvent medicines; afterward, apply cautery to the root of the throat, and be sure not to go near the throat, and only slightly heat the heart.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, make another cautery at the joint of the collarbone with the spine, and these cauteries that are called "claws" from which we have the form above; treat the limb as we have said above until it is healed.
de la toust	Of the toast
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and every disease of the bones are due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or stiffness, and it is an old disease, make two cauterizations on the strong parts of the body; and another cauterization between the two limbs; and let these cauterizations be called "clavile" according to the form mentioned above.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make a cauterization by pricking the entire cauterization called "poins" from which the form of the ear disease is as mentioned above; and these points can be up to 30, or even more.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treatment, reset the shoulder according to what has been said above, and perform the cautery in three stages according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because the cautery is lighter, make three copies of this.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterward, remind the patient of their pain on their back and side; afterward, gently apply the heat to the area within your left hand's grasp; if the joint is misaligned inside, warm the cautery with great care as it takes shape.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	Cauterize the pain as it reaches the side, and let the figure of the cautery be three cauteries together; for this reason, cautery is made with the cautery having three prongs, so that the shape of the cauterization has six cauteries; and the nerve follows the delicateness of a thread, and this is the form of the cautery with three prongs.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never should anything be adjusted on this nerve, for which there are eight types of cautery.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying the cautery, place crushed silk on it; then rest the patient, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated from above, what happens is bad; then apply cautery to the thick part of a hot cauterizing clamp, or many types of cauterization by pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joints are closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and moisture in the stomach irritate it to the point that they alter its complexion, and catarrh multiplies within it, and usual treatment methods do not help, then the patient should be made to lie on his back, and extend his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	Then, make three cauterizations below the knife, each with a depth of as much as a finger, securely fastening all cauterizations, and two cauterizations on both sides, ensuring that the figure of the cauterizations forms a right angle, with sufficient space between them so they are not joined together while they heal; and make the cauterizations deep enough to penetrate both parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauterizations be as described without adjustment.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you must cauterize with a great fire in the stomach according to this form, and whoever has fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and signing on the stomach at one point according to the quantity that you see fit; then cauterize along all the cautery called 'points'.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the condition that we have discussed, as long as it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver experiences pain from cold and moisture and excessive flatulence, as long as it is deprived of its natural complexion due to superfluities; and the patient is treated according to what we have mentioned in sections, but it does not help, it is necessary for the patient to be careful about his head. Sign three cauterizations according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, removing the humors that cause pain in the hip or loins of man; and there should be a distance between each cautery equal to the thickness of two fingers; and the cauterization must be long on the body, without pressing too hard with your hand over all the cauteries; and burn only slightly the half of the heart, and have the patient stand straight on his feet; and if he cannot, let him lie down, extend his legs, and ease his breath. This is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you wish, cauterize these wounds with a cutlass, if you are skilled and sharp in the art, and be careful not to burn all the heart, for you would scorch the whole body; and that it does not come to boiling, because the veins are very delicate there, and only the wise can see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you need to know if it is within the tissue of the liver or in the membrane: if it is within the tissue, the patient feels a moderate pain; but if it is in the membrane, they feel severe pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this cure involves the eyes, it is necessary for the patient to rest on their head; then apply a signet over the vein or abscess, and afterwards heat the cautery which resembles a reed, in this way:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize the cautery until the veins are burned, and the pus comes to the surface, as long as the infection is entirely cured; after the cure, according to the treatment of ulcers, as long as it is healed; and it is not appropriate to use this cautery unless by someone who has studied medicine for a long time, and whose hands have never failed in treating these illnesses.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can boldly move it, but nonetheless, I still think it's best to leave it.
dou cautere de pleuresin	The cautery of tears" doesn't appear to be a standard medical term in medieval
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should perform cautery on tears with roots of the herb aristology, in this manner: take a long root of aristology, as large as you can find, and dry it, making it also as thick and as long as your arm; moisten it in oil, and apply it to the fire, cauterizing the tear between the eyelash and the eyelid, and making small cauterizations downward into the area below the beard; also cauterize between the fifth rib and the sixth, sloping slightly behind; cauterize across the middle of the anus, and another one on top of the stomach, and between the shoulders, and along both sides of the lower ribcage, leaving the cautery between the shoulders. And do not press your hand, but hold it open as if smelling something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And they say that no old man should use fire cautery resembling a razor, and burn it and place it between the ribs, until it reaches this abscess; and there will be great pain, as we have said about the acute liver disease.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this case, there is fear that the patients may die now, or a fistula forms which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse according to the divisions of treatment that we have mentioned, and it does not benefit, then they (doctors) apply three methods of cautery, all of which are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Dislocate the joint in such a way that you make three cauterizations, or four, following the length of the bone, according to the figure of the cautery of the fire that we have mentioned above; and do not press your hand too much on the cautery, and let the patient be aware of his back; and another way of cauterizing is to heat the cautery with two tools, as we showed in the dislocation of the shoulder; and ease the pressure at the place where the bone is located, where the pain from the patient comes to the left, and elevate it according to the direction of the pressure, following the length of the body, and make the cauterization according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After heating the two tools until the bone is pierced on the other side, then burn the cautery quickly, and thus you will have four layers. And if you see that it has been cauterized completely with three tools.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has been gangrenous for a long time, and this is more moving than the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	Dyshydrasia" is the modern term for
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery is not effective for dyshydrasia, except in the manner known as "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	If your treatment according to the methods we have described in divisions is not beneficial, then you should perform four cauterizations around the wound, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the heart, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in the anus; and the cauterizations should be close to the affected area.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the cautery open for a long time to let the putrefaction go, do not abandon the treatment of the patient after the cautery; healing would hasten, and both intentions will be aligned with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the stomach should be a claw, as we have shown above; and for the back, it should be ovoid, according to what is placed before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the stones
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the stones are swollen in a person who is hydrophobic and filled with clear urine, you should cauterize just above the stone on the back between the little finger and the ring finger; and gently apply the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And don't cut too deep, otherwise you will injure the citron's root, and perform the cauterization according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After that, make two cauterizations on each leg, at the tip of a sharp knife; and let the cauterization be long, one on the inside of the knee joint and the other outside, along the leg; and leave the cauterizations to heal over a long period without cleaning, so that the wound heals; then treat the other wounds as we have said.
de la menoison	of the wound
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, to the point that the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by any means; and you see the patient suffering greatly and possessing great strength, perform a strong cautery on the stomach as he has spoken about it before, following the cautery of the stomach, with a circular cautery; and three cauteries around the anus with subtle cautery needles, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, perform a cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each place, and three small cauteries on the stomach to remove the excessive, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	On the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are of long standing and consist of corrupted, cold, moist humors, they are treated as we have said in the previous divisions, but they do not benefit from cauterization. Make three incisions on the spine of the back, the first starting from below and moving upwards in a triangular pattern; two cauterizations should be made below the anus (2nd one). If you think the stomach is cold, the meat does not cook, and there is swelling on the face, then apply one strong cauterization on the stomach as mentioned above, and another on the liver, and yet another on the heart (all with cautery); leave the cauterization open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, reset the joint while it is still healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you deal with the fleshiness (thelul), if the cautery appears too sharp, then cover it entirely with hot embers over the entire affected area; and let your hand move until the cautery reaches the vein, without cutting into it; do this once or twice. If there is a lot of thelul, cauterize each part as we have said; after treatment with beneficial ointments while they are still healthy; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the chest (alchatim), it will bring greater relief.
de plaie mal curee	From the poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, as we shall relate in its place, such a disease arises that can only be healed by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a vein becomes fistulated and is inflamed, with putrid and corrupt moisture, you must try all subtle remedies, and be sure to know the full extent of their effectiveness.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After preparing the cautery instrument to appear sharpest, insert it into the fistula according to the amount that the attempt entered, and repeat the cautery once or twice or three times, depending on the quantity required; be careful not to burn the surrounding nerves and large vessels.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	It appears there was a slight repetition in your request, but I will translate the provided Old French text line by line into English:
de la maladie des reins	Of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When the pain of kidney stones and heavy urination comes and does not allow a woman to bear it, then you must perform cautery on the kidneys from both sides with the cauterizing iron that we have previously mentioned; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a row, and this will provide greater relief.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak due to pain and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then perform cautery on the outside part of the bladder where the hairs begin, both on the right and left sides, making each cautery as long as a finger; also perform cautery on the back side if necessary, following the shape of the iron mentioned earlier.
de la marris	Of the shoulder
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the wound is cold and moist, it does not allow for healing, and the flowers (scabs) are corrupted and their formation is delayed; and when they do form, they cause great pain. Then you must make three cauterizations around the edge, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizations on the back; and these cauterizations should be done with a clamp, as we have said.
de la hainche	The term "de la hainche" does not appear in the
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moisture descends into the chest cavity of the hinch (presumably referring to pleurisy or inflammation of the lung), and for this reason it becomes immobile in its place, and the symptoms indicate that one leg is longer than the other when measured together; then there is a discovery of fluid in the lower part of the lungs, and it is necessary that you cauterize the patient above the chest cavity in a circular shape similar to the one used for the stomach, marking in front of the lung as it moves, so that the chest stays within the circle; and the cauterization should be done similarly to the one performed on the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present for you, perform three cauterizations with hot olive oil, and let the cauterization be as effective as all the others; and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain arises in the back, due to cold and moisture, and the patient's condition does not improve with the treatments we have mentioned in the previous section, then it is necessary to purge the patient of excessive humours, such as putrid pills or other similar beneficial pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After making the incision, there are two ways of cauterization: that is to say, using burning medicines and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery has many variations, one of which is as follows: you make triangles with the cauterization, ensuring a good depth and size, with a distance of about two fingers between each cauterization, making them olive-shaped. Never perform cauterization in the middle of the chest, as it should be done according to this form, consisting of four steps.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see fit, cauterize in a circular shape as we have previously mentioned for the dislocation of the chest; but do so in such a way that the circles encompass the entire chest, and all the spaces around the heart are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the method used for sciatica when the pain is confined to the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	If the pain reaches the thigh and leg, perform a cautery on that area where the patient feels the pain, or on the ankle, slightly to the left; this can be done with either a cutting cautery or by burning away the thick flesh. If the patient feels the pain extending up towards the hip or near the knee, cauterize the point where it is felt, using three or four small cauteries called "points.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it happens that the pain is stronger in the knee towards the thigh, make a cut with a sharp or circular instrument, and be well careful in all your cuts not to leave them until you burn the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause the patient more harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who have made a cut on the ankle of the foot and left it until the leg was completely swollen, and the foot as well, and it became pierced and corrupted throughout the foot.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After an abdominal solution, which led to his death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, perform cautery on one and the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise ones say about the cautery of the spine, which is how it should be done: take a hot iron, as thick as a new date palm twig, or slightly thinner, and make incisions between the vertebrae, at a distance equal to the size of a thumb; and the incisions should be on both sides, and just like ours, with a well-made iron. This is its form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heat it until it is completely red and exudes vapours, then place it on the affected spine of the patient, and turn to the healthy side; perform the cautery again and leave it for three days. Then apply butter poultice and keep the wound open for a long time; after treatment, as long as it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we should use this cautery sparingly because of its danger, and be careful who employs it; nonetheless, these are good cauteries, which the patient can endure, and where it is needed.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The hot medical cautery is made by creating a tool with a sharp edge that descends along the margin of the door, and it should be either of iron or steel attached to a long handle. It should have two parts, one at the top and one at the bottom, and each part should have the thickness of a finger; they are both open on fire and joined together in this manner.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing the board of the spine on the patient lying on his side, and quickly putting your hand over it, pour between the two circles of hot awes heated in the fire, and leave them for an hour with the patient enduring the heat and burn.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it has a true bite, similar to fire; and when the bites have passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the spine of the soft awes, leaving them for three days, applying butter until the blackening from the burn is removed; and let this be the last aid after the treatment of wounds until it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, apply the instrument that you used on the hip, according to what you have done; and this is the method of hot water, which I have written about in the treatise on rectifying medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and live charcoal, in equal amounts from each, and grind them together, and put them into a new vessel.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Or, if he has a small hole through which the tip of a reed can enter; place this pot in another well-sealed pot, and add alkali and charcoal, then pour hot water over it, until there are two layers of powder on top, as you hold it firmly in your hand; leave it thus until the water turns cold and becomes clear or cloudy within the sealed pot. Then take all that water, and pour it onto the charcoal and alkali, just as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And so it will be very useful and helpful in many medical operations and cautery for other limbs, as it does the same work as fire, and if used with other medicines such as poultices and myrrh and calamine with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a cure for which an honourable person was healed of the pain in the hip and sciatic nerve, and he said that no other treatment was done, and it was completely cured once this cure was applied, and he bathed as he teaches below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And prepare it in this manner: you press the fresh and dry verdigris with a little fat, and mix it well, and apply it to the thigh, and the calf, and the leg where the pain is, and bind it; leave it for three hours or according to the amount that the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him take a bath or immerse him in water until the body is slightly warmed, and make him lie down, and the pain will disappear entirely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such caustic medicines unless after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's dung, it brings great relief; and the cautery should be done in this way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take lint and grease it with old oil, and apply it to the pit between the big toe and the other one called the "fossile.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After that, take dried goat's dung, ignite it until it becomes charcoal, and place it on wool, leaving it until it is stained; and keep doing this again and do not stop until you think by sense that it reaches the thigh, and that the pain ceases; and this cauterization method is called "goat's dung cautery.
de la dolor dou dos	Of the great pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When great pain comes to the back, whether from stretching or impact or excessive evacuation, or from some similar cold material expanding, none of these appearances warrant cautery, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	Afterward, when the patient is relieved of foul pills or other similar substances, one should make three lines marked with a sign of a cross on the back where the pain persists, and in each line, apply five cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cauterizations should be done using a cautery called 'point'; and if you see fit, perform three cauterizations or four at the medium cautery following this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This illness often appears in small children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a tight and painful throat when they swallow, and fear; you feel a sharp pain in the lower back and it appears differently from the other pains.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this (the condition) and observe its cure, cauterize it with the cautery iron according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	The cautery should mark each part of the pain equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, cauterize around the pain with the cautery iron by drawing two or three lines, and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treatment, keep the limb healthy according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply heat to any numb areas that may be affected by nerve damage.
de la dolor des jointes	joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain is caused by moisture that spreads throughout a limb, and when the pain comes in sudden waves, it is properly called "gout," and when it is due to a cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is treated with cautery in this manner: make several cauterizations around the affected joint, and let the cauterization be olive-shaped according to this form.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary to pinch on the face with your finger, make the cauterization all around with something called "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this often happens, make cauterization on each knee with three or four cauteries from each part, all around; and if you need more, do so, but do not hold your hand too tightly until the heat of the heart is gone.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knees and back, administer the cauterization that we have mentioned in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the affected area with two lines; and if there is no pain at all, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains reach up to the fingers or shoulders, cauterize each part and give proper care to the patient and prepare medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give proper care and drain the fluide, it will be healed by God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the wound
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When a rupture occurs in the abdomen, and the bowels descend into the coils, it is important that when you attempt to cure it, you do not touch it for a day; and use things that leave the stomach, so that the intestines descend from the stomach; afterward, place him on his back between your hands, and command him to keep his breath until the bowels are repaired, and arrange them in your hands, and sign the rupture on the bone of the forearm, and mark it in every way similar to half a circle above the body. Then heat the cautery as follows:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as it is white and exudes sensations.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bones to their proper place; and have the minister hold his hand so they do not return backwards; open well the thighs of the patient, and put under him a cushion and a support on the thighs, and another on the pis (scrotum) which holds his hands; then apply the cautery to the sign over your entire hand, holding it straight and firm until you reach the bone, and if you do not touch the bone the first time, repeat it again until you do; be careful that the joint does not pop out when doing the cautery; do not burn it; and so that the patient does not die, or suffer other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is in vain.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And the cauterizer of children should be subtle according to their size, and also of tall people according to their measure; after three days, cure the wound with butter until the burn is healed; then treat other injuries until they are healed, and have the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well sealed; and it is important that his movements be restricted for a long time so that the boils do not appear when he goes to chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wishes to stand up, a well-made bandage should be applied for another forty days; and he should have good rest, engaging in light work and guarding against too much drinking and eating, and also avoiding excessive laughter; and following these instructions, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will now describe the treatment for cutting in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other abdomens and are known not to grow any further, they should be treated with fire cautery according to their quantity, starting from the third day after treatment; subsequently, follow the cure as we have described; and no one among the ancients said that it should be cauterized at three angles in this manner.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the location of the hernia with a sign, and make a line across its width above the rupture; then another line from the outside, and hold your hand steady over the entire cautery area with the other hand.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cautery is lighter and easier.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain arises in any limb, whether from a fall or an injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and the cure through medicine is ineffective, then it should be cauterized with the cautery called "point," and the cautery should be applied according to the length of the member, its smallness or largeness, its strength or weakness, its twist, and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If the patient is healthy after the first cautery, that's good; if not, start over with another cautery on that part, because it often happens that the joint must move to the adjacent limb, so you should perform cauterizations until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	It appears that "de meselerie" is not part
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	These issues are never helped by cautery alone, especially the disease that arises from the putrefaction of fluids and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	You can treat it by cauterization, taking care if the disease is in its beginning and if it responds to the cure as we have said in the previous section, without delay or hesitation, so that you do not doubt that corruption does not spread throughout the patient. Then perform cauterizations on the head: first, start from the crown down to the hairline at the end of the temples; second, move to the two horns, and third, behind the head on the nape; leave your hand alone until the cauterization reaches the bone, and make sure the crusts fall out so that vapors of thick humors can escape; treat the mouse according to what is appropriate.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if the illness is widespread and obvious, it is necessary that you cauterize these cauteries that we have mentioned above in the head, and cauterize gently on the spine of the neck, and cauterize six times on the spine of the back, and one greatly on the groin and another delicately elsewhere, and two on each shoulder; and two on the elbows, and two on the tendons of the pisiform bone, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the pits of the hands; and beware of the nails that are on the last toe, that you do not burn them; never make a cautery on the bone of the wrist, or another on the stomach bone, or one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more you perform cauterization, the greater the aid it provides and the better the outcome; and know that the patient feels no pain from cauterization as the healthy do, because the body is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauterization be great and small according to the members and joints, as you will find in the ways of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment, apply wheat flour with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling appears in any member and is cured by medicine, oils, and bandages, but it remains inflamed, then apply cautery to the member according to its size and the severity of the condition; and let the cautery be slightly inside the hope of healing; then attend to the treatment of the wound until it heals.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And never should cautery be applied to the hand, foot, or back, at the end of a nerve that weakens the member, and thus is removed the swelling; nevertheless, no one should intervene unless they are knowledgeable about the members and the paths of the moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	Of albars (or alabaster)
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is ignited, and the medical skill is worthless, then cauterize with a hot iron according to the severity of the case, until the white is removed, and it changes color; then apply a cure of flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and collicin and alder sap, each in equal parts; mix everything together, wrap it in cloth, and keep it on the affected area until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of cancer by cauterization.
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When cancer appears in its early stages and you wish to stop it, cauterize it with a hot iron in the shape of a circle, around the entire circumference of the cancer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And nevertheless, the wise say that one should also cauterize in the middle of a chancre; but I do not find this good, for I fear it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen this happen many times before; and a more righteous thing is that it be cauterized around, in the cautery called 'circle,' as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	from the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When anyone has a disease called 'adubelati,' and they do not die quickly or because of the excess it produces, or due to the old age of the patient when they are debilitated (that is, too much) and have little blood, or because of time; and you see them hastening to die: then cauterize around with many small cauteries while pressing; after which leave it as it is.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see her pierced through with all the cautery, then the heat of this cautery here is the shape:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of the illness called "adubelati" as long as the cautery has pierced the heart, and make the cautery such that the patient feels no pain in this way so that the course of the poisoning is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The treatment of fire with iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another type of disease is called "corroding," which is nothing other than a rot of the limbs, for it attacks the members as fire does dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a limb that can be treated with fire cautery, then heat the cautery clamps both very small and very large, according to what is appropriate for the limb or the disease; afterwards, cauterize all parts until you reach all the corruption, and leave nothing of it, so that everything that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and apply the cauterized leaves soaked in oil until all burns from the fire are healed, and any corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of wounds that cause pain.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if after three days you see that the wound has not healed properly, it is good; and if not, repeat the cauterization on what remains of the corrupted leaves.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this treatment is sometimes sufficient with medicinal herbs instead of fire cauterization; but nevertheless, fire cauterization is more effective, and I have already mentioned the use of medicinal herbs in detail: take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	from the fluids that come as pieces
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that pieces due to defects are born from a disease called "close" according to our understanding, and it is a great wrong that damages the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this disease is according to two manners.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This is to know the fire cautery, and the cautery of hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	For the fire cautery, take a hot knife that is as sharp as a quill of a bird, and make it of good iron to pierce the nail from all sides, and have fine edges; then place it entirely on the nail, and turn your hand around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail; leave it thus for three days until it begins to rot; then make an ointment with wild malva herbs ground up with silk, and leave the ointment on all night, and the nail will shrink and be pulled out from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cleanse the wound with a fresh compress until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are changed by fire, the body's heat, and often occur in hands and feet, it is necessary to apply cautery with hot water; and it is done thus: take a rod of iron or steel, or a penknife, and place the nail and the blister upon it, that is to say, the verrucas; then place the rod around it so that it touches all sides, then add a little hot water, and hold your hand firmly, pressing your hand as you turn it, so that the edge of the rod reaches the root of the nail, and can find the hot water deep inside to the root; and allow the patient to bear the sting of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will come out from its roots completely.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	First, do one after another, until you have relaxed all those that are in the body, then treat the wounds that cause harm.
li cure dou trembler	it cures the shaking.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When anyone trembles from cold or fever or another ailment, it is necessary that you perform four cauterizations or five on the spinal column, one cauterization between each vertebra; and one cauterization on the fish, and one on the stomach with an olive cautery; if this stops the trembling and hastens the recovery from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	from pus-filled blisters
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Never is it apparent through external symptoms that the body's baths, or pus-filled blisters, come from large amounts of corrupted matter within.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	if it is necessary to treat them at the first appearance, one should make a cautery on each pustule: a delicate cautery with a twig of myrtle, which is then seized by the fire, or with a long root of aristologus, or a lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And never should one cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, nor can they grow worse in advance, but it disrupts the superfluities from which they come and heals them; but it is necessary that this be done after evacuating the blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut off
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many grave consequences result from the blood of an artery being cut at the wound that reaches the extreme point, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cautery of a member, and similar things; it is very sad indeed to endure this.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Nevertheless, if this should happen to anyone, act quickly and place your finger on the wound of the vein, pulling it firmly until the pain subsides completely; then take several small and large olive oil cauteries, making them all red hot, then press them onto the wound according to its size and location, placing the cautery on the vein where you hold your finger, holding the cautery until the pain stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if a sudden heat occurs while you leave your hand over the vein, and the cauterization is complete, then quickly take another cautery from the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And continue to perform this one after the other until the wound is closed; be careful not to burn the nerve nearby, and ensure no further harm comes to the patient; and know that when the blood flow from the artery cuts off, it cannot be properly closed, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have mentioned: either through cauterization, or extraction when it has not been treated, or tightly wrapping it with strong thread, or applying medicines that have the power to stop the bleeding; and it should be bound and restrained carefully.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers relief tightly binding them with cloths or placing burning objects or similar things upon them, will not achieve much unless it is done properly.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to someone and they have no suitable medicine at hand, then they should apply their finger to the wound of the vein as we said before, pressing firmly until all pain and swelling from the wound and vein disappears; and they must not move it, but moisten it with cold water frequently while it remains very cold, until the swelling subsides and fades; and prepare carefully in advance what is needed for cauterization and other medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	We begin the second book of surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have already told you in the first chapter about all the diseases that require cautery with fire or burning medicine, and the herbs, causes, tools, and shapes of cauteries; I have placed this chapter on the most common injuries, and I will follow the same path in this chapter so that it may be easier to understand for those who wish.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, before I begin, it is important for you to know that this chapter involves greater risk and fear than the first one on cautery, and therefore requires more caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to attempt folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	Because many ways of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	if they come from such who have grown so accustomed to their illness that they die lightly due to the severity of the treatment they find for their disease, and of the greatness of their evil; and of these one should be afraid.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And there are those who give you a sign, saying: "Wait, I am blind"; and the illness is despicable.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	You should not consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put more great care in your honor than in your greed, and do not act rashly but wisely regarding those whom you are certain of, and from whom you can take and heal; and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health is restored; and this will help you gain good repute, glory, and a lasting memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Three precious words, Our Lords give you good understanding and rectitude, and if you desire the holy inspiration from His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I have ordered this chapter for you, in considering the tasks of a surgeon, as I have discussed in the chapter on cautery, from the foot to the head, so that you may more easily find what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Dou chief plein d'aigue" translates to "a head filled with blood
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	You know that this illness often comes to children at birth, when the baby's head is too tightly compressed, and it never occurs for a reason that can be identified as there is no remedy.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease except in children, and it hastens the death of all that I have seen; and for this reason, I think it is better to abandon part of the work in some treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose joints were filled with water, and the head swelled each day so much that it could not be supported; and the moisture grew so great that it became trapped beneath the skin, between the heart and the bone; and the work is such that the moisture is trapped between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, so you must make a deep cut through the head to let out the moisture, as far as possible, until the moisture has drained. And see here the shape of the sponge:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is underneath the bone, and you see the openings of the glands on each side of the head widely open, and when you press it with your hand there is a sharp, strong discharge, and it does not return to normal, then you should make three incisions in the middle of the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture completely.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After holding the cracks of the fabric and powders, he applies wine and oil, leaving it for up to five days; then he loosens it, treats the wound with bandages and poultices, and stretches the head equally, allowing the patient to eat dried meat from a pouch of moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another method of incision is that you observe or measure the size of the abscess and the collection of pus; for it never appears in front, nor behind, neither on the right nor on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Measure therefore the size of the abscess that has opened and the filling of the pus, and cut the opening according to your ability; be careful not to block the artery; then comes a flow of blood, so that the patient dies from the slow decay of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of the root
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When someone has a disease called "cataract," either in one or both eyes, and the illness is long-standing, and medical treatment does not help, then the final remedy is cautery by sealing the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you seal the two arteries, you should make the patient turn their head away; then rub the affected area with a rough cloth until the arteries open, and gently pull the cloth to extract any blood; then locate the vein where it appears behind the ears, and press on both sides gently until they are closed; then mark the spots of the arteries, and cut each one with a sharp spatula from both sides, reaching deep into the tissue, making sure the incision is wide across the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, turn the spatula away from the artery and cut through the coagulum on top, also cutting as it should across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, it bleeds continuously from above until it stops.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open when pressed, it is necessary to measure the amount of space of three fingers, then tie it with a thread and cut until the bone; and this amount of blood that should be let out is six parts, or perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure and the condition of the artery; then examine the wound: if there is no discharge from the wound onto the bone, drain the wound and bind it, and treat with care until it heals.
de emigrainne	Of migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migraine comes with catarrh due to moisture in the eyes and cheeks, and ancient exhaustion, and similar things, it is treated by methods of medical cures, but none of these help, if we drain the arteries of the eyes and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	The method for extracting them is that the patient pulls out the hairs from their temples and listens to the artery opening in the temple, as it opens clearly with its beating, and is quickly covered by no one else. If it is covered, the patient gently pulls some cloth over a few parts, then rubs the area with a rough cloth until the artery becomes visibly open; then take the instrument with this shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then hold it with pincers and carefully remove the threads that are attached to each part; if the artery is thin, turn it at the tip of the hook, then cut off that part according to the quantity of two joints.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, it will not heal without pain at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And treat the inflammation with six parts of garlic, up to three times; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it with two pieces of strong silk thread, so that pus does not come before the healing of the wound and causes complications; then cut off the excess between the two threads at the same time, and if you see fit, cauterize the patient with a cutting instrument up to the bone as long as the joints are cut; this is the moving part, if the patient does not have fever and has a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cauterization is aid to finish moisture: therefore it is of greater help with moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Or for the extraction of arteries, it is necessary to fill the wound with wet cotton and cover it with well-made bandages; and when they are released, take care to apply dried medicines that cause heat, and more bandages until it is healed; and if there is no vitriol available, hasten to cover the artery with cautery or press your hand on it so that the wound is cleansed; and if you do not have this at hand, place snow on the wound until it freezes, and then apply cold water continuously until healing occurs, and pull as necessary. The more mobile and lighter the extraction of the artery is, the better it is to cauterize the vein with this cautery, cutting from both sides, but the cuts should be well spaced to maintain heat for a longer time.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too tense, they cannot hold their heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have between the two blades a good amount of space, and then when you have sealed the two joints, and you place the hot iron over until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two joints; and they should be separated between the two joints because this cautery is not well-joined throughout; and this is the form of the cautery.
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes descend into the veins that are on top of the head, and no medicine helps, and you see the face of the sick person turning red, and feel a burning sensation on their forehead as if from heat, and the eyes become wet and moist so that the eyelids's hairs fall out, and the eyelids themselves are scorched by the tears' heat, then this treatment is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called this ancient treatment "contused cure". For the patient with this condition, pluck the hairs on their forehead. Then make three cuts on the forehead equally along its length; one cut should extend downward towards the nose, and the other two should be on either side of the forehead above the eyelids, avoiding the arteries that are beside the eyelids. Keep your hand away from the continuation of the jawbones. Each wound should have a width equivalent to three fingers across. Have a piece of sponge and cloth ready to wipe away the blood, then use the curved spatulum as shown:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is made on the temple, down to the second incision; peel away all the skin that is between the two slits, to all the satisfaction that is on the bone, then make another from the middle incision down to the other second, and then extract this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you insert the instrument called "cultellaire" into the first slit, it should be very sharp on one side and soft on the other; its shape is as follows:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	and place the sharp side against the skin at the edge of the wound, and the soft side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle slit.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to their ends, so that the incision is continuous until it opens the heart; then make another deep cut until it reaches the other side; and then extract the blood evenly, and press the wound to express the blood; then place a thin piece of old cotton in each wound, and cover them with damp cloths soaked in wine, oil, and ash, and ensure that no abscesses form; and on the third day, loosen the bandages, and apply a strong spray of cold water, then the basilicon cure with rose oil, and other treatments to heal the wounds, until they are healed.
dou reume des eulz	In this context, "dou reume des eulz" translates to "the
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	As for any sudden catarrh that has become habitual, and you see the eyes swollen and small, weakening vision, and the membranes burned; and the hair falls out, and it feels as if there is a sharp pain in the head, and the patient sneezes; then know through these accidents that this matter and catarrh do not come from a single cause, but rather from many veins, and the movement that heals it.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And instruct the patient to press his forehead, then make a deep cut across the middle of the forehead, and another one wide enough.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And starting from the cut on the left temple to the right temple, make the incision down to the bone; and move your hand away from the nerve of the temples that move when you blink; and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then separate the two edges of the wound and place old cotton in it, and cover it with linen; then put moistened cloth soaked in wine and oil on top, and be careful not to get any pus; once the bone has healed, it is necessary to rub the bone until it starts to feel alive, then treat it with drying agents that cause itching.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of wheat flour and three parts of chalk, and make a paste; apply it to these wounds to draw out the poison throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	ear inflammation
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Anything that causes ear inflammation is one of the four things: grains, animals, mineral stones, or similar objects; seeds such as peas, beans, and others; or anything fluid-like like water or mucus.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	If a stone or any other object that does not fit properly in the ear enters the ear and does not grow or settle in the ear, place the ear in sunlight.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see a stone, and it emits any drop of purple oil or oil of myrrh, then administer its extraction; and the act causes coughing, and stops the nostrils when coughing occurs, and places pieces of cloth or wool inside the ear; and pull the ear gently upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times this treatment brings immediate relief; and if it does not bring relief, then administer its extraction with fine pincers, of which here is the shape:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out with the pincers, that is good; if not, administer its extraction with a thin, double-threaded needle; and if it still does not jump out, make a chain of aramid thread and plug the opening of the ear tightly with the tip of the chain, and stop any air currents around the chain with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the chain. Then treat it forcefully, because often this method brings immediate relief, as we have said; and if it does not work in this way, take a lot of care in choosing the instrument, take some cotton, and place it around; then press the mass on the stone with the thread or something similar, and extract it.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not follow all the things that we have said, hasten to split the ear in such a way that the abscess cools and the spasms cease; and the manner of the incision is as follows: you must first cleanse the patient suffering from cephalalgia, and extract the blood according to its virtue. Then place the patient between your hands and return the ear to its proper position, making a small incision at the base of the ear where the fat or cartilage depends. Let the incision be no larger than a moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your ability, sucking on it diligently in your mouth, and continue the treatment until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if there are grains present and they swell, then perform an extraction; but if it cannot be extracted, apply a delicate, thin spatula according to this form.
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision of that growth.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not attempt this if you think the growth is moist from earwax, having made many attempts; then extract it with delicate tweezers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case that these things occur in the ear, it is appropriate for the patient to use a gentle sneeze and fill the ear with fine cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And place some stuffing on the same ear, whether there is wax or water.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If she jumps out of fear, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If she does not jump, take many small needles according to the length of your little finger and warm them slightly over fire; then insert the patient into one or both holes in their ear, and from another side, push on their feet, and strike with another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and continue this process of stone against stone until all the liquid comes out completely, and thus she will jump out completely; and if you see, take a thin thread, and insert one end into the ear, and the other tip over fire until the thinner thread is burned; then do the same with another thread until all the liquid comes out.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	During the removal of an animal, if it is a small core, like a bug or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the previous discussion; but if it is a large core that one can feel, then use pincers for its removal; and this is the lightest thing to remove that is found in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	When removing worms from the ears, as you treat it as we have said in the previous discussion and how to deal with discharges, if the treatment does not help, then you should examine the ear under sunlight. If there are no visible worms, use very fine pincers to remove them, and if they are still not visible, take a stick (cainne) and gently probe to determine their location and shape.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it should be cut deep from below and wide from above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And then turn the bottle more subtly into the ear according to the amount of suffering of the patient, and suck until all the venom has left. Do this often until all the poison is gone.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not come out, then narrow the canal with cotton as I have said in the case of stones; and if they do not come out easily as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have tried in the extraction of worms, and you will find them in the treatment of distillations; and distil your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, forming it as you see.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And take a piece of silver or gold wire, cut it into small pieces and place them over the tiny openings for distillation; and to press the distillation inside the well-made brass instrument, you should use a razor and wrap the tip with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and what you wish from your medicines in the flame, and keep the candle near the ear. Then put the razor entirely around the cotton and press your hand firmly until the oil is distilled or the candle flame withdrawn from the ear; and let the patient smell it, and make sure the distillation is not too hot, for the medicine would then be ineffective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	ear candling
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born with any perforation in their ears; and the same thing happens to adults due to a wound or an object inserted into the ear, and this blockage occurs entirely within the ear unless one can see it; and sometimes the perforation becomes completely closed, and no one notices it.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	When the blockage occurs entirely within and is invisible, it requires careful treatment in multiple ways. In such cases, you should place the patient's ear towards the sun; examine it closely: if you see the accumulation of wax visible, this is where the shape of the blockage is formed.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And make incisions and cuts all around it from front to back so that the ear does not become damaged; if the pain is due to inflammation or hardening of the ear canal, hold a thin pince with delicate fingers and gently press until the hardened part is completely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the incisions are completely in the ear, take a thin, sharp razor and heat it slightly over the fire, then insert it into the ear canal.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the pain from the operation in the ear, make a slight hole, and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear; then insert into the ear a plug according to the size of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Keep the wound covered for as long as it is fresh, or take a cloth and moisten it with rose water, and sprinkle vitriol powder on it; and if you see the ear swollen, it is necessary to remove the cloth and replace it with another moistened cloth made of rose oil and wax until the swelling subsides; then treat it while it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the inflammation of blood comes, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and use other remedies that remove the inflammation of blood which are treated with distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the making of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Gather all the papers that come from the eyes when they are moist and dried, it is necessary to extend them with tongs and pincers, taking care not to damage their roots, then place a small piece of glass over them.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if, after removing the outer layer, the cautery is performed with a subtle lenticular cautery tool, and the surgeon moves it after incision, it often heals, though nothing remains of its roots; and when the roots are cauterized with fire, they are burned and never grow back.
de la gresle	(referring to) the ice
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times come to paper certain things that seem gravely in their form and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "frostbite," and it is a gathering of much moisture on the paper above and below; the work is as follows: take care if the frostbite becomes silent from one side to the other, and this is a slight thing to know; then make them wide, then scrape each part gently, then take them with pincers and cut.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper slightly, it causes no harm to the patient; and if the split is great, and the gathering has a stitch, then treat it as long as it remains healthy; and if it is small, do not use much force, for the humors will soon restore it and cause pain.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the pain is descending inside the ear towards the top part, turn the paper and the pain will be in pinches, pressing from one side and the other; and if the paper is moved by the incision, it causes no harm; and when the pain is cut, remove the salt water oil, and treat the affected area until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	from the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a fat that is embedded in the threads of paper above, and it occurs more often in children than in adults, causing great pain to their eyes, leading to cataracts in the morning, and they cannot bear the light of the sun because tears flow excessively from their eyes; and due to this, they close their eyes tightly, sleep on them, and their papers become moist under their eyebrows, where the fat has opened in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the joint with your fingers and feel the heat between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient places their head on a healthy surface; then takes a linen cloth and prepares a tent-like shape according to the amount of blood from each part, placing it over them; and presses with both hands on either side so that the blood collects in the center of the circle; then, using a sharp spatula, makes a cut as wide as the wound made on the vein, but no wider; and carefully removes the blood until all is extracted; and depending on the arrangement, more blood may come out from the cut, forming a shape like a white piece of fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Take therefore a whole piece of cloth dipped in hot water between your fingers, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is relaxed; and be careful not to press into the wound, do not reach all the way to the oil, do not touch it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the wound does not open at the beginning of the incision, gently widen the wound a little until it opens; then remove it as we have said, and moisten cloth with water and oil, apply to the wound, and bandage tightly.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And for such men who grind and apply something to corrupt the moisture that is stuck.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it as long as it is whole.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to a hot abscess, treat it with external applications as long as it is whole.
des poilz des papieres	hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow in paper (i.e., abnormally), they become entangled, causing harm as if they were a custom habit or molly of paper and albugine, leading to the destruction of the hair; and the cure is according to four methods: by cauterizing with fire altogether, or using medicines according to what is mentioned in the chapter on cautery, or through incision and stitching, or by binding, as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You should place the patient's head in your healthy hand, then turn the paper from the oil in your left hand; if it rotates, that is good; if not, insert an needle along all the thread above. And this should be done along the edge of the paper where the hairs grow, pulling the thread over the entire paper and turning it against the razor. Then make a cut in the paper, beneath the hairs, adjusting them neatly, all the way to the large vein and the small one; then extract the thread, and place beneath the paper a small piece of cotton and cloth, and draw a figure on the paper like a yew branch, according to the amount you see the paper rise.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if you take some skilled person to cut a great quantity of paper according to how soft it is; then make a small slit across the entire length of both lines that you have marked, and begin with a large tear from one end to the other; and let it be one of the slits close to the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then cut the edge into one of the two angles towards the heart, then scrape it entirely away; then bring the two edges together with a single stitch of fine thread, and wipe away the blood, and allow the excess threads to hang down from the two corners on anything sticky, if you are able to do so. And if not, leave the stitches and threads for three or four days, then treat the wound without stitching using drying and constricting things, because the paper revives at the healing of the wound and the gathering together of it, but the stitch is moved (as they say in olden times), and that causes harm; and if in another way: it is that you mark the paper with a figure which is as the shape of a needle, as we have told it, at three points according to the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then take hold of what is above with small force equally according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the tweezers, and the matter is not equal, take a needle with thread, and tie it around the figure; then take another thread through the large tear, and the smaller thread through the small one, and gather them equally between your fingers; then gently let go of your hand equally, and gently all the skin where you have made the mark, as we have said, then sew together the two edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with wax and similar medicaments that assuage; and sometimes happens that the paper-like tissue is converted. It is necessary to use what we have said about the incision, but the stitching in both directions is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment for a broken arm is as follows: take paper and make it inside according to what I said, then make two arm splints the same length as the paper and wide enough; bind each part where you hold the bones together; carefully assemble one onto the other on top of the paper from oil, and stretch the two arm splints from the forming parts; leave it like this for a few days. The bone that is bound will heal and stop hurting and causing pain when it has mended through itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays and the wound becomes filled with pus, or if the paper cannot be lifted anymore because the hairs have grown back, and it is no longer possible to see the bone; then treat it as soon as possible while it is still healthy. And when the wound has healed and if lifting the paper no longer causes pain, make the two arm splints according to this figure and this measurement of length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work involves piercing the skin with a fine needle and threading it with soft, thin silk thread. Then, you gather the edges and tie them subtly, making the length of the threads one palm length. Next, arrange another thin silk thread briefly in the wound, tying it around the hair's base. Place the patient's head on your healthy side, gently releasing the work so that the wound is relieved. Since this is a delicate and minute task, push the needle entirely through the root of the hair, making it pierce the paper thinly until you treat it above the natural skin. Then, pull out the hair up to the surface of the paper with the thread, and within the paper, take hold of the hair if there are one or two or three or more threads. Finally, remove your hand once the hairs have completely left the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hair is treated and does not come out with it, pull the hair from the root to the entire length that you have ordered, until the hair comes out completely through the opening and you see it with your eye; then pull the hair and the thread, close the wound and leave it for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and a scar forms. And if the hairs are small, accompany them with a long natural horsehair, and raise it along with that one or leave it, as long as it remains extended and then let it go.
de la porriture de l’oil	regarding the impurity of oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this illness called "aleacrati" or putrefaction occurs in the body, it has two causes: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it occurs suddenly from a wound, or cutting, or cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the method of treatment in this case is to open the wound, separate the edges, and insert linen strips inside, binding them until they are healed; and it is not advisable to use things that dry out and constrict during the healing process.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the illness returns worse than before; but it does bring about softening things, such as fenugreek; and rosewater of water or linseed oil cooked, and any diluent ointment melted in either eye, and it wraps around a cloth, and treats it thus.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the true treasure of your cure is that you must be careful not to adhere strictly to the form it had before; and these works that we have mentioned are no more than correct measures for this illness, so that it does not return in the same way as before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the grease that comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This illness that is a dislocation, which is truly called "luxation," is both natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accidental cause is a wound, a cut, cautery, and similar things; and the outcome of the work in this case, if you pierce a needle with a double thread, inserting it into the flesh from the left side towards the right, so that the thread passes through both sides of the skin, then the needle is positioned above everything, and the wound is wide open.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper returns as it should be, that is good; but if not, take a razor and insert it into the cut, turning the paper and making two cuts on either side inside the paper; and let the edges of these two cuts form two angles in the incision you made, so that when they are brought together, the shape is like the shape of a letter with a "Y" (griesche); then remove the paper, according to the amount that its sides have dislocated from each other, from where it was attached to the skin; then adjust the two disconnected parts and sew them together with a thread of wool; finally, treat this as we mentioned regarding the mollifying medicines and bandages, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the illness arises from cutting, stitching, or cauterizing, it is necessary that you make a clean cut between the hairs and the skin, following what has been said before; then separate the two leaves of the wound, as I have mentioned; and one must perform the work according to the form of the illness, for it varies greatly in form, and skilled masters devise various means from all possible tools to restore the natural shape; and the patients themselves, according to what is appropriate for the treatment and instruments used, take on different dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	The phrase "dou soudement de la papiere" translates directly to "cut immediately from
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suture is in the hands of skilled people in this manner that the paper on top is smooth with white oil, and it cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must insert the tip of a razor under the paper and lift it up; and hold it like pincers until you remove what is hard on the delicate spatula, neither too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient can endure neither the too sharp nor the one that bleeds oil; and make your incision, from which you scrape together the assembled paper, gently, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and all of it heals, never causing any infection in the oil, nor does it become salty or use hot water or a collar; then place between the paper and the oil a cloth made of linen, and put on top of the oil moist wool in abundance; and after the third day use a collar and things that help healing until it is completely healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	from the nail of the finger
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	You know that the nail has two types of appearances: one is nervous and resembles a hard, sharp object, and the other is not nervous but appears as white, frozen moisture, which, when touched with iron and treated with pincers, cannot be done; and both resemble beginning towards the great joint, growing bit by bit until it covers the entire sight and light and movement of the finger.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	The method of incision is as follows: the patient places their head in a healthy position, then opens the joint; takes a piece of paper in their hand, then twists the nail with small pincers from above; takes a needle, threads it with horsehair, goose hair, or cowhair, and a strong thread; doubles the tip of the needle slightly and inserts it through the nail, piercing it all the way through; ties the nail with the thread and extends it from above; carefully removes all the hair on the side of the nail closest to the root, using a sharp and thin scalpel, leaving the natural shape of the nail intact; under no circumstances should the nail be extended at an angle, only straight or slightly curved as we have said. This is the form it takes:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And ensure that the knife does not touch and tear the soft flesh, and that the cut is not pierced; then, after incising, drop a little of the crushed silk into the wound and cover it with a collar made of litargire, and leave it until the next day; then treat it as necessary until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	If the nail is not nerve-related and you cannot insert the needle, or if the hooks cannot enter, this condition often requires treatment with medications; as I have described in detail. If you see it cover itself when opening the wound over the patient's pain, take a light knife according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And remove the nail gently from above, and if you see that it is loosening and the reason for this quickens, then let it drip from your mouth into a collar made of collyrium (a medicinal ointment) with a red string and grind it, and seal the oil until the next day; then repeat the other work according to this same method, until it is entirely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing in the oil contradicts you, such as a hot abscess, then apply it, and treat the hot abscess first until it is healed, then continue with the work as before, until it is cured.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh causes pain in the eye through great damage, suspending it at the corner and cutting off a part but not all, no tears will come; then distil into the eye a red collyre made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	on the flesh that is born on the iris
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Some people are born without any red flesh on the iris, covering and restraining it with membranes and turning it to ash, resembling a rosebud; and this is harmful as patients place their heads in unclean beds, then open them and clean all the flesh with suitable hooks, supporting it firmly. Then, cut off the first piece, shaving everything down to the end, being careful not to cause eye damage during the procedure. And after completing the incision and removing all the flesh, apply oil of crushed seal or distil a red collyre into the eye, along with other corrosive medicines, and place warm cotton over it so that it remains surefire. If nothing remains, and there is no sign of healing, and you suspect a hot abscess, leave the oil and treat the abscess with calming remedies; then return to your task as soon as it is healed, and repeat these procedures in this way.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nevertheless, you must pay attention to each weak part of the body naturally; and in the case of an accident, through work; and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member suffers from that work.
des voines des eulz	veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	These are the red veins that are covered over the eye, they take away from sight its work and weaken the eye every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	The art is first to observe the eye, if it be red, swollen, and there is no other disease but the redness; then take these steps: command the patient to place his head in your healthy hand, then suspend those veins at every turn according to your wisdom, and make the incisions delicate, twice as subtle according to this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And there should be two incisions by degrees in the body according to this form.
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then you should gently massage the veins, wiping off the blood hour after hour until you see the veins disappear from the skin; be careful not to pierce the skin with the tips of the instruments, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, being very diligent in your task so that you do not make the veins swell up again; and when you have done this, distil green and red collyrium into the oil to corrupt what remains in the sebaceous glands.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	If you cannot collect all of these in that hour, make a poultice over the oil with soothing things for the pain of the joints, and leave it for no more than a day until the pain is eased and the hot abscess is assured, then begin again according to this manner as long as it remains healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	from the fistula of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	He calls these fistulas "arissati": when you treat them with cautery and hot medicine according to what I have said before, and they are not healed, there is a foreign body within the abscess, where he must die, and drain all the moisture that is in it, as long as the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and blackness, if it has taken the shape of all the instruments mentioned here, it is called "the sharp point", and should be made from iron from the deepest part to the tip, and pointed like a file as it is in this present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place the corrupt bone back in its socket, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand slightly until you know that corruption is gone; do this several times, then return the joint to a state of dry medicine.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the joints are fused, and it is born thus, and the bowel's opening is fused and remains that way for 40 days, and it does not heal or become abscessed, and no bad accidents occur, knowing that it is healthy; if not, there is no other mechanism to reopen the fistula through the opening than according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron and aqua-based medicines, and when it is uncovered, take this fores as shown here, and let the iron be at three angles, and the chafing should go no higher than seen.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the lost bone of the arm, and remove your hand from the blood, then turn to all parts until it pierces the bone and causes the patient pain as if he holds his hand on his eye; and after that return the limb to dry medicine, as I have taught you, and when the charring and hardening of the bone has taken place, then see the matter at the joint; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the blood
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the wound is completely open and does not disturb the joint or cause any diminution, it is necessary to bind the patient; then heal it, and apply poultices or leeches without hurting in order to suck out the evil humors, then prepare an oil with alder, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla, and strain the oil, and apply it on bandages and cloth; the manner of the cloth should be that you make each layer double, and place them one upon another according to the need of the wound; then strain it over a hard bandage, and repeat the use of leeches for sucking without hurting; then remove the leeches and leave the poultice pressed day and night, and if it becomes moist, it is good; if not, renew the poultices, cloth, binding, and leeches until the wound is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	breakage of the skin's surface
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When there is a breakdown in the skin's surface (scab), it opens and fills with pus like a grain of resin, which is encouraging to see. Then, if you notice this, the treatment involves inserting a needle into the base of the scab, as close as possible to its root, and then another needle where the thread part of the scab begins; pierce it and leave the first needle in place. Next, cut off the double-threaded part of the scab, wrap some clean cloth around it, and pull tightly, then remove the needle and apply fresh, moist lint over it. Leave it until the thread is completely separated from the scab, then treat the wound with comforting remedies until it heals; at no time should the wound be restricted by the scab in any way until it has healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation has a great appearance, pierce it with a fine spatumule that comes from oil, and dry the albugineous moisture and pull the joint, then insert it again as soon as possible; then extract it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the oil gland
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called "alcunnati" is not acute, but a swelling that collects in the oil gland, resembling a sharp descending sensation, and it is not sharp; and the manner of the appearance of the work is such that you make the patient lie on their back with the affected area raised and straight, then take the head in both hands from two sides, and move it until you see the swelling come up to your fingers; then insert a point, and do not let it sink or become discolored, and observe the patient as usual; if it does not subside, know that it is acute, and the drainage of the swelling must be done as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you let the patient rest in your hands, then take the delicate spatula and make incisions on the corneal membrane along the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal membrane and cornea, until the bowel is released; and when it has been released, it distills into hot clear water mixed with honey, or boiling fennel seed and honey, then apply other remedies as long as it is healthy.
des aigues de l’oil	the waters of oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have similar waters in the division, and what is necessary to pierce; to perform according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	You should place the patient between your crossed hands away from direct sunlight, and apply pure oil tightly; then place the paper of the oil in your left hand if the hairs are on the left side, or in your right hand if they are on the right side. Then take the instrument called "almagda" in your right hand if the hairs are on the left, or your left hand if they are on the right; then insert the tip of the instrument into the oil's blossom along a thick line from the smallest drop to the end of the oil's stem, and turn the instrument called "almagda" skillfully, feeling it pierce the oil's blossom and notice that almagda fills the void. And the measure of the path of almagda should be exactly the same as the measurement of the space between the plum blossom until the end of darkness; this is the crown of the oil. You will see the bone on the paper due to the clarity of the corned cloth, and then place the instrument up to where the water begins, pressing it along one path after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he feels the patient now, if he sees the patient before him and the instrument in his hand.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting, take a small step and then lift the second joint, apply force with the instrument, and when it is deeply inserted and does not rise, slowly extract it by turning your hand back and forth; then put the gem oil in again and remove it from that place.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then apply heat to the cold compress or any other moistened oil with rose oil and plenty of egg yolk, and wrap it in healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, place a fine mesh over with much heat.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if it cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, as there are many people with very hard eyes, it is necessary that you press the instrument called "alberit", which has this shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Then pierce only the conjunctiva gently, without causing too much pain, but make it subtle, then push the foreign body out as we have said; and after completing the work, prepare the patient for sleep with a comfortable position, lying on his back in a dark place; and be sure to restrict all movements, feeding him soft foods, and do not let him move his head to the right or left, and keep him in this position for three days. Then release him in the same dark room, test his vision, and show him no objects, and then put the bandage back on for seven more days; and it is not advisable to perform this at the time of the cure or after the incision, but rather to ease the patient, as acute pain may worsen.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	If an abscess appears, you should loosen the skin in front of the seventh day and apply the remedies that soothe the abscess; and once it is soothed, loosen the sight and place a corner of cloth on his face to cover for some time, and thus remain in this dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	Then leave the house little by little and recover in bed; and know that no disciples should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from the East who told us that in his land they use a certain tool to suck out water, but I have never seen it in our land, nor have I ever read about it in ancient books; perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of magic, so that whoever does not know them will see them as strange; and they should be precisely of gold.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the tip of this same instrument be very thin, and the rear part at a right angle.
de la char sor le neis	of the charm on the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	No one should ever birth or create charms arranged in various ways, of which there are none that seem like scorpions full of poison; and if there are such with a charm enhanced with exquisite color, or a charm soft and of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In this case where the wound is painful and not yet healed, you should make the patient lie between your hands facing the sun; open their nostrils, pour the liquid into those wounds, and treat them roughly; hold what you can sustain with a thin, sharp instrument from one side, until you know that wound is completely healed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there is anything left that cannot be covered, open it with all the delicate and light instruments until nothing remains; without delay, perform the incision as needed; and for malignant abscesses, hurry and cauterize until the wound is completely healed and all the pus is drained, then apply heat or cold and wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If he opens his mouth and moisture comes out until the pain is gone, know that it is safe; and if moisture does not come out as it should, know that there is something stuck in the bone above, preventing the instruments from cutting. Then you must insert a piece of linen thread, thick enough, and use your hands, allowing each finger to have some space or less; put the patient's toe in the thread on his ability, and pull until it comes out through the mouth, and often children do this at school, and it is an easy thing for whoever wants to do it. Then hold the part that comes through the mouth with one hand, and the other part coming through the mouth with the other hand, knowing one after the other as we who are in thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	As long as you know that the new wound has been corrupted, then treat the son (patient), wipe off the blood, and moisten the wound with Egyptian ointment, and put it back to its place as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments have corroded all that remains of the corruption; and then place a plug in the nose for no more than a day while it heals, and if there is need for dry medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, with which one distills oils and medicines into the nose.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be of silver or gold, resembling an open lamp, like a pipe, and lead it thus; and if you see fit, make a closed pipe, and let the instruments be full to purge the head; and have many around the head to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	Of the pain near the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Often, near the nose, there appears a pain called "telul," which swells and becomes very large, so much so that it is a sight to behold; therefore, it is necessary that you take care at the beginning, and remove it entirely, then apply cautery or burning medicine upon it. If one delays covering it until it becomes large, be careful if it hardens, takes on a poor color, and loses sensation: do not touch it with iron, for it is an infected abscess, and when you attempt to cover it even once, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is sensitive to touch, neither apply heat nor cold, and try to completely remove all infection without causing pain to the patient, making him comfortable.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the wound is cut and dressed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	You know that when the fluid from a continued fracture comes out through one of these powerful cartilage joints, it benefits no one.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore necessary to close this wound in no way, if the injury is fresh with blood; and then sew together the two lips into a single stitch, and treat it until it heals; and if the lips are already separated on one side or the other, it is necessary that you cut away all the parts of their core while they heal, then sew them together into a single stitch, tighten it, and sprinkle over it dragon's blood powder, and incense ground; and place upon the powders a piece of plaster of strong or other adhesive plaster, and leave it until it falls off by itself, then treat with ointment until it heals.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of stitching is as follows: either with needles, as we have mentioned in the sewing of the stomach; or with thread, as I have informed you.
des apostemes des levres	abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At home, the abscesses on the lips appear as hard lumps, some smaller and others larger; then you must turn the lips and split each one open, using tweezers to remove the pus from each part; then apply a mixture of vinegar and charcoal after making the cut, until the wound is clean; finally, use a dry leaf, and cure the wound with dry herbs until it heals.
de la char des gencives	from the disease of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often, a disease of the gums, which the ancients called "albulus," occurs; it is necessary that you hold it with tweezers and cut off the root, allowing the bowel or abscess to drain; then apply, over the wound, vitriole dust or other drying and constricting powders; and if the gum disease returns after the incision, it often does so a second time, and cauterization is required: if it does not return after cauterization. These are the shapes of the instruments for cutting off gums.
des sordens	of obstinacy
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	No teeth are ever aligned at the top of the jaw, within the gums, which are ugly and rough; nor do they become black and yellow and rotten until corruption reaches the gums, and so the teeth stink; it is necessary that you hold the patient's jaws in your hands, and their teeth in yours, and file away the visible teeth or gums until nothing remains; and thus make them black, green, yellow, and others, as long as they are rotten; and if what is removed at the first attempt, it is good; if not, repeat the process on the second and third days, until everything has been filed; and know that the teeth require various tools to file, according to the work they must perform, because the tool used to remove one set of teeth has a different shape from that used between them. And these shapes and others should be prepared in advance.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	You should cure the tooth of its pain as soon as possible, for you must not delay in treating it at all, for it is a very precious substance and one cannot find an excuse for delaying its treatment.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then, when the patient is suffering greatly, it is important that you be certain about which tooth is painful.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the patient cries out in pain, thinking it is from a tooth that is healthy, and has the good tooth extracted; but still the pain does not go away because of the extraction, as we have already experienced with these patients; and when you are certain about which tooth is painful, you should cut around the tooth with a sharp spatula to protect the gums from all sides; then move the teeth with pliers bit by bit, making sure they are well set, and tighten the pliers; place the patient's jaw between your knees, holding it firmly so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, if it does not come out, take none of these instruments and push it gently from every side, and move it as you have done before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	If the tooth is broken and pulled out, it is necessary to fill the empty space with cloth, either from the pocket or the wound; and if it is tightly gripped by pliers, be careful not to break it while pulling; and it is very important to work skillfully around the gum line to remove the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be very careful not to break it, and if a part breaks off, return it to the patient; due to the evil of the root, he will experience greater pain than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And be sure that you do not act like the ignorant healers who, through their haste and boldness, break the skin at every turn, and do not take heed of what we have said; but they bring about great illness through their words, either because of the roots where they linger or because of the skin they break, as we often see. And when the wound is deep, wash it with wine or vinegar and silk; and the pus that comes from it, which often happens, use vitriol poultice; if that does not help, then cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shape of the instruments used to extract teeth should have long and thick handles that do not bend when pulling a tooth; and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should have sturdy limbs that do not bend when pulled, made of well-forged iron, and toothed so as to hold firm.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains stuck when pulled, it is necessary to place a moistened cotton ball or butter on it for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the limbs are relaxed, then use pliers called 'algefri' to gently extract them, making them look like a bird's beak; they should be made inside as a file and this is their shape.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out of these grips, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh all around the root, and place the instrument called "althali," which is a plier, in this shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And if it is hard and thick so that it does not break, and the root comes out by itself, that is good. If not, use all the instruments, and the shapes will come as follows:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses this instrument with two edges, the shape is as follows:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are used in the treatment of teeth, and this tool that resembles large pliers, whose shape is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And this instrument should be so strong that it cannot break, and you should know that many dental instruments exist; and also other instruments, which are not mentioned. The most skilled surgeons create their own tools according to their works and the disease, for there are many diseases for which no instrument was taught by the ancients. If one breaks a part of a bone or another hard substance, and cannot find the appropriate instrument I have mentioned, and requires help in gestures, this is its form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And they should be large and well-fixed to hold the bone, so that it does not escape but can be held and extracted; and then return the limb to suitable medicine, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, even if it is small, use all these instruments:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural shape of the body, and its form is ugly, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know if the tooth has grown after the original one and is not in its proper place, and it cannot be sawn or filed: then extract it. And if it grows with another tooth, take this instrument whose form is like a small beak, and let it be sharp steel.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And take a small cup and put it into your hand each day for the pain in your teeth, and because you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that it can be filed, then file it from one side as this form shows.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	It is also similar to how they file the points of needles; daily, gently file the tooth with your hand until it stops moving, then at the end, shape it with no rough edges, and if the tooth is too sharp, file its sharpness until it is even, so as not to hurt the tongue or impair speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth aches
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth aches deeply, either from hitting or falling, and the patient cannot bear pressure on it, believing that it will break, and medicine has not helped, then they should restrict it with a thread, for silver wire turns green and spoils, but gold never changes; and the thread should be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the space between the teeth. If you need to align the teeth, take the thread and wrap it double between the two healthy teeth, then place the aching tooth(es) in between the healthy ones, as many as there are, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then continue the wrapping and gently but firmly pull the thread, until it does not move. And ensure your plier is at the root of the aching tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then cut the tendons with pincers and assemble them, and insert them between a healthy tooth, and arrange it so that the tongue does not tear; and leave it this tight as long as it can withstand, and if it loosens, the thread will break, if pulled from another thread; it should stay like this throughout its duration, and it is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of the two healthy teeth and the two jaws, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth is removed and placed back in its place, fresh each time, as we have said; nor should anyone intervene who is not skilled and patient, and one never makes the shape of a bone tooth of a healthy animal, but puts it in the socket where the defect is, and tightens it as we have said, and holds it for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	from cutting the tongue's ligaments
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	No matter what these ligaments are, whether they come from the tongue's natural structure or an accident from a deep wound; and the work involves opening the mouth of the patient with force, holding their head in a safe position, and loosening the tongue; then cut the nervous ligament widely, as much as possible, so that the tongue is dislocated from its attachment, and if there is any hardness or newness, and it's from a sudden wound, use a hook and cut the ligament widely; be careful not to cut too deeply into the gap, for the artery located below; and once done, lift the affected area with warm or cold water, then place a thin cloth under the tongue; and repeat this process each night so that the ligaments do not heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the blood flow occurs due to moisture, apply vinegar to it; and if the wound does not heal, cauterize it with slow-burning caustic, which is good for that; then treat it with another remedy until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it of red, black, or hard color so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it inclines towards white and there is moisture in it, pour vinegar on it and scrape it with a thin spatula from both sides; and if it does not heal at your work, apply vitriol until it is stained, then return to your work until you treat everything thoroughly. Then lift the limb gently and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	from the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	No symptom ever appears in the throat that is called "godath", and they are properly known as the two amandres (amygdalae), and when you treat them, as we have said in the previous division, be careful: if they are abscesses of small size and a bright red color, do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if they are red and the root is thick, do not touch them with iron, also to prevent the spread of pus; but leave them until they die, and then you will remove them, or they may break on their own. And if they are of a white color again, and the root is fine, then prepare the instrument to extract, but first ensure that the abscess is calm and at ease.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then make the patient stand before the sun, and ensure his feet are in good condition, and open his mouth wide, and press the tongue down with the instrument between his hands, pressing it hard; this is its shape. And let it be made of silver or fine gold as sharp as a knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	You cannot press the tongue down with all of this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the needle and thread it into the wound, pulling it out above as far as possible; do not remove any material from the stitches with it, but cut it with the instrument, which resembles a forceps; nevertheless, its head is curved, one side towards the other, very sharp, made of iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument at hand, if it is like pincers, then it has this form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	It should be carved on one side and smooth on the other. Once you have extracted one of the mandibles, extract the other in the same manner, and after the incision, rinse the patient's wound with hot water mixed with vinegar, salt, and herbs such as pomegranate peel, mistletoe, or similar, until the infection clears up; then apply the cure while it is still fresh. And no other abscesses form in the throat besides these two mandibles, if they are extracted in this way, just like the two mandibles.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was located inside her throat, namely a small abscess; and had pressed the entire throat tightly closed, so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passage, nor eat or drink, and would have died if she remained that way for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so swollen that it had pushed two ribs through both openings in the neck.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I then quickly inserted a knife into one of the openings in the neck, then removed it, and drew out a large amount of pus; then I did the same on the other side, opening the mouth and pressing the tongue, after which I inserted the knife into the abscesses and squeezed out some of the pus; only a little blood came out. And thus was the passage in the throat of the woman opened, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I did not cease cutting away at the abscess for a long time; but the abscess recurred again, filling the space that I had emptied, becoming very large. Then I seared it and cauterized it inside the throat; thus it healed without further growth. And I left these tasks to God after me.
de l’uve	from the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the retina detaches from the eye, and it is swollen and distant, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is thin, round, and detached to one side, it is called "retina.
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have mentioned in the previous discussion, but the treatment does not help, and you notice that the abscess is drained, and it becomes smaller, it is necessary to drain it; and the round one, when pressed together, is not far away, and it has a red or dark color, then it should be avoided from being incised.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the poor patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see this, according to the manner I have said, take the patient's tongue with your fingers and press it to the instrument we spoke of earlier; then insert the pin in the wound and pull it out, cutting it with one of the two instruments used for incising the mandibles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you must not cut off more than the excess beyond the natural limit; for if you do, it pains the voice and speech, and after the incision, use what we said regarding incising the mandibles, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient feels great fear, it is necessary that you use an instrument for cauterization to alleviate the intense pain.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The method of cauterization must be sharp and quick.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient should place his head on a healthy surface and then press the tongue with the instrument described in this chapter (cauterization) using sharp, hot coals, so that it is neither too thick nor too thin; and when using this instrument, it should take the shape as follows:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the physician hold a hair, as if it were the handle of a spoon, and place the instrument over all the medicine on the eye; and have the patient lie on their side, so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth into the medicine, preventing it from going down to the throat and causing pain. Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour, until you see it relax and the stinging of the medicine subside; and if necessary, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, dip it in the medicine, and insert it into the socket around, pressing it against the eye until the cotton sticks to the eye; and do this often until the cauterization is complete. Then leave it to dry and repeat after four or five days. If you need to redo the cauterization of the medicine, then redo it, and after the cauterization, wipe around the eye with cotton dipped in cold water, and cure any gargling as long as it heals.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is safer than cauterization, especially through incision; if it is performed with fumigation in this manner, take calament, hyssop, oregano, rue, chamomile, and similar herbs, and combine them all or any of them in a pot, and place it there, then bring it to a boil; let the pot be well sealed with strong clay, and among the pot have a chevait instrument in this manner.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be of silver or gold, and one of the joints should be squeezed in the patient's mouth as long as the vapour rises to the eye through the canal, until the eye becomes numb; after that, it often recurs as long as the eye is dry, and be careful not to perform this at the beginning of the hot abscess, as many things can happen; and do not attempt this except during the decline of a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not available, take a cane and insert within the mouth a piece of wool, so that it is not too hot for the patient; for the wool does not allow the heat to affect the mouth, and it is a good remedy together with safety.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times a burning sensation occurs in the throat due to an os or a fish spine, or any other thing. Therefore, you should treat what you can see, pressing the tongue against the sun with all the instrument so that you may observe the thing; and if it does not open and remains stuck in the throat, you must make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps this will dislodge the object. Or, the patient might swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a crumb of dry bread; tie a thread to the sponge and then swallow it; when it reaches the throat, it will burn and you can then extract it forcibly. If none of these methods work as mentioned, take an instrument according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instruments be curved at the tip so that they can enter the throat more easily, and raise the head high; and beware not to touch the epiglottis, so that everything does not come back, nor push the bone inside; and you must help the patient to swallow the instrument, because it needs to be moved in both directions; if it goes down, pull it out evenly throughout the instrument until it comes out.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Never is the throat treated with medicine, as I said in the previous section, except with medicinal treatments; and if that does not help, then look at the throat of the patient in the sunlight, and press the tongue with the instrument I told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the wound, pull it with all your small pins, or fine tweezers that are fit for it.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, take a horsehair rope and tie it around the throat of the patient, then tighten or loosen the rope until the pain subsides, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient has a fever all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it in while the patient swallows it, moving their hand often; and as soon as the wound feels the water, it will close.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not break as we have said, and the patient inhales the foul odor from the instrument used in fumigating the eye, do this many times, for it will eventually break without warning.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	The method of fumigation is as follows: you take a pot with hot coals in it, and place a small perforated cover over the opening; through this opening, the instrument used for fumigation is inserted. The patient then puts the tip of the cane in their mouth and closes their mouth tightly, preventing any smoke from escaping but allowing the vapors to reach them. The process will continue until the breath changes, or it may be repeated several times if the breath does not change. The patient should endure thirst and eat salty, bitter things, and avoid drinking water; then, when the breathing has changed, it is time for treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument with which one treats the wound, if it can be seen, resembles a curved pliers designed to enter the throat; and it looks like a falcon's beak, and has the hardness of stone, so that whatever it grasps, it cannot let go; and here is the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many appearances of abscesses are, according to the recollection presented in this book, diverse in terms of perforation and incision; and they are of two types, one being in its own likeness, and those that retain moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method is for the joints where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscess of the head is different from that of the base, and the abscess of the fleshy limb is different from that which occurs in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if, for an abscess, one should not pierce the flesh while the bowel is still alive according to its completion; but for such as require piercing when they are thoroughly healed and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses that occur in joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when an abscess comes from damaged joints, and it is left as long as it is swollen around, perhaps the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which causes contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	If the abscess is in the main member, and you delay piercing it until it is gangrenous, it will harm the principal member; or if it is from the foundation, pierce it likewise when it is gangrenous, otherwise it will rot completely, become swollen inside, and form a fistula; and it cannot heal thoroughly.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you should know the moment of perforation of an abscess which is deadly according to its completion, and this is when the pain is soothed, and the fever departs, and the intensity of pain and redness diminishes, and there is a gradual improvement and sharpening at the top of the abscess, and other signs; and you must make the perforation depend on the location of the abscess, and where it opens; and the perforation should be long throughout the body, and if the abscesses are in hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and everywhere equally without any bulging.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, according to that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when there are abscesses in fatty flesh, it is better to let the incision heal completely, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it too soon, the body retains the blood and is filled with much foul matter; and by chance, the lips harden and you draw out the filth from it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if at any abscess that is pierced according to the thickness of the flesh, according to what the member needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary to treat small abscesses with small incisions; and in large abscesses, large incisions, and many cuts according to the size of the abscess; and if at such abscesses one must direct the heart, and cover; when they have grown as thick as drapes, and are softened, it is also necessary to do as with blisters: and if there are such that are split into three angles, and if there are such that are cut as if with a needle of myrtle, like abscesses of enemies; and if there are such for which one makes a round or other size incision, and similar cuts.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	He who does not have a hard abscess, if it is a superficial sore, he should pierce it thoroughly; and when the abscess is large, with great bowing, and you pierce it, do not drain all of the pus at once in that moment, but drain a part of it; then dress the abscess until the next day, and after that take nothing from above. Repeat this many times, gradually, until all of the pus has drained; especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a woman carrying a child, or small children, or elderly decrepits.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For sometimes the patient jumps at the discharge of the pus, and by chance dies, and you will not notice.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived your abscess, if the wound has drained, and observe whether the abscess wound is small; and if it is a deep one, then apply thin layers of linen or vegetable cotton; and for large abscesses with many openings, it is necessary that you place a layer on each side so they press against each other. If you have found in the abscess a portion of hard skin, and you have closed it around, then it is necessary to fill it with old cotton or linen shavings without moisture and bind it for three days; then open it and apply the treatment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if the occurrence of blood happens in your work, then apply ice and cold compresses, and wet the cloth, and place it on the bleeding area repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the infection of blood persists and is properly administered with governance and care, and the powders I have mentioned are given to them in this book, and if it's a case of winter or frostbite, and their joints or abscesses are very sensitive, then they should be covered with moist blankets of wine and hot oil; and if it's in this condition, and their joints are fleshy, then place moist blankets of water and cold oil, or fresh wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said; then remove the abscess and wipe it clean and treat it, as appropriate, until they are healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: I have already told you how one should proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and here is this chapter.
des soros	From the sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Or consider how small boils come, which are like our skin's threads, just as the seams of a garment, and they have many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fat and such, containing moisture as do the pulsating veins; and if of those that are hard and resistant to cutting, then there is no doubt that the arteries do not act contrarily.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the size is that you must try all instruments called "entromissory", from which the form comes as follows, containing something.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, and it breaks through from above down,
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is evacuated, if it leaves nothing behind on the skin that contained the moisture, it will repeatedly return as soon as one lets go; then dip a cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is available; if not, use water and silk, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and this will heal those who have been delayed by night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then repeat the cotton, as before, on the second day, and on the third, as long as you know it does not remain by night; then treat the wound with suitable ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds tight, follow this form closely; then cut deeply, and scrape from all sides, and apply all your effort to extract the pus from where it lies; and if the artery opposes you, do as I have told you.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do the same with an abscess that is pus-filled, cutting and treating as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	Cut the abscess that is pus-filled and moist; it will be lighter as they contain little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if there is no moisture in any of these abscesses or joints, and I encountered such an abscess on the head of a very old woman; and I found it as hard, rough, and white stone that cannot be crushed; and if anyone were to try to break it, they would cause just as much harm as with a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other joints that come on the head, it is these that occur at the top of children and at the roots of the ears, leaving an opening completely open for as long as necessary so that the bowel can come out, and treat them as they should be treated.
des scrophules	Of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times this abscess appears in the neck, and drains the phlegm, and causes pains, and never comes anywhere else on the body, and it is very painful and twisted one against the other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each goiter is properly inside its ribcage, just as the nodules and abscesses in the neck, as we have said; and there are many similarities to these goiters.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	Some of these contain moisture, and some are malicious and do not want to obey the treatment.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In that which you see has a good disposition for touch and resembles the healthy color of the skin, quiet on every side and without any gap in the flesh or nerve of the collar, or artery or duct, and is not too deep; it is necessary that you cut it open from above and scrape each part, and the two lips of the heart remain intact as we have said in the chapters on the head; and handle it little by little, and be sure not to cut the nerve or vein, and do not make it gush out or bleed too much, so that your hand does not slip, and look forward too much, lest you cut something you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not allow you to operate, apply vitriol powder or any other powder that stops blood, and close the wound; leave it until the pain subsides and the wound softens, and begin to heal.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound is stained with blood, return to your work until it is completed; then pay close attention to your sign if no small scabs remain, whether they are dry or moist.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein in the root of the scab, it is not advisable to cut off the scab at its root but instead tie a double thread firmly around it and leave it hanging without causing harm; then apply an old cotton wound dressed in Egyptian ointment and treat the wound.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut off the entire scab, it is necessary to close the two edges of the wound and sew them together now, so that there is no delay due to the size of the scab.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If you want to understand how to treat the root of it, pull it out forcefully, and cut it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For those scrofulas that have an excess, pierce them where they appear to be dying; and the piercing should be done as previously mentioned, depending on the situation, then apply these treatments with ointments and similar things, so that it does not corrupt what remains from the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, continue the healing treatment until it is healed.
de squinance	squinance (n.) - eye strain or visual fatigue
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	They speak and write about the anatomy of the throat; but I have never seen anyone perform it in our land, and it is written in their scriptures.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those with squint (strabism), it is necessary to avoid the fold in the throat known as the epiglottis; for this condition is not helped by anyone, because all the veins and the pores through which the ill comes, are close to the abscesses in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the tonsils.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the channel of the throat, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the harm that comes from constriction.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is necessary, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it in three circles or four small cuts across, between the two circles, or according to the size of the cut, not into the cartilage; and these cuts are most suitable for cutting through the epiglottis so that there is no charring, and the edges are long and sharp.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is timid, it is necessary that he extends the throat skin to its entire circumference, then cuts through the heart as it reaches the trachea; and avoids blood vessels, if you see any, and then cuts into the substance, as we have said; and by cutting the stream of the trachea, which bursts out from the broken place, and by the loss of voice, it is demonstrated that the wound should remain open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed and there is doubt about strangulation, gather the two edges of the wound together where the heart is, and cut through it all the way to the cartilage; then administer drugs that produce heat until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albuscasim advises that this should not be done until the throat is completely closed, and the patient is judged to be at death's door, for lack of breath.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then, they should operate on the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, thus preventing death; for the ancients ordered that the wound be left open as long as the evil of the disease persists, and it disappears in three or four days. And then they commanded that the wound be sewed up and treated, as long as it was healing; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a damsel took a knife, and inserted it in her throat, cutting part of the tongue from the gums; and I was called to cure her, and found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had flowed from it, and realized that it had no strength or power to flow in any direction except into the throat, and the veins were coming out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I acted quickly, sewed up the wound, and cured her until she was healthy; and it was not long before the damsel regained her voice and returned to her normal state; for this reason, I say that one should have no fear of the operation involving the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Cystic abscesses are called "throat hernias", and they are large abscesses in the color of a jet, and they mostly occur in women; and there are two types: natural and accidental, where the former has no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental type is of two kinds, one resembling fat, and the other kind resembling an abscess that comes from an artery; it causes fear, and one should not attempt to make incisions unless in a small area, testing and examining all the openings: if you find it similar to fat and cannot move it, treat it like any other nose, removing all debris, and ensuring it is completely healed.
des nous	From us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways in which we can cure illness, of which I will describe all their similarities; and now it is necessary that I explain the distinction between our methods and their outcomes.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that the outcome is heat and fever, as long as the ebullition has not passed, and it completes the putrefaction; then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the new method, there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains satisfaction, which is its own sac and corresponds to the condition of the body, and begins like a wound, and becomes swollen; and they are according to two appearances, either grainy or moist, and have much color as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	You should, when you come to the treatment of a new patient, first try and inquire about all the instruments called 'entromisseurs', according to their form, from the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	The method of questioning for abscesses is to press more or less moist into the abscess that you find, and move your fingers in and out little by little, until you know that the instrument has reached the center, then extract the 'entromisseur', and be careful not to let it slip.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the abscess has a running discharge of pus, of the color as I described for other abscesses, then do it as I said before; but if after inserting the 'entromisseur' no pus comes out, know that it is swollen, so cut it in crosswise sections and hold it with pincers, gently scraping off the crust from each side, and treat the wound with new gauze until it heals; if you cannot do this, then remove it bit by bit so nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if it does not stay, it returns to the mind many times; and if it lingers a little while without disturbing you, it uses the wound with corrosive powders, constricts the wound, and applies hot compresses to relieve it, and treats it with various remedies until it is healed; and if the wound is large, it cuts both sides of the wound, and treats it accordingly.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the pain persists or other symptoms arise in a hurry and you use vitriol powder, leave it on for two to three days until the wound pus is drained, and rest the inflammation of the blood; then return to cover what has been disturbed again.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See here the shapes of the instruments that are inserted, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are three quarters called 'albaret', and one called 'breb', and they are also like needles used to cut sorceries, made of gold, or iron, or silver, and move best those that are yellow, and are more effective for encircling fistula corbs; and these too are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the amount of the wound's width.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of the hooks are very similar, as you can see: large, medium, and small; and there are hooks with two curves in three ways; and there are hooks with three curves, also in three ways; and there are hooks with two curves, or even just one curve, and these too are necessary according to their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The tip of these instruments is sharp, and there are some that do not cut through both sides, which tear the skin but do not sever the vein or nerve; from these intruders come the alemoths that enter into various openings so that the patient does not feel it when opening abscesses; and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see; and one should use them only on fleshy parts like legs, arms, breasts, and wounds, and in similar places; and at no time should one make another small instrument resembling a digit, according to this form, to stop the flow of blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it should never be placed in a place that severs veins and arteries, and never according to this great form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Never inflame the breasts of any man when they begin to be corrupted, until they seem like women's breasts; they remain ugly and swollen, and anyone who wishes to cure them should do so according to this form described in this line b until g.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then peel away the fat and apply medicinal ointment with hot charcoal, then bring together the two edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healthy; if the skin folds downward, and softens due to its great size, just as it does in women, making them appear in two parts, one at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller, according to this form described in this line b until g. Then peel away the leather between the two edges, remove the fat, and apply the treatments we have mentioned for stitching and powders, as well as anything necessary for the cure, until it is healed; if it is not healed, or the incision has not been properly made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to bleeding, it is necessary to fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive poultice, and leave it until the healing process removes the remaining moisture and fat, then treat it until it is fully healed.
des apostemes des asselles	from the abscesses of armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Abscesses that come from under the armpits are hard scrofulous nodules or they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line B to line G.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, apply clean cotton to the wound and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and treat with appropriate medicament until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess appears similar to a scrofula, then perform it as we have said in the incisions of scrofulas, and if the wound gapes, apply the cautery as we have mentioned before.
de la routure de l’artere	from the rupture of an artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When an artery ruptures and the covering (cuir) is sewn shut, it often leads to abscesses, and also to veins becoming inflamed and abscessed; and if one recognizes this as due to an artery rupture, then the abscess will be long and deep; and when you feel it in your limbs, it feels strange; and with veins, they become red and swollen, appearing very bad. It is foolish to try to treat this abscess, especially when it is beneath the skin, surrounded by claws and angers (presumably referring to nails), or located in various other places, as it can be extremely serious.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	You should seek iron cautery, and he who is at the head should also beware, and on him whose artery is close to the skin, cut from above with a long blade; then make an incision as if you were cutting into the flesh, and carefully remove the artery from its strands, leaving it exposed; then insert a needle from below through one side, and pierce it all the way through to the other side, binding the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have taught you for removing the two arteries in the temple; then mark the spot between the two threads with an instrument until there is no discharge, and release the abscess; then administer treatment as needed while the wound is fresh; and tend to any subsequent care required, as long as the bond is intact; then secure the abscess from above on the skin with a double thread, in the same way I have instructed you, binding it from one side to the other; and if you doubt that the thread has loosened, insert another needle through all the strands below the abscess incision, and tighten the threads by pulling them three times; then remove any excess, cut off the surplusage of the skin, and leave what is bound; then cover with a moist cloth dipped in wine and oil, and administer treatments and care as needed until it heals.
des apostemes des ners	from the abscess of nails
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just as abscesses occur in arteries and veins, so too do they form in nails when they are damaged or subjected to excessive work, among other things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this occurs more frequently in joints and all limbs where there are various dispositions, which is the cause of abscesses, and their color appears like the color of the flesh, and they are in greater pain; and when they form, the patient feels great pain, and it is not fully healed in the heart, but lies beneath the chest; and it moves from all sides, neither advancing nor retreating, neither below nor above, and the one in the joint should not be covered with iron: perhaps it would cause contraction; and those on the head or forehead make the skin split.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, and it has a claw-like shape, cut it at its base; and if it's large, suspend it with a hook, then peel off the skin, next remove the muscle, and stitch up the wound, and treat it until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	The phrase "des grosses boces pendans" translates literally to "hanging large
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	It happens in bellies alone and nowhere else; it is a disease called "fungus" due to its appearance, it has subtle roots, and large droppings; it can be both small and very large; and I have seen people with two or more funguses in their bellies that were more similar to each other than anything else, and there was no difference between them, they were white, had fine roots, and were constantly excreting moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I gathered them and found in one eighteen ounces weighing, and in the other six, and the work of the incision is such that you watch if the patient is moist, and the color of the joint is white and moist with a delicate root; if it sticks to the spatula, have fire cautery in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For cutting often brings too much blood loss, and if it bleeds heavily, then hasten to cauterize; and if you see the patient fearful and anxious about the incision, take a well-made thin thread and bind the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days; then tighten it, and do not stop pulling the thread until it cuts through the joint, without pain. And if the roots are thick, be afraid to cut especially in the abdomen, but you can still cut half of it, then cauterize so that it does not come back; then dress the wound, and be careful not to cut the thin tissue that is red, poor in substance, and milky-colored.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an abscess enlarged, and I will come to the treatment of this cancer later.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the bowel is blocked.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the bowel comes from cauterization of a wound or fissure in the abdomen, and is not in any of the bowels, as happens in other ruptures, or bleeding from veins or arteries as one would expect, or from flatulence; and if it is due to the rupture through the wall of the gut and the discharge of the bowel, then the abscess has a color similar to that of the flesh, and is a small thing without much pain, and opens up in various ways.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the intestine, then it is more diverse; and when you press it with your fingers, it heals again and then returns, and perhaps becomes sealed, and widens greatly at the entrance of the bath and through hard work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing and opens well when you press it with your hand, without constraint; and if it is due to blood, it appears through these signs: large and hard abscesses, and are fixed in quantity; and if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the effort involved is such that you must observe its appearance for the sign of blood from an artery or vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it is necessary, you must leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter about abscesses, both for arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if it appears to be an intestinal or bowel issue, you must instruct the patient to keep their bowels still and straight, then make a cut around the abscess; then have them lie on their side, placing the affected area above all the pain; then tie it firmly with a strong thread or sturdy silk string, making sure the intestines are not trapped; then open the abscess while it is on the string, inserting your finger to explore the intestine; if you find it stuck in the string, release it and bring the intestine out through the opening in the abdomen; and if you discover the bowel, take care at the anvil, cutting off the excess; and if the artery or vein causes difficulty, gently go around it; then return to your task, taking two needles, piercing them through what you have previously made a cross, drawing the abscess in three parts above the needles; and remove the needles, leaving the affected area to heal on its own, and dismembering the dead flesh by yourself; or when it becomes thin and ready to fall off, treat it as appropriate, completing the abscess as we have said; then drain any blood or moisture you find, treating the wound as necessary, and close the opening.
dou chancre	A cancerous wound
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have discussed in the previous section the signs of cancer, and how it should be treated with medicines, and how one should avoid iron treatment; we say that cancer spreads quickly and requires great caution in its cure, and advise the ancients that when cancer is located where it can be removed, like a tumor on the breast, or the thigh, or similar places, it should all be cut out as soon as possible. And for large and old cancers, one must not even approach them, because I have never been able to heal any, nor has anyone else before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And for work when the cancer is located where it can be removed, as we have said, do not at any time purge the patient of black blood; then make it better if there is a manifest fullness, and cut out the cancer from a good place to perform the work; then pour on your poultices or cancer, and shave all parts, and remove all traces without leaving anything; let the blood flow completely, and feel the place with your hand or any tool, and if the appearance of the blood becomes contrary to the incision of an artery or vein, cauterize it until the pain is completely gone; then apply another cure as long as it is healed.
de ydropisie	Of hydropsis (or water retention)
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already discussed the signs of hydrops, and in what way the accumulation of water is formed, and the symptoms of each condition, and the remedies that are applied using medicines, and those treated with iron; such cases should be left alone. This applies to two conditions: tympanitis and ypoharyx, as they are deadly; therefore, when treating this hydrops-like condition, which is called "eclites" using medicine, and the cure does not help, consider if the patient is weak or has another illness besides hydrops, such as a stomach upset or similar; in such cases, do not use iron, as there is doubt. And if you see that the patient has strong vitality and suffers only from hydrops without any other illness, and he is neither too young nor too old, then proceed as follows: lay the patient gently on your hands, and the attending person should press the abdomen towards the lowest part of the pelvis, while pushing out the water. Then take the spiny spatula in this shape...
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And make incisions from both sides.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Pierce with a point, but do not insert it so deeply that it reaches the intestines when pushed in, and do not let it burst; then observe if there is any droplet formation towards the intestines. It is necessary to make an incision three fingers deep from the edge of the wound, directly under the thumb; and if the hydrops is due to liver disease, make your incision on the left side of the wound; and if it is due to a swollen spleen, it should be on the right, and do not let the patient lie on the incision so that excess fluids do not flow into the weak organ. Then cut through all the skin with the instrument, and the muscle, and gently press your hand over all the spacers between the skin and the splen, just as you would when scraping, to a quantity equal to a fingernail or more; then pierce the splen until the spacers come to the surface, and this is the shape of the instrument:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it resembles a silver cable, fine and light as gold, with one small opening on each side; on one side three openings, and two on the other, and one on yet another. It is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes make when they cut feathers.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top of it is the alemele, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it descends immediately onto the instrument; then empty half or a third of it, for if you empty more than is necessary at this time, by chance the patient might die from the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he might lose his palm, or approach death; but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulse. Then take the instrument and retain the water, which is now held by the keur that stops the opening above the syfac, of which I have spoken, so that you pierce it in this manner; then repeat the instrument on the other side, if you see the patient suffering from it, and draw a small amount of water; do this every day, and be careful not to let any more water out until there is only a little.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the patient, and leave him much water, whether through the cure of a burial or hot sand, or much sweating or bath or in the sun, and he becomes weakened; and treat with drying medicines until he is healed, and cauterize the stomach and liver and spleen after draining the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	from the blockage of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born without a hole in the penis, or if the hole is small, or it is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary at once that he does not pierce all the very delicate spatulum according to this form.
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then open the very small orifice of the bladder, and hold it closed for three or four days; when he wants to urinate, remove the closure, let him urinate, then replace it; and sometimes it is not necessary at all, because the hot urine that comes out does not allow it to close.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the orifice is small, it requires a gentle closure of the bladder, as we have said; if it widens.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have a complete opening in their joint are afflicted, because no one is born with a dislocation at the top of the bone, so they cannot urinate until they raise their limb; and they cannot procreate because the material cannot reach up to the marrow, and it is a terrible illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method of the operation is that the patient lies on their back, then the dislocation is at the top of the bone and the joint is as thin as a feather, so it can be moved to the correct position; and be careful of the bleeding that often occurs, and if it happens, stop the bleeding with whatever stops blood, and treat the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	from the pustules of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often, this sore appears on the penis, and it presents an ugly sight; there are both malicious and non-malicious types. You must prick them gently with a needle, and drain them, then clean and bandage them with moist cotton in Egyptian fashion; then apply the healing ointment diligently until they are healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	If the sore is malicious, with putrid colour and discharge, then it needs cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have achieved this, and if the swelling is in a sleep like a stick, with part of it inside the skin and part outside, then you must first remove the swelling that is inside; and when it is hardened, then treat the external part.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it all together, unless you are certain about the condition of the stick that it is not damaged, blackening and rotting will occur in its core and root; so it is necessary to remove all that is black and rotten, then apply a plaster made of honey and flour from grated red apples and leaves, and continue treating it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery is carried out as follows: that is to say, in case of bleeding and corruption; and if the tip of the penis is corrupted and withdrawn, it is necessary that you insert or guide a plug into the urethra and let the patient urinate; and when the hair on the head of the penis is dry, which has not been circumcised, or there is an ulcer or abscess, then it is necessary to scrape it with a sharp instrument until the ties are released and the part around the tip of the penis is freed; and if it is a difficult task to devise this, it is necessary to scrape it gently with a spatula from the top of the penis and the scrotum; then carefully separate them, and cover the raw area with a thin damp linen cloth in cold water so that it does not dry out.
de la circoncision	from circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a dislocation like other wounds; nevertheless, when we perform this operation of our own will, especially on children, it is necessary that we make the best and lightest work for their healing.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision for their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen most of the masters and elders who perform circumcision around the anus, with force and all manner of new tools; it was their custom to cut through two layers, and perhaps by chance one cuts through this one above and leaves that below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or she returns covered, and the pain is doubled, and in the cleansing that is done from the deep wound, the point of the member is not assured; and in the cleansing of the nail, by chance, the iron escapes, and the work is ruined, and often they heal in such a way that they do not need cleansing, and I want it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the cleansing that is done with force on every link of thread, I have found the goodness of experiment, for the forces cut just as well from above as from below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, if you cut it evenly in all directions; but the thread should be well twisted around the skin; and make sure the first operation is such that the child, if it listens, understands that you are not tying the thread too tightly around the stick, and then let it relax in every way possible; then twist it between your hands straight, and hide the forces between your hands or beneath your feet so the child does not see them, nor any of the tools; then press your hand against the stick and blow gently at its heart, and pull it up until the part of the stick is entirely freed; then clean it well of the dirt that is collected on it, then tie it with a double thread, then connect it to another thread; and hold it in place by the second connection on the pouchet (pouch) and the index finger; then cut between the two threads, then lift the heart gently without pressure and pull the end of the stick; then let the blood flow little by little, for that is how it heals; and apply powder above and below, and cover it with a cloth gluey with a mixture of egg white cooked in rose water, preserved with good red oil and fresh herbs, and leave it until the next day, and treat it differently each day until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of purification is as follows: both shoulders should be bare and cut, and the shoulder blades should also be large, equally so.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in purification occurs when the veins are not cut properly; therefore, you should extend your finger to reach them, so that they form an abscess; and do the same with the other hand, if you cannot hold it with your finger, use tweezers, then cut.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they remain for three days, and the skin beneath the arrow is swollen, leave it until the abscess has subsided, and gently peel away the skin; cut as much as you can, taking care to avoid the arrow's shaft, which will cause no harm.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, treat the wound suddenly caused by a powder, which we have spoken of in our treatment of powders, and if one draws out too much heart, it will go above and cause no harm; then treat it, as we have said, while it is clean.
dou retenement de l’urine	retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	Urine retention can be caused by kidney stones, frozen urine, bowels or a constricted neck or bladder, as we have described in our previous discussion. If the urine cannot be released and you observe retention due to a stone in the bladder or neck, it is necessary for the patient to lie on their knees; pressure should be applied to their lower back, and they should extend their belly above their back. This restricts the patient's movements as much as possible. Then, the bladder's neck is forced towards the expression of the stone above, allowing the urine to flow out. If this does not work and the patient experiences severe pain, you should administer extraction to all instruments called 'syringes', which have the following structure: they are made of delicate, light silver, similar in shape to a bird's feather, with a length of approximately 3.5 palm widths, and a fine tip at the top.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the method of urination is as follows: take a double thread and tie it to the top of a wool or cotton ball, then insert the thread into the syringe; cut off the excess wool and insert it just below the top of the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and position the patient over a seat with their bladder and penis moistened with wet oil and olive oil and warm water. Then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the base, then double the penis over the syringe; then remove the syringe before the bladder, and let the patient feel the urination until it empties, and this should not be done otherwise because the direction in which the thread is inserted can twist it. Then cut the thread at each piece of wool, and the urine will follow through the wool, then extract it forcefully and drain the urine; repeat the syringe process until the bladder is empty, and ease the patient's discomfort.
des maladies de la vessie	From the diseases of the bladder.
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When ulcers or purulent infections come to the bladder, and pus is gathered there, you should drain it with water and medicines, using an instrument called a 'clepsydra', and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if it has three openings: two on one side and one on the other, as you can see; the stem through which the medicine flows is designed to stop the stream effectively without addition, so that the moisture can be drained as needed. When you pour your medicines into the bladder, place the head of the drainer in the moisture and draw out the liquid gently. Then, press firmly on the tube attached to it. The moisture will enter the drainer and flow directly into the bladder at once, which the patient will feel. This is the shape of a delicate enema bag used for cleansing the bladder: thus is it.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or gold, and the place is higher; then open the chest at the side where the wound is; take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the moisture you want to use for enema; tie it between the two breasts with a good double thread, and heat the moisture over fire. Then insert the enema nozzle into the rectum, and press your hand on the bladder until all the moisture enters the bladder; and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle of it, and pierce it around; then insert a strong thread through the holes, assemble the circle like a dart, and put inside what you want to use: oil, moisture, and water; tie it with the instrument. And do as you did with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	from the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already discussed the methods for dealing with stones and their extraction, together with medicines; I have mentioned the distinction between stones that are painful and those without pain, and in which cases one should perform surgery; and on the bladder and the penis; I will now explain this clearly and concisely.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is in the bladder occurs more often in children, and this is a sign of acute urinary tract infection, similar to water in its subtlety; it opens the urethra and greatly torments the patient, sometimes frequently, and then becomes harder; many such discharges come from the kidneys; and the cure for children up to the age of four is light, but very painful for the elderly, and is in the middle for those between youth and old age; the treatment is lighter for those who have large stones than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient with a cleanse, to draw out all impurities from the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it often becomes stuck while trying to pass the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet and straighten them, moving them away from the body so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, never rising up again; then place the patient between your hands with their feet down, ensuring the bladder is tilted downwards; then hold it still and insert your finger inside. If you feel the stone in the space, be quick now to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not come out at the first touch, moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand, and if the patient is old, or your right hand if the patient is young; press it into its socket, and hold the stone, and when you feel it on your side, near the collar of the bladder; then press down on your right side, and force the stone out towards the opening where you see it cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the attendant to press the bladder with their hand, and command them to extend their right hand upwards and stretch it open, and with their left hand, remove the skin covering the stones in the area where the incision is made; then use the forceps to extract the stone, shaping it as follows:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And they make an incision between what is between the buttocks and the fundament, not too deep but on the side of the left thigh; and it should be straight on the stone, and your feet should always be at the fundament, and the saw should cut through so that it is wide on one side and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large; so that the pressure on the foot in the fundament causes it to come out without effort; and know that there are stones with angles and margins: these are difficult to remove; and if they are located beneath, resembling a blade or round, with a smooth exit.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	If there are angles and margins, make the cut larger; and if it does not come out, you need to use pliers that are also like a file at the tip, so as to extract the stone without escaping; or you can insert a fine, curved instrument at the tip; and if you cannot pry it loose in this way, enlarge the opening slightly and, if it is smooth, pull it with vitriol; and if there are more than one stone, first remove the largest one from the neck of the bladder, then cut, then pull it out, and the smaller ones after that if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, they must cut it out carefully, making a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For there are two things that can happen to the patient: he either dies or his urine comes back through the wound where the limb cannot be healed; but nevertheless, strive diligently to pull it out piece by piece, and when you have completed your work, apply incense and aloe and dragon's blood to the wound, tighten it, and place a moist cloth of oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then bind the patient's limb tightly for three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you dislocate it, if a lot of warm oil and water arises from it, then apply healing ointment and basil-based ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses and corrosion and blood clots in the bladder occur, and urination is blocked, as if without jumping with urine: then press your finger into the wound and extract the pus, because if it remains, it will corrode the bladder and cause putrefaction; then cleanse the wound with water and salt and all available remedies, until it heals, and remember to bind both thighs and apply medicines to the affected area.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is located in the urethra, and stuck in place, and urine cannot pass; then by following my advice, you cut it multiple times, it is excusable to cut through this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have tested this thusly.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take the iron at the forefront of this form, and insert it at three angles into the wood:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the shaft below the stone so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then push the drill gently into the shaft until it reaches the stone, and turn the drill back to your hand in the shaft little by little, as you can pierce the stone from another side; soon urine will flow, then press your hand on the part of the shaft that is still inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is broken and jumps with the urine, and the patient feels pain; and if you cannot make it steady through anything that supports it, then tie a thread into the stone from below and another from above, then twist the rod towards the stone between the two threads, then pull it out forcefully, and loosen the knot, and clean the congealed blood in the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of women's stones
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It is the case that a stone gets lodged in women, and if it happens at all, the cure is difficult, and it is hindered by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; the second is that one cannot find a woman well-versed who knows how to dislodge it, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	The third way is that one might not find a woman well-versed in this art; the fourth way is that the stone in the woman's case is more difficult to extract than in men, so deeper incisions have to be made, and great care must be taken. If such necessity arises, it is advisable to enlist the help of a skilled midwife, and if one cannot be found, then any experienced woman, even if she knows only a part of the art, will do. Command her to carry out what you instruct regarding the extraction of the stone; take great care if the woman is a virgin. Then she must push down with her left hand on the swollen bladder. If she finds the stone, she should extract it by pushing it down through her fundament, and recommend that the patient press hard with their left hand on the swelling.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, she must move it little by little from the entrance of the bladder down to the thigh, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then strike the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the kidney, where it is moved and feels the stone in that part; and do not move her leg above or below the stone, or cut too close; then turn the edge towards the wound, as you feel the stone pressing so strongly that the stone can come out, and know that there are many types of stones: small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and with points.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know these similarities to understand the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the vein bursts, put crushed vitriol on it and hold for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your work, as long as the stone is hard, and have tools that I told you for removing stones from men to assist you in your task; and if the vein bursts again, apply powder to the spot and bandage tightly and do not repeat this, and leave the stone and do not try to extract it, unless the patient dies; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat from the infection has subsided and the swelling goes down, return to your work, as long as the stone remains hard.
de hernie carnouse	of herniated carnous (or flesh)
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Rameous (or fluid accumulation) is nothing other than the assembly of moisture or white phlegm, which is separated from the heart of the body parts that contain the egg (or testis), and it is called "phlegm", and never properly part of the egg's fabric if one believes it to be another tissue; and this is the membrane surrounding the testis between the white phlegm we have mentioned, and it has no other purpose.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this rameous (or fluid) is due to weakness that affects the testicles, and this material expands.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And never does it come from percussion on the joints, and this moisture appears in many forms: either yellowish, or without redness, or black, or watery white, and so on; and these are the signs to recognize this gathering, for if it is of the color we have said, the abscesses are bright red, long like the shape of an owl, and do not open the joints, because they are filled with moisture.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the flesh itself, the abscesses are bright red with a part of the owl's head, and for this reason one thinks it is another owl; and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white, it smells well; then, when you want to know the color of the moisture, carefully probe all the affected area, from which its form appears.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after, judge of what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healed according to his ability and the fulfillment of his body; then place him on his back, on something slightly elevated, and cover him with many sheets; then have him sit on his left side, and command the attendant to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the heart; then take the scalpel, and cut the skin of the ribcage from top to bottom along the rib, making a straight incision in considering the skin of the ribs until it is white, and carefully scrape off the flesh subtly according to the patient's ability; then make a small perforation in the scar tissue with water at a wide opening, and drain all the water, and then apply bandages, and pull the scar tissue upward; do not touch the heart of the ribcage, but only the scar tissue; cut it carefully and precisely on both sides, that if you do not cut it well, the fluid will return; and if the effusion has ceased to your work, then restore it to its place when you have completed the work with the scar tissue; then join the two parts of the ribcage with a stitch, and treat it as other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the heart corrupted by another illness, it is necessary that you hold the vessels that are suspended, in doubt about the outflow of blood; then cut the vein throughout the suspension, and extract the heart, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the blood is collected in two parts, knowing that these are two branches, cut the other part as you did the first, then dry the wound and apply it with fresh moist lint dipped in rose oil; and place another piece of lint moistened in wine and oil, and wrap the two joints, and cover them with doubled cloth, and bind it to all the limbs according to this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two strips of cloth, made of shredded wool according to this form, and sew them together at the thigh's gully, one of which is pressed into the fundament up to the back, and the other on the side of the wrist; and the third on both angles, and tighten it with the loop of the trousers. Never use this twig cautery in place of a iron scalpel, and you must press a delicate surgical knife into the skin, cut through the leather of the coions, and heat it as we have said before, until the white substance that holds the water is revealed; if you take the cautery according to this form, pierce this substance as before, and scrape with this hot delicate cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the remedy in all manners that you can, as long as you are thorough; and be sure that the fire does not touch the wound; and know that this work is safer; and move carefully to avoid bloodletting, and act cautiously regarding the wounds of surgery; and if anything goes against you, whether it's an abscess or bleeding or any other complication, treat what goes against you according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	If the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this procedure due to its horror, then perform a perforation as I have told you, and make sure that when you are completely certain through the signs that we have mentioned, that the discharge is caused by the condition, place the patient in a raised position; then incise the abscess from below, towards the center of the affected area, making it wide enough for all the pus to drain. Then cover the wound with cotton and secure it, allowing the remaining pus to drain. Then treat the wound until the infection is cleared; if a white cloth does not allow the pus to drain from the wound's opening, then insert a needle or the instrument used to drain water from dropsical patients, as mentioned before, shaping it as indicated. Enlarge the incision in the wound and be aware that the discharge will return and gather again after six months or so, and when it gathers as before, the patient's condition will improve.
de l’aposteme des coions	from the abscess of the hairs
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Knowing that in this branch there are many dire outcomes, it seems to me that it is better left alone; and I will tell you about the work and the signs of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I therefore say that many abscesses come where there is hair, especially on the head; and this is by many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is known from the excessive acidity and ague that is spread to the hairs, or from percussion; and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the skin; it does not cause pain, and it is a serious abscess; and sometimes there are several abscesses that are hard, pale, and dark in color, and they do not come from new arteries or inflammation of veins.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is due to an artery, if it is constricted by the heat of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it is not appropriate that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	What is made of vein inflammation is constricted by its disposition due to the pressure of the fingers, and it can be accurately measured on this model and on other parts; and it is that you cut into the heart of the matter, then there is a release in the top, and the pain decreases from all parts of the swelling.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the swelling is already hard with these means, then it is appropriate that you treat the swelling and cut it; and if it is painful to the touch, or in those parts that are within the vessels, then it is necessary that you release all of that tension, and cut it properly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the base of the bone is in the back, then you must extract it entirely, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, immediately apply the wound with moist wool in rose oil and wine, then use other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the bowels
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is a type of abscess surrounded by a thick, similar to a borjon (swelling), with the bowels being relaxed, and it causes the patient great pain when it appears; and its cure for this illness is just as careful and fearful as the one mentioned before, and nevertheless, we will tell you about its work according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you make the patient lie on a clean bed, then hang the suspensory of the veins below your hands, to all the vessels close to the wound, and tie them tightly; then, with a broad cutting spatula, make an incision across the vessels while they are exposed, and peel them from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries located inside; then insert a needle where there is a double thread, and tie it to the first joint where the vein is attached, and tie it again to the other end; then cut them evenly according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupt moisture; then treat the wound as with others, so that no vessel bleeds from one of the cuts; for by this there will be no harm, and all vessels will receive blood, so it is necessary to drain the veins from all vessels; so that the lung does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and they heal and cannot help.
de la routure dou syfac	From the dislocation of the shoulder.
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The treatment of this condition involves incising or sectioning the area where the dislocation has occurred, either on the side of the shoulder or on the abdomen in the region of the angles (angle of the shoulder blade and rib cage), allowing the intestines to descend from that opening into one of the openings (coions); and this dislocation occurs either due to the incising or due to the stretching. These two methods have various causes: a blow, a jump, shouting, lifting a heavy load, and similar actions; and the signs of a dislocation due to stretching include gradual onset over a long period, with no sudden occurrence, and the abscess is evenly distributed up to the full extent of the shoulder blade (scapula) because the stretching pushes the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is from the incision that sudden pain occurs, and different abscesses appear beneath the skin close to it, and this is due to the release of intestinal contents and blood from the wound of the syphilis.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never drain the abscess with the intestines, as it becomes stuck and causes great pain to the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these poor treatments of iron, for this reason, one must be cautious.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the method of this procedure is that you command the patient to move the intestines back into their socket within the wound if they can; then gently hold them in your hands and ease the pain. Next, stretch the skin above, and cut all the flesh down to the bone with a sharp blade, so that it exposes the white flesh beneath. Then insert your index finger behind the muscle, between the white flesh underneath the skin and the second flesh, and between the second flesh, and remove what is behind the muscle, and between the second flesh. Afterward, move your right hand inside the muscle of the intestines, and position the white flesh on top in your left hand, easing the muscle towards the stomach. Command the helper to stretch the muscle upwards, freeing anything that is wrapped around or stuck to the bone. If you find any thread-like pieces, put them into the stomach underneath. Take a needle with a thick thread made from four strands and sew it through the back part of the flesh where the skin is, after the muscle; then cut off the visible threads, ensuring there are three left. Arrange these threads in a cross pattern and tie the flesh firmly with a strong stitch from both sides. Then wrap the threads around the flesh, forming a secure seal so that no foreign objects can enter, and prevent further infection. Place the first knot two fingers' length away from the beginning of the thread; then leave the portion of the flesh beneath the muscle tied with one thread, and tie the rest according to the shape of the muscle. Then apply moist wool to the wound and dress it, and use the stitch as mentioned before.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never should the white skin be cauterized as we have said, after incision, out of fear of bloodletting.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens often, and leaves the wound open until it heals itself; if it takes too long to close, apply hot water and follow what we have said, as long as it wishes; then treat the wound with another remedy, until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	from flesh hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, never should anyone attempt to treat with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients say that it is made like a branch that holds the eye, in such a way as you tie the vessels after cutting them slightly on the inside, then clean the abscess of him who opens, until the vessels stop bleeding; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	No rupture should occur from the attack of anger, as we have said, and it opens the vessels; and no part of the intestines should protrude outward, and if they do, it is a sign of danger, and it should be attended to every hour; nevertheless, if it lingers too long at this point, it seems to be a fistula or a syphilus, until the intestines protrude; and this happens due to the expansion of the syphilus in the vessels, as we have said before, for it is stretched out then softened and inflated; and its cure is by cauterization, as we have previously mentioned; and never should it be treated with iron in this manner. And so, the patient lies on his back between your hands, then cut the vessel of the rupture deeply according to the quantity of three fingers; extract the syphilus that is below the skin, then take the stick and place it over the visible part of the syphilus; press it firmly into the abdomen, then cut both the two visible parts of the syphilus on the top of the stick, and sew them up; then remove the stick, and do not cover or stretch the syphilus, nor anything else, as I have told you in the cure for the vessel of the intestines; and cure it through wound care.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you treat the wounds, if they become dirty and the injury is cleaned, as long as it is healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The treatment is difficult, and it has no appearance in the fracture, but the cautery is moved on this side, and closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the dense skin of the limbs
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Often, the skin of the limbs is softened in no men, because the moisture that is within them becomes softened, and it is visible; and it is necessary, when one wishes to cure it, to lay the patient on his back and cut the soft skin on the natural skin; then bring together the two edges with a stitch, and if you see, first sew the superfluity of the softened skin with three stitches or four firmly; then cut between the stitches and treat it like other wounds, as long as it is healed, and pull the thread.
dou chastrement	Dou chastrement (Double cautery)
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	You know that castration is forbidden in our law, and for that reason, I would not like to speak of it in this book; nevertheless, there are two ways in which it may be necessary: one is to answer wisely when asked, and to provide a wise cure; the other, because we often need castration of certain animals to aid us, as with goats and sheep and cats and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say, therefore, that castration is performed in two ways: either by pulling or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the method where we pull, we should soak the animal in hot water until the testicles are softened and relaxed; then grasp them with your hand, until they return to their normal state and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	From the castration of the horse: you must tie up the animal and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensory and cut into each one alternately as you have well scraped them; and leave no grain there that satisfies or the subtle satisfaction that is on the vessels; and this method of castration is different from that which is done by attraction, because at attraction, something from the testicles may remain, causing the animal to desire lust; then treat the wound until it is healthy.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	A hermaphrodite is in two manners like men: one is when between the two testicles appears also as the form of a woman's nature, or it has hair, and never cuts short the urination.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And for another method, it is in women, and has on the finger like a stick and two joints.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for wind and hunger is to loosen all the tight muscles, and treat them like other wounds; in the second way, for men whose urine leaps through the skin of their testicles, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the goiter
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Goiter is a tight muscle in the natural part, so ugly to see; no woman has it so much as a hand, and that is its cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	You should hold the excess of the tendon in your hand or with pincers, and cut it gently; do not cut too deeply, lest bleeding occur, and then apply another cure until it is healed; and to another matter that arises at the opening of a wound, and its use, and perhaps it jumps out, and resembles a cow, and for this reason the ancients called it 'cow disease'.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	It is necessary that you cut it, as we have said of the tendon, and cure it until it is healed.
de erratique	erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic is the nature of a woman if she is not properly perceived, or if the wound is small; it is either innate to her by birth, or accidental through illness that comes upon her; or it is due to an adjustment of humors, or because of subtile or extreme causes, and it is done completely in the womb, or on the side, or beneath, or in any way; and it requires conception, childbirth, and perhaps even the flowers of youth; and knowledge of such things comes from observing the dance (or movements) of the body.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the signs of shock are immediately apparent, act quickly, either by your own means or with the aid of another.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a delicate fracture and close to the bones, act quickly: place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then form the two bones into shape until the delicate fracture is healed and the swelling has subsided; then take wool, moisten it in oil, and place it over the fracture, and have the woman lie at home each day so that she cannot move.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the fracture is hard and complex, it is necessary that you use a spatula-like tool similar to a leaf of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the swelling is from fire, suspend it with a splint and bandage; have medicines that stop blood, such as horse chestnut, dragon's blood, incense, plenty of egg white; then apply a wide poultice so that the wound cannot heal; and thus for a long time, apply a cloth of dry linen; and then use other remedies until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when a fever comes from fire, if it is necessary to cover it, do so in this manner, especially if there are no abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an abscess that is inflamed during the fever, one should not make any incisions.
des emorroides	Of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that, without usual care, become enlarged and hardened; in our discussion on this subject, we have already mentioned the external appearance, symptoms, and signs, and I will now describe those that receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and their symptoms, when they are in the worst state during menstruation and do not appear by ordinary means, can only be treated effectively with heat.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the opening of the menstruation can be felt; these are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is necessary that you place the woman in a cold house, then stretch her limbs with pincers and compress them at their roots, then sprinkle medicine to stop blood, such as yarrow and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then bind her feet to the wall for an hour, then immerse her in cold water. And when blood comes, let it stand in a decoction of sumac and cinnamon bark and gall and similar things, and then take oat flour and confit it with honey and lard, and make an emplaster on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it becomes wet, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If that does not help, apply suction cups to the back and breasts without causing harm; then take cloth, soak it in plantain juice or hazelnut juice with old wine, and apply it to the place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has subsided, continue to treat the wound with care until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red and resembles a rough head, so it should be covered as I have said before; then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	about abscesses of the breast
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses come about in the body, such as cancer and previous abscesses, and sores, and boils, and hemorrhoids, and hot abscesses, and numerous other illnesses that I mentioned in the preceding section.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary that I discuss here the hot abscess that comes about in the body, which is not like other abscesses that discharge pus; and if you are skilled in medicine, consider whether the abscesses are aggressive at their onset, filled with heat and fever, and turn red when you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Do not then hurry to pierce, but let the patient suffer until the pain is alleviated; then have the patient lie down on his side, and take two small pillows upon which he leans, supporting his back and bringing his feet towards the head of the bed; and let his knees be bent, resting his arms beneath his genitals, binding them firmly with a good bandage. Then suck out the pus from the right side, and insert the instrument used to open the abscess, by which means the shape [of the abscess] is formed; and it is necessary that when you insert this instrument, you first probe the depth of the abscess, so that whatever enters the abscess through the instrument does not go further than it should, and does not injure the patient; and if the instrument is too large, cover the bottom of the abscess with cloth so that the instrument does not hurt; and place the cone of the instrument above, and secure the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess opens and it is punctured with a gentle hand, if necessary, cover the wound with a soft cloth; and when the bowel is empty, put moist cotton soaked in rose oil or dry green oil into the wound, all around the margin, and place another cloth soaked in hot water or cooked mullein over the wound on top of the cloth, and then wrap it tightly over the wound and the arm, keeping it clean; then treat the wound after two days of treatment, until it is healed; never raise the abscess or the wound with a enema of water and honey, nor later with water or cooked lily roots and aristologus; then return to treatment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is healed in the marrow, it is necessary to avoid heating with fire, but treat it as we have said in the previous section.
de l’enfantement	from childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Knowledge of the art of midwifery is first and foremost to recognize the signs of natural childbirth, and these signs are when you see a woman straining downwards and panting heavily: then the child should be born immediately. Then know that these children come according to nature's design, issuing from their mother's head, seconding with her; and when you see these signs, gently press on her belly so that the child is born quickly. For when it descends upon her head, it seconds with her, and the mother delivers of her excesses through good cleansing, and thus comes a natural birth; anything else is not natural.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it never comes upon its feet, but affects the body or the joint, or the hands, or strikes in the abdomen or elsewhere, and turns about by chance onto its neck, and assumes other evil forms; so it is necessary for a skilled physician to be wise and subtle in these matters, dispelling error and deception, and I will show you all the forms and how aid should be given.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the fever comes upon the head by natural cause, and a woman is giving birth painfully, and her virtue is weak, then she should be placed on a saddle, or women should hold her; and prepare oil of fennel or fenugreek, cooked as described below: take a small spatula, which has this form...
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and split the second bone, and cut into its finger as far as the moisture that runs within; and press the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to clean the woman with fennel seed musk in sesame oil; then make her sneeze and cough from a cold position, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now deliver the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if both hands come out, it is necessary to reset them slightly, little by little; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a seat and raise her feet up; then remove the seat to the ground and turn off the woman so that she does not try to stand; and if her hands cannot enter and the child dies, cut through the hand at the previously placed incision, extract the child, and reset it equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the emergence of the child on his feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child is born on his feet, he needs to be pushed upwards; then you gently turn him and keep turning until he is even; then press down on his feet and stretch them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	He should jump up to his ankles if commanded to press, and this makes him sneeze from the condition; if he jumps high, God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not happen as we have said, gently turn him until he is according to nature's form.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it becomes slightly better.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not improve as we have said, take a small amount of musk, oil from roses, and gum resin, and grind them all in a mortar; then apply this mixture to the woman's body both inside and out, after which place her in warm water up to her ribs; when she is moistened, apply a collar of myrrh and leave it for an hour. Then place her on a seat, make her sneeze, press her mouth and nose closed, gently massage her belly, as the child is now ready to be born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the birth of the child on its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this condition, he should move his hands little by little; then rest on his collarbone, and let the feet hang downwards, and lie on his side; and gradually move his hands, first taking them to the stomach, removing the cushions from below, until it is completely released downwards; if the child does not jump, take hold of the feet and move them, then move the stomach upwards, and then bring your hands together; and gently rock the child, and tell the woman to press herself as the child emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the birth of the child who comes with a large hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I know how to bring the hand back: if it cannot be brought back, then have the woman get up and walk; if she cannot walk, make her lie down on her side with her legs bent; then apply the muscle relaxant I mentioned; and if she still does not give birth, have her sit on a chair, and study how to bring the hand back, and deliver the child according to nature, and have her sneeze, and command her to press as hard as possible.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the birth of the child on his chest, with his hands spread and his face turned away from his mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I want the patient to hold their hand, then turn it little by little and gently; and when it is even, he should place on it a light muscular compress of wool and oil, as we have said, and command that it moves little by little; and when you have done this, let it rest on a certain seat, and command that it press; and make the patient sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same manner throughout all of this.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it proceeds in this manner throughout all the secondine (stage), if the secondine adheres to your fingernail, while the moisture is being drained; and if it sticks to the face or neck, cut it from the lip, so that it is not retained, and the child dies; then turn the baby inside out, as you have placed it appropriately, and command the woman to press at certain times; then gently ease (the dislocation).
de l’issue des gemelz	from the issue of the twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	You know that twins are born many times, and never more than three or four at a time; and this is not strange, and often happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Twins are strange, and do not live long, they have no name; I know that they multiply, and their fate is determined by the will of God who created them, who is bound to the womb; and they never emerge as naturally as any other child, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they are severely stuck, if the treatment is as we have said, and there are subtle pains, do it quickly and gently; and act thus as it seems best for their salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	They should never be formed in the womb I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, or more up to XV, and they are all shaped like a child according to the wise measurement, and it is necessary that the skilled physician knows everything, for by chance similar things may happen; so do according to what is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	From the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat a woman who has lost her child through miscarriage or abortion and there is no natural delivery, and you are forced to perform manual extraction; it is important that you know if the woman's health is good and does not have a fear of death. She should be lying on her back with her legs inclined downwards and raised, and the midwife should cover her with a blanket from two parts, so she is not exposed when the child is extracted. Then rub the mother's vagina with moist olive oil mixed with fennel and linseed. Afterwards, apply the same oil to her hands and muslin strips; gently press them into the vagina and then remove them slightly at a time, checking if there are any signs of delivery. If they appear above her head, insert the muslin strips in her vagina, between her fingers, or on her neck, under her beard, or on her thighs, close to her ribs, and gently but firmly pull downwards until the child is fully delivered. This is the shape of the muslin strip:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then find another joint, where you need to insert it, so that the extraction is even; and then extend it evenly from one side to the other, to pull it out, and let the joints hold tightly, as this figure shows.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	If a piece remains, and none of its two sides are oiled, press one side into that part and pull the other; and if nothing comes out, place this joint higher up and do it until it completely pulls through.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes forward over the other and cannot return due to stiffness, it is necessary that you wrap it up with a cloth until it moves completely; then cut it at the joint of the palm or the finger, and do the same for the other hand, holding the two feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the child's head is large and stuck in the birth canal, and has a sharp point assembled, it is necessary to insert the spiny spatula between your fingers, and press the head and extract the water; or you can use the instrument called "almidach", from which the shape comes with the tools of this chapter that follows; and thus do the same for the child with a large natural head; then pull the bones with pincers, and if the head protrudes and is stuck by force, it may be split, until all moisture in the worst canal is removed; and if it cannot come out, break it into pieces as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, pierce it until the moisture runs.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the fever is on his feet, it is a light attraction, and the direction to the mouth of the wound is gentle.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is tormented in the belly or the bowels, then you must pull it with a cloth wrapped around your hand; and make an incision in the belly or the bowels until the moisture that is there is drained; and if another member is broken and the feces remain, press the ball of your hand into the wound and draw it towards the mouth of the wound; then use a knife or something similar to cut and pull it out; and if the mouth of the wound has become constricted due to the heat of the abscess that formed, it is not suitable for working on, but rather moist and fatty substances should be applied; and apply poultices, and immerse in lukewarm water that softens and moistens.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the dislocation is on his side, and you can make it even, as we have said about the living child; and if it cannot be treated this way, it should be pulled apart piece by piece, leaving nothing of the second joint.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And once you have done this, apply what we have said about abscesses that come near the wound; and if bleeding occurs, it should be treated with strong restraints, and other remedies should be applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose belly had been cut open, and another surgeon looked at it, and he prevented further harm.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, a sore appears on the lip, it swells until it opens, and begins to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to heal it, and I thought for a long time, but I could not close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong poultice, and an bone came out, and after a few days, others followed.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very surprised because this belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I thought this was a bone from a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I examined the wound and found a bone in my hand, until the woman was in better condition; and for a long time, she remained thus, then suddenly some bowing occurred in her leg; and I have never remembered this chapter being useful except when a master encounters something strange and knows how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the woman back to her place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	After this comes the form of a press, with which books are bound; and at the turn to the other side, to the two ends of the strings.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle in their tightening, and made of ebony or box; and the mouth opening should be wide enough, with a margin one palm length and a half long; and both sides of this same horn should have a firm adjustment, either half a palm long or slightly longer; and this adjustment is inserted into the mare's mouth to open it when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, resembling pliers; and it should have two adjustments, each one palm long and two fingers wide; and when you open the mare's mouth with all the instrument, make the woman lie down on her side, with her knees bent and legs spread, then insert both adjustments into the mare's vagina together and hold the base of the instrument between her thighs; then open your hand over the entire instrument, just as you did with the pliers, according to the amount that opens the mare's mouth, until it reaches what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	The surgical instruments are all prepared, and they have many similar appearances; when the surgeon has arranged them, the work is done more quickly, and it requires greater skill for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not carefully arrange the instrument, then do not use it, for its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the secondine (a birthing tool) is used during childbirth, it is important that you instruct the patient to retain her breath and then make her cough gently, holding her hands over her mouth and nose; if she does this, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If it is not possible, I will take a needle or an instrument that can open the mouth of the wound, such as calament, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or any of them, should be cooked or boiled in water over fire; then insert one end of the needle or instrument into the opening of the wound, and the other end in the mouth of the wound, and hold it until the vapors go inside the wound; then make the patient sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the patient's condition worsens,
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if after this treatment, the patient still feels weak, instruct them to moisten their left hand with oil of sesame or a mixture of almond, and then place it in nature (perhaps meaning a specific position or treatment), and seek the secondment (possibly a form of physical support or therapy). And when they find it, they should press and stretch it slowly and straight, so that the wound does not open during extraction; but they should gently move it to the right and left, and then pull. It will come out and depart.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the wound is too tight, we have said the cure of sneezing and herbal fumigation; and if it does not respond to all that we have said, be careful not to follow these practices, but whoever has a wound in the mouth, tie it to the woman's calf, then apply a four-ingredient ointment; it will discharge and heal, and go away, but nevertheless, when it discharges, there is a bad odor in the stomach and head, and the patient becomes pale.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore, suitable fumigations should be used: none of the ancients have tried fumigation with arugula and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which the woman is fumigated to prevent the flow of blood and vitality is this one.
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	It resembles a bell, made of glass, with a narrow top in its natural form, and wide bases over the fire; the fumigation is done over charcoal, until the substance is completely burnt, and then a new one is prepared.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who have not had their foundation pierced; instead, a subtle and soft tool is used: therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to pierce this with her finger, without using a sharp instrument, and prevent her from touching it; then she should apply a moist cloth soaked in wine and oil, and continue the treatment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it does not return, insert or open a plug of cloth, and leave it for several days, so that when the child wants to move, it is broken.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And this sudden stop of a wound or abscess should never be left untreated; it must be covered immediately: if it is cured, as we have said about the plug of cloth.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from its origin
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that originate from below the fundament are called nodules, and they are larger than those that emerge from above; or there can be one or more fistulas. And when this nodule has been present for a long time, if it opens up and is still moist with white or subtle pus, these fistulas do not heal; and they are known because of the discharge or flatulence that occurs when the patient evacuates, and sometimes they burst open.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if they perforate the fistulas that reach the bladder, and halfway through the penis; and they reach the joint of the thigh, and even the root of the cow.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus, you recognize the fistula that penetrates to the fundament, and does not penetrate: and it is that you insert your index finger or fundament, and insert a fine needle of iron or steel into the fistula where there is no curvature.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has curvature, if you insert a thin plunger or a horsehair, as long as you feel the resistance or the hair with your finger; and if you do not feel it, and it does not come out with any discharge or venting, as we have said, know that it does not penetrate; be swift in curing.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula persists up to the bladder or up to the urine conduit, if it leaks urine and cannot be healed by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced up to the hip joint, then the veins approach close to the place; if there is no curvature or abnormality in the pain around, then it continues to bend, and neither medicine nor bandaging helps; and for these persistent fistulas, there is no cure except through hard work and the vain efforts of those who interfere.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the case where it is neither persistent nor old, there is hope for healing by cauterization, as I have experienced: place the patient on their back with their legs extended to their knees, and their hips inclined towards their belly; then apply a thin piece of iron, or a piece of cloth if there is curvature, until you know where the vein is.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain throughout the entire body, it is necessary to press with your index finger, so that he perceives the place where the tendon is touched; and if you discover between your thumb and forefinger any satisfaction or hardness, then know that it persists; otherwise, working further will not heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One cannot nevertheless heal anyone completely, but it happens rarely; and the aid one provides consists in applying hot cautery according to the extent of the fistula, as mentioned above; and pour hot liquid into the fistula until it reaches the depths of the wound; and do this two or three times, until you know that these inflamed marks are burned, which resemble a feather from an eye. Then apply moist ointment, until the charred parts heal, then continue with healing treatments that soothe and join together.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is in such a state, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If the vein cannot be found in any other way, one must seek between them, and not piercing through to the bone that is at the root of it, and between your two fingers place a thick covering of wool or something similar, and you will see the fistula appearing beyond the covering towards the heart; if it touches the beginning of the fistula, then withdraw before the covering, and afterward apply cautery, as much as it reaches to the top of the covering; and the tent (fistula) will be healed, and cleansed; then beware of those faults that resemble a bird's feather, and do not leave anything.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if pain overcomes you, and a cut separates you from the task, then cauterize with fire or sharp medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For fire cautery brings together two good things: namely, the burning of these tissues, and the numbing of pain and the drying of moisture; then treat the wound with moist ointments or in crushed things, as long as the heat is strong, and pull the burned tissues into the bowels; then cure the wound with hot applications and dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it becomes healthy and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula appears all the way to the bottom of the foundation and is distant from the body, if you press it deep into the foundation, it will close up again.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tentation and between it is the cloth or the silk or the charcoal, or it is about to pierce, if there is no other way of escape and hope, through one of the three means: you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it all the way to the bottom, or if you can insert something and cure it as before; but don't go too deep, that you don't cut off the covering that holds the foundation, and cause discharge against your will; then cure it as we have said. Perhaps it will heal, or you remove that cover and clean it afterwards when it is cut from the foundation, either with a tent or another pointed instrument; then disinfect the wound as best you can; and try to restore the wound and prevent the fistula from recurring in the part beyond the foundation. If it's a lighter matter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And never are fistulas formed in this way: and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is on one side close to the base of the skin above, so take a tent that is pierced at the top according to this shape:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And insert the thread twisted in two, and push the tent all along the thread into the fistula as far as it goes to the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is stuck in the margin of the base inside, then pull out the thread from that hole, so that you insert your other finger or base; and hold the top of the thread, and bring together the two parts, binding them to each other, and leave it for one day or two; and do not touch it again until the threads have healed that are between them, and stop itching; then treat the wound until it is completely sealed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If you cannot pierce the fistula, no matter what method you try, it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not appropriate to attempt to treat it with a tight bandage if the swelling is too deep, and then cure it, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form is a sharp, spiky mass from which the fistula is formed, if it is hard and one-sided and cuts; on the other side it is not, so that one does not grasp what one should not grasp, as you can see.
des emorroydes	Of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: those that are internal within the anus, resembling grains of resin, and consisting of small or large veins, oozing blood, and causing pain; and those that protrude from the anus, often having little moisture, sometimes a bit of citrus or salt water, with a skin-like appearance. For the treatment of hemorrhoids located internally, instruct the patient to strain for defecation in separate chambers until the anus heals and the child is delivered; if urgent, grasp them with tweezers or your fingernail, then cut them at their base. If they cannot be held due to moisture, use a cloth, cotton, or a piece of chamois fabric to extract them gently. Cut them off at the right angle, then apply powder from hot cauterizing substances over them, as described in the cautery chapter; or cauterize them, after ensuring the anus is healed, using other treatments until they are cured. If the anus cannot be opened, use a strong enema to wash out what is within, so it can exit easily. When the patient feels relieved and there is no fear of incision with a tool, then the treatment is complete.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you need to administer the stitch in this manner: take a twisted thread, and wrap it around an needle, then pull the thread from above and pierce the needle from the other side, and pass both ends of the thread under the needle, and if it is too wide, tighten the forming thread, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do thus with all others, leaving one for drawing off the excess blood; then place a moist cloth over the wound, or a piece of gauze, and on top of the wound, and instruct the patient to rest; and then leave it until they heal, and when they fall, apply dressing and other remedies, until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	Carefully consider the sources or foundations.
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times, there is a drying up of sources (or foundations) within the intestine, due to constraints of nature, and when the illness is old and no medicine avails.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary that you remove the scurf with the point of a scalpel or your fingernail, ensuring it does not remain moist; then treat it as it should be until it is healed; and if it cannot heal, repeat the rasping stronger than before, until it becomes moist and is cut; then treat it until it is cured.
dou fremit	He trembles.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Mice are small, hairy creatures that move quickly; they never stop shivering, and one can feel their life force leaving them, affecting the entire body, especially the hands.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a feather from an goose or a strong falcon's feather, and place it on the shivering until the purple circle covers all the shivering; then turn your hand over the entire feather until you cover all around the shivering, and reset it, and remove the shivering from its root.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make this of a steel or iron wire according to this form, and be subtle from below and draw across it.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not cut, so as to hold the two together, and press. And if you see, cauterize the wound, as it is in front of or at the beginning of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of a douche
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never should a douche be made of silver or gold, or melted iron or wire; and never should these small and large instruments be made according to those to whom they are adapted.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	For such are those who are poorly managed in the care of children and those who are weak and painful, they are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the bladder is small and wide at the top, or the stomachs are bound in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and if there is distension or the stomachs are bound, as you see, and the feces are perceable inside, it has one opening on one side and the other on the opposite side. And put into one of them a medicine bag made from animal bladders or parchment, and it should be pierced all around with small openings, and there should be one space between each opening, then thread through these openings a strong thread twisted in an X shape or as desired, and gather the stomach like a bell; and when the medicine is inside, tie the instrument tightly with a strong thread, then perform the enema; and this is the form of a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and apply a warm cloth with oil or egg yolk, or something similar, then wrap it tightly; then the attendant should press the affected area with both hands together until it is completely relaxed, then remove the compress, and have the patient rest his legs against the wall, and let the medicine escape as much as possible; and if he sleeps soundly through the night, it will be greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you use the clister for an intestinal obstruction, and the medicine quickly escapes, repeat it until it is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoid is at the foundation, or in an abscess, it should be treated with just as much subtlety as for a child; and this is the shape of the subtle cleister where the skin is tightened.
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already spoken of the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments of hands and medicines, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the place where the wound is made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by the use of stone, and sword and knife, or lance or spear or arrow, or similar objects; or they are made according to the laws of the body, such as a wound that breaks through the neck, or head, or side, or stomach, or liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and begin with simple wounds of the head, because the memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, be careful if it is caused by stone or similar things, and the skin is nevertheless severely damaged and the wound is large, and you doubt the risk of an abscess: treat it as soon as possible, especially if there is little blood from the wound, and heal it on the contrary from the affected part; and let the patient avoid wine and fatty meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to heal, let his flesh be reduced, and he should not drink wine or eat char; and apply a poultice of rose oil only, or of stipple wine; and if there is a hot abscess, apply it to the wound while it is fresh with all its blood, and do not let air or powder move it, as I will say a little later; and if the fire has moved it, apply any herbs until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like a sword's length or similar, and the edges cannot be brought together, they can be sutured together, as I will say about wounds in the belly, from the stitches.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to the bone, it bleeds profusely and only lasts for a short time if not treated; then treat the wound with medicine, and replace the skin with hard wood in place of leather, and instruct the patient to eat substantial meats, such as roast meat and cooked wheat, also poultry, and similar foods.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find putrefaction in a wound that does not reach the bone, it quickly destroys the flesh, then treat it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, from which, without cutting, it cannot be stopped by medicine, then cut the artery, and if you dislocate it, bind it with a thread; and if this does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: so you must apply this powder that will soothe the burning.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	The method for the powder is as follows: take an equal part of incense, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of live charcoal, mix the powder finely, apply it to the wound, and tighten it until it spreads well and joins together with all its essence; then bind it firmly and leave it undisturbed, unless it swells, for the medicine should not be removed as long as it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never should one use only charcoal without having both incense and dragon's blood, but the burn must soothe the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the fire has moved the wound, especially if there is no pouder applied; but place on it any prepared ointment, or a paste of barley flour made with water and honey, as long as it remains soft; then cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if a bone fracture occurs with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with delicate pincers; and I will tell you below about the injuries to the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound in the collarbone
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound occurs on the neck and it is simple, then there is no difference between it and any other wound in the head, but if the wound is deep into the neck where the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If the wound is deep, then there is no other remedy but to let it heal and put nothing restrictive on it, as it would harm the neck and cause it to retract; do not apply any sharp objects to the wound, because the substance of the neck is cold, and its continuation is connected to the brain, which is the highest member. But apply medicine as if washing with mild water, mixed with rose oil, and also wash the dressing in mild water, and other herbs according to this method, and moist compresses.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is great, cutting it open and binding it with bands, then heal it until it is cured.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and infected, filled with pus, perforate them to the bottom; if the artery is cut, and bleeding occurs, ignore it, but apply cauterization as needed; if the pain is in the throat or the heart, cut the spleen or the veins, but be careful not to touch the throat except to reset it naturally. Then tighten the bandage tightly, and don't loosen it for several days, applying treatments with oils until healed; if the wound has pressed into the bone, dig out any pieces of bone that remain. If you cannot get them all, leave any remaining parts of bone until the wound rots away, becoming free and easier to heal; if the wound is fresh, apply the powder I mentioned above.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones and a fistula in the wound, treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	wound from a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a spear or knife, and deep, pay attention to the signs of the patient: if they are only slightly affected, then know that the wound is mortal; but if it is not too deep, and still has fresh blood flowing, do not apply powder in the first hour, nor bind the wound tightly so as not to prevent the blood from clotting and returning to its natural state, and thus healing the patient; instead, use a soothing ointment and change the bandage twice a day. And if you have no ointment, place old cotton in the wound to absorb excess moisture, and make the patient rest on the wound for three days, or four, or more; if there is no spasm, nor any tremor or strange feeling in the body, then know that the wound is healing well.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure the wound with various remedies and others, as long as it is healthy; and if it cannot heal, make an incision, and know that there is a fistula; then treat it as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, simple, or deep in front or back, treat it as for the one in front; if large, sew it up; and if small, use powder; and if it penetrates into the bone with small pieces, clean the wound thoroughly if they are unclean; and if they are clean, let the wound heal, and make the extraction lighter; and for other wounds in other limbs, judge them as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	disorder of the stomach
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The disorder of the stomach is great and medium and small; from a large wound, any time the intestines or the nerves of the intestines protrude; and stitching is more difficult, and never worth less the small wound than the great, because one does not pull the intestines in as much when closing a small wound; for they swell soon and cause pain if pulled in too tightly, and that's why it's better to move them slightly with a small wound, so that the intestines stay in their proper place just as with the others. And know that the rupture of the stomach occurs according to these four ways: common stitches occur in the stitching of the stomach, and the stitching of other wounds on the body, and other specific stitches are common to all other wounds; nevertheless, they are more suitable for the stitching of the stomach, and I will explain each one.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small and nothing of the intestine is exposed, and it is a difficult thing to reset, then it is by one of two methods: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to the injury.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: moisten a sponge or a soft cloth with hot water solely, or cook in water mixed with vinegar, cinnamon, and pepper, and straighten the intestine until the swelling is gone; and never use this wine to constrict, but let it flow freely until it subsides.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, if the intestine is filled with water or some other fluid, and the hemorrhoids are cooked, for this lightens the entry into the rectum; and if it cannot enter, they make a slight cut in the wound with the instrument used to treat hemorrhoids; and the first cure is to move the stool, that we should not have to cut without great need; and this is the instrument to open it: cut inside the heap and push outward, and see this shape.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine bursts out, if you can put it back into its natural position in its proper place, do so, for it is better to move it.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the belly, you should make the patient lie on his back and raise his legs higher than his head; if it's in the lower abdomen, put the head and heels higher than the lower parts, and also ensure that the torn part of the belly is in one of the two halves, so pay attention that the wounded area be higher than the other; thus it is right to administer what I say about large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, prepare what you are equipped with, then take in your hands a wet and clean cloth to cover the entire wound, and close the lips; this is the common method of stitching. Punch a single needle or more, according to the amount of the wound's width, then leave a small space at the top of the wound, and sew a strong thread; perforate both layers of skin with the two points of the scalpel, from the inside until you have perforated that part, and bring together the two points of the scalpel, all four together. Then tie a double thread around the needle from both sides, then bring together the two edges of the wound properly, and leave a small space, and sew another needle; bind it with thread as you did the first needle, and continue doing so according to your need for needles, until the entire wound is secured. The needles should be medium, neither too thin nor too thick; the thin ones capture all the flesh, and the too-thick ones cannot enter properly. Therefore, they should be medium. Do not pull the needles too far from the flesh and skin, or else they will open the wound before closing it; then cut off the ends of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient while sleeping, and place a tent or cloth at the ends of the needles to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed. This stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because only one needle or two are needed for closing; take a medium-sized thread, strong but thin, bring together both layers of skin and both points of the scalpel together at the needle, and as you begin, sew the wound like sewing cloth. Put a space between each stitch about the thickness of a finger; this stitching is useful for men, and I sewed a wound on a man who had been stabbed in the belly, which was more than one palm wide, and it was away from the intestines by two palms, and the wound was deep into the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought the intestine back as it had been for twenty-four hours, and the wound was healed within fifteen days, and it was cured, and it became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And they marveled that he did not die, and this was a miracle; and I did not cure him with any treatment, as I was in a place where none were found, neither any medicine; and I put clean cotton on the wound twice a day and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching: take the needle and thread from the outside part to the inside; when it has pierced through the fabric in a straight line, bring the thread to the surface where you first inserted the needle, and then pierce it again from the inside out, until the stitching is complete. This method is just like that used by a tanner with leather, leaving one end of the thread on one side and taking up the other until the entire stitch is finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second way of stitching, which Galen rightly calls, is like no other, assembling the two parts together in a natural way, and applying one of its ends to the other with satisfaction: insert a needle or the end of the thread close by, and pierce it through only once, leaving both ends of the thread; then turn the needle and pierce it from the opposite part as far as the inside, through both ends of the thread; and then pierce one and the other from the opposite part to the inside, in two other threads that are on the other side. This is the proper way of stitching and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen calls this method, and no one testifies to it—the stomach should be sewed with two needles, each having thread; one needle should be pulled from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew wounds; and know that when the rupture is within the belly, the stitching is more difficult than for other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is like the judgment of other wounds: and it is that when you probe the fresh wound until all its blood flows out, and if the flesh has moved, then dress it, and apply the ointment; then put any ready medicine on it as long as the wound swells; and bind it tightly, and let the herbs and myrrh do their work; then treat the wound like other wounds until it heals; and if you have no medicines, put a piece of old cotton and move it two times a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you need no other medicine in addition to these arrangements when wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound affects vital members, it is necessary to moisten with light linen in warm olive oil or rose oil, and place it around the affected areas, and under the armpits; and if there is pain or putrefaction in swelling, and this happens often, then give them enemas of black wine, and especially if the putrefaction reaches the intestines; pierce them from inside, and know that when it concerns the large intestines, healing is easier than for the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The internal organ called "young" cannot heal when it is weary, and this is due to the weakness of the vessels, and the subtlety of all the body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	If the flesh around the wound falls off, reset it as with the intestine while it is still fresh; if it is old and has turned red or black, you should tie the dark skin to prevent blood from flowing, since there are vessels and arteries there; then cut away the tissue in between until the stones come out easily when the flesh detaches, and the wound bends.
de la routure dou boueil	From the rupture of the bowels
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is ruptured and the wound is small, it cannot be restored in any man, as I have seen one die with a lance through his navel or abdomen; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, it became infected and turned into a fistula, from which emissions and flatulence issued; I applied treatment according to my ability, and did not cease subtilizing until he was healed, and the wound sealed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it healed, I doubted that the patient would not experience pain in his stomach; but he felt no pain, and instead grew better, taking food and drink; and certain experienced people said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be treated in this way: take large flax seeds, then bring together the edges of the wound, and when the seed has opened its mouth, place it between the two edges so that it draws the mouth tight; then cut off the head of the seed, and this will hold so that it cannot open; then place another seed in the same way until the wound is completely closed; and then treat the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	This chief is so sharp in the intestine, and causes no harm to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a fine thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal, in this way: take the chief of this intestinal thread, which is very stripped, and then tie it to the chief of this thin linen thread twisted, then roll the thread into the needle, and sew the intestine, and arrange it in the wound; and this method of sewing with foreign threads is not stronger than according to the path of faith and hope; and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the large intestines, no one can heal it except with subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	or whether it is a fistula, wherever it may be.
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	You know that any wound or abscess, when it opens, is universally called a "fistula", especially when it is covered with hair and looks inward.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is according to its true nature hard and white, without pain, and also covered with hair like the feathers of a bird; sometimes it opens clearly, other times it becomes thick; sometimes it feels hot, other times it feels cold; and I have already spoken in the division of wounds that every wound which does not heal, and there is no discharge, is due to one of the nine causes: namely, because of the sparsity of blood or pus; or because of its evil nature; or because there is too much hardness inside, and on the lips, which do not allow discharge; or it has too much discharge; or the muscles are rotten, and the material is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good for the cure; or because corruption is in the manner of pestilence; or because of the proprieties of the region, digestion is delayed, health is late, and is flatulent by nature; or there are veins or bones. And I have already shown all these causes, signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary that I inform you about the treatment of a fistula which is performed by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	You know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that affect large veins, arteries, and nerves, or the bladder, intestine, or bladder, or any of the ribs, or the spine, or any joint in the hands or feet, and if they occur in a way that affects the primary member and its similar structures.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all fistulas of this nature are difficult to heal and require effort and knowledge; if there is a fistula that does not come to the surface as I have said, but you have hope for its cure and understand it, take a thin blade of iron or steel, if the fistula is straight, cut it as desired; and if it is crooked, use a delicate, curved tool because the pressure should conform to its curvature; and if the fistula has an opening through which it cannot be properly reached by blades, clean it with a catheter from the nearest opening, for moisture travels quickly from one opening to another and cleanses it; then cauterize it thoroughly in your power to know if there is bone or nerve, and if it is completely healed, and ask the patient about the pain they feel when you press on it and where they feel it; and once you have truly identified its location, and whether it is far from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or any of the places I mentioned, cut it as I directed, and remove all foreign matter and corrupted flesh within; then heal it as best you can, and apply moistened medicinal herbs to the wound up to the base of the fistula until the medicine dissolves the excess that has accumulated at the bottom; and then place fresh, healthy bandages over it while it heals; and if it does not heal through these means, cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, cut it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerve does not affect the main member, as we have said, and if the bone is exposed and there is corrosion and blackening, treat the wound thoroughly until the corruption is completely removed; then apply healing remedies until it is healthy again; and if it remains unhealthy and bowing as before, know that you are not yet healed: expose and clean as much as you can, remove all the corruption, then restore the joint; and if it becomes healthy in this way, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If this is not the case, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach; if there is no other means but to let nature take its course; and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can pull it with pliers suitable for this purpose, and if there are many bones, break them all, leave none whole; and if moisture makes things worse and gives you doubt or fear, cut, dry, and heal, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, place something corruptible on the wound, and leave it until the pus has formed around the bones; then they will be more easily removed. And if it is a large bone, such as the thigh or shin, cut off the corruption as far as the blackness of the bone, then return to the wound; and if there is a great deal of corrupted flesh, extending almost to the bone, you must carefully cut off and cover all the corruption until it is healed. And I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that you can take an example from it and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	He was a young man around 30 years old who had pain in his leg due to something that came from inside the body, causing matter to accumulate in the leg, and he had a large abscess with no apparent way to open it. But, through their folly, they continued to work on it until the abscess opened, and many things were corrupted, becoming a fistula, and there were numerous ruptures from which all drained, bowing and moisting the body. And many tried to cure him for two years, without any wise man in that art, until I was called upon, and I saw his leg and the remedies they used, and what happened through the ruptures to great parts of the body; and his skin turned red, like a citrine.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I set up a tent in one of these gaps, and then I examined all the gaps, and I found that some came into contact with each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I then hurried and cut into one of the gaps until I discovered a piece of bone, which I found corrupted and broken, with the corruption extending to the inside of the bone; I understood what appeared to be the corrupt bone, and thought that there was no other corruption except for this one; and I began to treat the wound with various medications for a long time, but it would not heal. Then I re-examined it and discovered the bone as before, finding continuous corrosion in the bone, so I treated it and then set it, and focused on binding it firmly; but I could only cut around one palm of the bone, bringing it to its natural position, and then applied more medications. It healed and bound up safely, without desiring to recommence the procedure again except for the weakness of the patient who could not endure, and for the fear of death that I had from him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For in the evacuation of blood, it often happens, but it was completely healed, and a hard callus formed in its place on the bone, and it was well-disposed and caused no harm or pain at all, neither to going nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be handled in this manner: take a ligature, and stretch it across the opening of the bone, and instruct anyone to extend it upwards; and tie another stronger linen band over the first one, and secure it to the callus that has formed beyond the bone, so that you pull the corrupted flesh away from the bone underneath, and expose the bone where you see it is healthy; and place a piece of cloth or a table under the bone to protect the corrupted flesh; and be as careful as possible as you can see and feel the corruption, and do this again if necessary.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if a bone is corrupt and will not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then expose all of it; then apply heat from below, and then move from one part to the other the corruption, and be careful not to harm the length of the corruption as we have said; and if the corruption is in a joint, cut out the corrupt joint, and remove the bone from the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, there is no other way but to cut them both; and if the corruption is in the wrist of the hand or the ankle of the foot, this matter is very difficult, but you should nevertheless inquire about the corruption how it opens, and cleanse it in all ways that you can, as long as the vein or nerve do not oppose; and know that there are many tools for cutting and removing these bones, according to the position of the bone and its appearance, and its thickness and thinness, and its size and smallness, and its hardness; and for this reason it is necessary to adapt each tool to the resemblance of every work; and know that the work will show you the tool that you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; choose the tool that you need, as befits.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The joint deteriorates either internally or externally; and when you have medicated that corruption with the cure of medicines, and they do not help, then it is necessary to cover that member until the corruption comes, so that the patient escapes from death or evil, which is greater, due to the fault of the member; and the sign of this is that the member turns black, as if it were burnt by fire, and after the blackening, since this corruption goes from member to member, and takes over the whole body; then you must hurry to cover it, and if it is due to the bite of some poisonous beast, such as a sea scorpion or a snake or similar, and the corrosion is at the head of the two, then cut it off, and do not give it time to come to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes up to the hand, so that the bone affects the joint, preventing corrosion from reaching the arm; and if it comes to the arm, so that the wound affects the shoulder; and if it passes beyond the shoulder, it is death, and there is no cure except according to the quantity of its strength; and thus it does when the corrosion reaches the foot. If it comes to the first joint, it affects the other joints afterward; and if it comes to the foot, it envelops the entire foot; and if it ascends to the leg, it affects the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other device than to leave the patient to die. The manner of binding or wrapping the member is such that you tie one assistant above and another below, and you remove the flesh between the two bindings with a broad knife, until the bone is exposed. Then bind or wrap it, and place a cloth on each side so that the cloth does not touch the healthy part, and it causes further injury and abscess to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if the blood flow occurs when you operate, cauterize the wound properly or apply any powders to restrain it; then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the affected member securely with a suitable ligament and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man in great pain: he had a blackness that seemed like a burn from fire, and this corruption first appeared on his right lower leg, until it discolored the entire leg. And when the man saw the corruption, he covered his leg and was healed. But after a long time, the corruption returned to his left hand, and he came to me, and I put protective things over the affected area after purification of the body, and the corruption would not cease. He begged me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to do that because I had hope of driving out the material; and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die, as the man's strength was weak. He became completely desperate, returned to his land, covered his hand, and was healed; and I have heard no worse outcome for doing otherwise, if one has need.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	No abscess forms in a healthy flesh, and lingers so long that it causes great swelling; then it bursts open, and the bowels fall out, leaving the bones visible, just like a vessel; and the skin covering it is as thin as delicate cloth, and does not cover the bone or nerve, and such a condition is called 'sain' (not an ulcer), but if it extends so far that it reaches the bone completely, it is called a 'fistule'; and the skin should be cut all around, especially if it is thin like delicate cloth; and its corruption is not easily discerned.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if the skin has opened and the corruption is not yet fully exposed, and the flesh around it is tender, then treat it with an enema in this way: examine if the swelling is large and the stench from the bowels is foul; then prepare an Egyptian medicine by mixing equal parts of ashes, oil, and litharge, and heat it in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and thick like honey. Then take as much as necessary and mix it with water and honey, and give the enema, relaxing the opening; leave the medicine inside for two hours, then expel it gently; repeat this several times until the swelling is gone and the pus has drained; never use water from ashes when this medicine is not available, but instead, burn vine roots and pour water over them, then strain and use it for the enema, ensuring that the opening is thoroughly cleaned. And if the patient cannot endure either the Egyptian medicine or the water from the ashes, give him an enema of honey and wine, with a little bit of crushed litharge; or you can use other medicines and ointments as described in my previous treatise on ointments; and if the tear in the side is small and the catheter for the enema cannot enter, enlarge it slightly with a hot iron, and apply the Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is wide enough; but if the wound is too large, cutting it will not help, and if the opening where the bowels are leaking is above, remove the catheters or lower them to a point below where the leak is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bowel is in perfect condition, it does not permit inflation; and if you cannot cover the opening of the wound as you see fit, arrange it in such a way that the bowel moves to the lowest point it can, for when the bowel is perfectly intact, it does not permit inflation, and if you cannot cover the opening of the wound as you see fit, arrange it so that the bowel gently flows downward, leaving no part of the bowel behind; and take consolidative medicines to place over the wound, and cover it with a linen cloth that encloses all the wound; then, as strongly as possible, apply pressure around the opening in the side of the wound, a little wider than before, for there is soothing treatment on another cloth according to the quantity of the opening, and place this over the opening in the wound to lighten the bowel, and do not remove the large linen cloth outside until after many days; and whoever is over the opening in the side of the wound often removes it to ease the bowel, and knows what comes from the bowel, whether it be venom or a little or enough or digestion, or undigestion; and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when you see how your medicine has spread in this manner and observe the nature that arises on the opening of the wound, then know that the bowel is already healed, and approaches health; and then loosen it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you loosen the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the treatment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the pain is bowing inward due to indigestion after many days, knowing that the pain will not subside.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons appear after a long time, do not despair of your health, for health draws near.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are some whose garments catch fire on their wounds, and others who do the opposite; and if the pain bows inward after many days, knowing that the pain will not subside; and if the bowing is delayed, and it becomes distant, then use moist medicines with a subtle nature and dry in virtue, as a final remedy, for there is much vitriol in them, which is the last medicine. Take a final remedy and apply it with rose oil, and mix it with old wine of equal substance; then conserve it and use it. The same is done with cooked honey thickened, when final remedies are not present, or you take mirra, aloes, and incense, and pound them, and sprinkle the powder onto the honey as soon as it's off the fire; then spread it on a cloth, and lay it on the affected area, and never administer anaristology for a long time, nor roots of celandine, which is similar to wheat flour and chamomile; and use simples or compounds. Crush them, and make powder, and mix with the honey I mentioned, and use. If the treatment is prolonged, and it's not cured by this cure, then know that corruption has taken hold, and made an impression on the bones, or the hard members, or the ligaments; as we have said before regarding fistular cure.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	from the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	A nail abscess (panarice) is an infection that develops beneath a nail of the hand, or foot, or occasionally in other digits; and when it becomes old and care is not taken, it can lead to a deep abscess, causing pain and discharge until the root of the nail is reached, or even the entire nail. It results in corrosion down to the bone, causing intense, putrid pain, and the tissue around the digit swells, becoming red and discolored.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When treating it as we have described in the previous section, if the cure is not effective, it is necessary to remove any excess nail debris, and then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cautery is great help if the bone is sound, and the nail is healthy; if the nail pierces the skin, and begins to point, and the wound bleeds, then it is necessary that you place the right under the nail that has pierced, and close it up, and gently and lightly cut away the charred part, and apply burning and corrosive medicines to remove all of it; then treat the wound with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it out and treat it, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal; and if you see both bones corrupted, remove them immediately as mentioned above, then cure the wound while it is still fresh; and if they are burnt and blistered, and cause great pain, then dress the wound first; then cut the nail with a sharp scissor at an angle from above, and be careful that the cut does not reach the skin beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if it does, apply something to soothe it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain arises deeply within the hand.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The adjustment that is born in the hands of no one, perhaps very fleshy, and by chance has part where there are bones, and never nails, and none are born at the root of the joint, or birth is in no way on our sides.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	That which is born in no joint does not move, and that which is born at the joint of a joint, perhaps moves; the size of that which is fleshy is very light, in such a manner: cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born at the root of the jointure is difficult to cure: if you keep him covered.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For he who is born with or develops a deformity in any part, it is necessary that you first cover the bone completely up to the joint, then dislocate the bone to a suitable position, and finally treat it while it is still healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The deformities that come at any age come either from birth, or from the healing of a wound, or from a burn by fire, or similar conditions.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If you need to bind this wound, so that it must be repaired according to their natural forms; then place between two moistened cloths or drapes in rose oil, so that they do not stick together; or you place between two pieces of thin cloth, as long as the limbs are bound, as is necessary.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If dislocation occurs in any of its joints with the palm, then bind the wound as is necessary.
des vils	vils (adjective) - evil
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Their veins are thickly wrapped, full of melancholic excesses, which come upon many parts of the body; and they occur more in the legs of those who walk, work, and carry things, than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is therefore necessary that you administer no purgative at all times, but then the health of the basilic (presumably referring to a specific body part or condition).
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment of iron (or perhaps a specific condition) is according to two manners: one is with the use of cups, and the extraction of black blood; and the other manner is that you leave the vein open, and drain it completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The incision (or treatment) is as follows: first, raise the affected leg with hot water, until the flesh becomes tender, then extract the sick leg from the thigh to the knee; then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a wide knife, then squeeze and drain the black blood into your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the patient can endure; and then bandage it, and instruct him to eat food causing dark, black stools; and repeat the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, and harmful to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	They should raise the affected leg and, if there are many hairs, submerge it in water, then immerse it in hot water until it turns red and the veins bulge; if you do not have a bath, heat it over fire, then apply it to the vein at the top of the thigh or below the ankle; then cut the skin at the point where it meets the vein, scraping the vein from both sides until it is exposed; it will appear red and black, and as it enters the skin, it looks like a white string. Then squeeze from below while lifting it, as you have done before, and apply pressure to another nail, then cut the skin over the vein again, as you did initially; continue cutting, pulling, and applying pressure in this manner, moving up to the next nail, until the entire vein is exposed. If it cannot be pulled out, insert a very sharp needle through the entire thread and hold and pull it, and squeeze from below while turning your hand back and forth until it comes out; beware that it does not cut off, for if it does, you will not be able to pull or remove it, and harm will come to the patient. Once you have completely pulled it out, place a moist, woolen bandage over the wound with wine and rose oil. Treat it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vision is contracted and twisted and folded together as one, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it crookedly but do not cover it; treat it as we have previously stated.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The method of doing which the eye is covered if it is curved and does not cut through, unless it cuts the vein; it is a great curve, because if it were thin, it would cover the vein, but since it is thick as we have said, this is its form:
de la voinne civile	of the natural vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is located in the legs, in warm regions where no herbs or trees grow, and in land where there is no moisture; it may also be found elsewhere, resulting from decay that originates from beneath the skin, as it winds and twists inside the body like a serpent.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein appear, it is marked by a severe inflammation in the leg, then the color changes, and the vein begins to protrude forcefully, much like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the vein opens, it is necessary to wrap a piece of cloth around it, from one and a half fingers up to two fingers thick, and leave the cloth on the leg; whenever it retracts, wrap it again around the cloth and the new opening, but do not cut off its root until it has fully emerged; for if you do, it will return inside the flesh, causing abscesses, putrefaction, or other illnesses. For this reason, it is important to treat it little by little, without leaving any residue in the body, and when it is treated with five or ten long fingers (or an inch), I have seen a case where it emerged from a wound of ten fingers' length, and when cut, it bled profusely until everything came out; and the material inside should be cleaned and medicine applied to prevent putrefaction every day, then treat the abscess as usual.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never touch this vein with your hands, especially when it opens at the ankle or foot joint, and it causes a lot of bleeding; treat it then as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	vers that are born between leather and bone
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This illness is called the "beef disease" in our land because it often affects cows, and it is a small worm that is born between leather and bone. It spreads throughout the body, moving up and down, and is felt to be very painful from one limb to another, until it breaks through the skin where it originated, and moves with great force; and it is caused by putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms, serpents, and lice or intestinal parasites do in the stomach. One doubts the severity of its malice, for when it spreads throughout the body, it climbs up to the head, and reaches the eye, perhaps retracing its path, and destroying the eye; and this happens often.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it healing and draining, you cannot force it until it is ready: therefore, you must lie the limb above and below with a strong, tight bandage, then cut and drain it thoroughly, and if the pus comes out in the wound, do not draw it out, but cauterize it with fire until it heals; and the greatest harm it does is when it causes oil to flow, as we have said; and if you see the pus approaching near the oil, tighten the bandage around the sore eye, then cut and drain it forcefully; and it is necessary for the patient to purify the body with cleansing medicines to dissolve harmful humors, and wash with foods that prevent putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from flatulence
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This illness is called "vacquer" in our land, and it is a pain that comes in no particular member, but can move from one member to another; and I have seen this as I have told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and I examined her arm, and saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and after that, I noticed something moving up her shoulder, as quickly as a little worm, like a bright silver when it moves from one place to another; the pain left that area and moved to the shoulder, and then, a little later, spread throughout her body, until it reached the other arm; then she told me that she felt it moving around inside her body, as I had seen.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marvelled much at how it moved from one part to another, for I had never seen this disease in such a way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I had seen many times that the pain of one part moving to another was not as it should be, but I did not understand why, as I saw it in women; and I thought it was because they had dry skin, exposed veins, and this constraint made them feel winded; and I did not see this reason apply to those who are healthy and have moist skin and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see this disease cured, and the patient feels that pain, as we have said, if it opens up from above and below by force, then close it; cauterize the wound; and if you do not know how to do it yourself, seek help from one who can reduce the constraint of the wind, such as foul-smelling pills, or pilules de serapin (a type of herbal remedy), or similar ones.
des saiettes	Of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows vary according to their appearance and the parts of the body they pierce.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	Their diversity lies in the fact that there are those with sharp, small, or saw-like points; some have two angles, others have elongated tips, and some even have barbs; they can pierce any part of the body in different ways: into vital organs like the brain, body, liver, sperm, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it comes out in any part of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, appears: it is necessary that you fight for the extraction of this arrow, because death comes after various dispositions; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not fully extracted, pull it out, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when the arrow comes out and pierces the bone, and there is a satisfying feeling on top of the brain, it is when stupor, sobbing, and twitching occur all at once, and the tongue becomes swollen, red, and inflamed; spasms and confusion in understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps the arrow emerges from the nostrils or ears; and sometimes it causes loss of speech and voice; and there are also white, pus-like discharge from the wound, resembling a bruise, or like blood spurt. If these signs appear to you, especially if you have the ability to treat it, extract the arrow even if it is not completely embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of a arrow when it breaks or withdraws, is that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty; and by chance the arrow may also become silent like the pulse, and there appears black blood, and coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: so know without doubt that death approaches.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow that never draws the pomon (lung) is that there is no foam without pain coming from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's face turns pale, and they breathe heavily and stop breathing suddenly.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow breaks in the deepest part of the flesh, it is a sign that the small bones are damaged; it causes great pain and deep breathing and sighing, and all the muscles around the shoulders shake.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrow pierces the stomach, perhaps something from the wound enters the undigested flesh.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow pierces the abdomen, and there is no safe passage through the intestines, then there is little hope for treatment or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow pierces the bladder, the urine gushes out, and the patient feels intense pain; know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, as they feel and appear—the hand, the foot, the throat, the shoulder, the helper (a term for a limb's assistance), the lower back, the knees, the toes, and the legs—are safe according to various configurations.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and is not venomous, as I will tell you it happened to me, because you do such a thing.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	An incident occurred with me; an arrow struck my shoulder or arm at the root of a nerve: I attempted to extract it, and pulled from another side through the fat of the ear, and it was healed without harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And tried a trick with an arrow that had struck in the fat beneath the skin, and the arrowhead was embedded, and it could only be reached with the tip towards the wood, and it was an arrow of great length with a blue arc, making everything light without any signs of injury; the wound healed, and no further ill fortune came.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And take an arrow from the throat of a Christian, which was an Arab arrow with ears: I cut the barbs, and pulled as I took it, and healed the Christian.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And I extracted an arrow from a man who had it in his belly, and thought he was dying; but after thirty days, he showed no change in condition; so I cut the arrow, and removed it, and pulled it out without any ill effect.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you wish to help a man who has an arrow in his back or side, and the wound is deep, and the arrow remains stuck inside him, and he shows no change in his natural condition, nor does he feel any pain from any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And see another man to whom an arrow has penetrated his face, and the wound was deeply seated; and he endured great pain without suffering; and many others like him.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And I treated a prince, the king himself, who had an arrow in his neck, which was slightly inclined to the right side, and the arrow was entirely removed after three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very deep.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I probed it very gently, and I felt nothing; but he experienced a sharp sensation and pain from the back of his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the tip of the arrow I placed a soothing, digestive plaster on the shoulder, because the muscles did not contract; and I saw the arrow muscles.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I left the plaster on for several days, and thus healed the wound, and thereby kept the patient for a long time, until he felt the arrow inside his flesh; and he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied a corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it healed, and tested it, feeling the tip of the arrow that was embedded in the flesh; then I adjusted the opening of the wound using this corrosive medicine until I could clearly see the parts of the arrow; it took around three months for the wound to heal, and then I used pliers to pull the arrow out from both sides, but it would not come out; so I continued to try and devise tools and methods, until I finally pulled it out with well-made pliers as described at the end of this chapter, while I treated the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And they believe most strongly that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: so I restored it, and the wound healed, and the patient was entirely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	I have also told you the quality of extracting certain arrows; so place your cure on what I do not mention, for books cannot encompass everything; but wise masters compare well little by little, and upon what is present and lacking, finding new works and new tools at the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not come from the members where they are stuck except in two ways: either by the place where they enter or from another side; and that which comes out from one side where it enters is an arrow entering into the flesh, and it never comes out again.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not now come out, let it grow until the flesh around it becomes rotten and weak; and if it is lodged in the bone and cannot come out, leave it for several days and every day move it slightly; then it will come out, and if not, pierce through all with a fine needle until the bones around it are widened, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone at the base of the skull and reaches one of the ventricles of the brain, or any of the conditions I have mentioned earlier affect the patient: do not pull it out, but let it remain as long as it remains even for several days, because if it reaches too deep, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is embedded only in the bone and does not come out satisfactorily, it keeps the patient without any bad consequences as long as the skill to pull it out is present.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply embedded and cannot come out, then apply herbs around it, as I have told you; then treat the wound as long as it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is pulled back into the body and one cannot see it, try to remove it with all your strength; and if you feel it, use any suitable instrument; and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound or because the arrow goes deep into the flesh, and there is no bone or nerve or muscle nearby, leave it until the wound is large enough; then, if possible, remove the arrow, and if there are any tendrils by which it is attached, cut off the part that is embedded in the second place as you can, then break or bend the tendrils of the arrowhead until you can pull it out. Be careful not to break the arrow itself so that you do not make the removal more difficult.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, leave it until the swelling around it subsides, then treat it, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the course of the fever causes you to do otherwise, then follow what we have said about treatment in that chapter; and be careful with the incision on the nerve and vein, and use whatever means you can to extract the arrow safely, either now or later, or firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the position it was in when the arrow entered, for this is the greatest help there is, and if you cannot do so, then do as the signs show.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	He knows that the arrow comes from another direction, where it opens something within, and the skin is swollen in that place if one sees or feels it obviously: then cut above, as far as the pliers can reach, and then extract: if it jumps out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	If it is stuck in the bone, turn your hand round, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot be pulled out, leave it for now and then try to pull it out again until it comes out; and if there is a splinter of the arrow within the wound, let it remain there, and then use an instrument to remove it, so that the tip of the arrow enters the channel of the instrument; then push it out, and if the arrow has a splinter, insert the instrument with its tip entering completely, in order to facilitate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is embedded, it is necessary that you clean all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, and then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow comes out in the side or in the abdomen or in the bladder or near a rib, and you can reach it, remove it; but be careful not to touch the vein or nerve, then extract it, and treat the wound as needed, and heal it as best as possible.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The instrument used to extract arrows resembles a bird's beak, and here is its form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The form that points downwards is like the feather of a bird, to push the tip of the arrow, as this shape indicates.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of claws for pushing and gripping, if this is the case:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are 31 veins from which one can gain healing, of which there are 16 main ones: 2 veinlets behind the ears, called 'dubhe herbech'; and 2 arteries clearly visible in both temples; 2 veins in the arm pits, called 'aspires'; the vein across the forehead; the vein at the crown of the head; 2 veins at the collarbone; 2 veins on the upper lip above the mouth, known as 'augeherich'; and 2 veins under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The common veins from which one gains healing are 5 in each arm: one is the cephalic vein, located on the left side, and commonly called 'vein of the head'; the middle one is called 'fast' and is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins; it is also on the left side and the common people call it 'vein of the body'. The basilic vein is on the right side and they call it 'vein of the stomach', and it lies above the flexor, and it is the one that appears most clearly when opened on the wrist.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the cure is the vein that lies between the little finger and the ring finger, and if it rains; and in the leg, there are three veins: one below the knee on the left side, and the second at the ankle on the right side; and the third vein, called 'nasse', is in the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg, there are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The health of veins behind the ears aids in the cure of old catarrh and migraine; and the quality of this treatment, as I have said, is to turn the patient's head and rub the affected area with a rough cloth; then tie the patient's collar tightly around their neck, until the two veins visible behind the ears are firmly attached to the head. Then hold them in that position and feel for the pulse below your thumb; if it is strong, proceed. Take the lance and insert it beneath the vein, up to the bone, then lift your hand along the entire vein towards the top, cutting and cauterizing the skin and vein thoroughly, but carefully, two times on each side. Let the blood flow out until you see a clear wound; then bind and dress it, as I have previously described incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	He heals the two arteries that are in the temples, with an old and smooth and accustomed eye socket, and at the source of the hot tears as he should; and his skill in healing is such as I said: and it is that the patient pulls his neck, until the two veins open widely; and feels the pulse beneath his thumb, then signs with a stick; then lightly touches the vein at the top on his right index finger, and draws the lance beneath, and loosens the vein at the top, and the coagulum, as you did with the other veins, and allows the blood to flow according to your need; then releases the patient, and places his thumb on the vein for an hour, then puts a cotton ball; and then forms the wound, and leaves it until it is healed; and we have spoken of their healing and extraction, as we began in this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The health of the vein on the forehead is worth as much as the health of the brain, as well as old facial diseases, and migraine, and redness; its quality is such that the patient twists his neck tightly until the vein opens. Then take the instrument called a "denter," whose shape is as follows:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand or another object, allowing the blood to flow according to its quantity; then loosen the patient's neck, and tie the vein as long as it remains healthy without opening a wide wound.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Nevertheless, one must not let the flames be too strong; and cut across the wound, for the bone is close by, and it may break the flame when it is delicate.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The healing of the two veins located in the arms is aided by these means, and also for itching, redness, and swelling in the eye, and facial diseases; and the quality of their healing is that the patient's pain is relieved by stretching none of the ligaments, as before; then the healing, and it should be slightly through, neither too long nor too narrow with the flame, because there is no room.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is subtle, it may break; then apply pressure to the blood flow as needed, and then bind it with cloth, tightly.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The health of the vein from the nose is very valuable for congestion, sudden pain, and facial ailments such as migraines and redness that come to the face, especially when it is old. The quality of the health is such that the patient squeezes his neck, then pulls his nose with his left hand, and takes the subtle flame, long, and inserts it between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well enough, and the blood will begin to flow. Do not press too hard, and apply pressure from the blood as needed, then bind it for a night, for it is quickly restored; this is the shape of the flame.
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The holy water from the two eyes helps in the constriction of the eyelid, and at the beginning of inflammation, and with many diseases, and impetigo, and corrosion, and herpes, and boils; and its quality is such that the patient pulls his lid tightly from one side to the other, as we have said; and let the skilled one be on the head of the sick person, and the sick person sits in a certain place, then clean the vein with long water slightly, then treat with blood temperedly, or as necessary; then do the same in the other vein, then loosen the bandage, and tighten the veins gently so that the patient does not choke; and leave it until morning, so that the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	of the health of the veins
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the veins in the lips helps to keep the mouth closed and aids in the healing of gum disease, lip cracks, and pain and swelling around it.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the health is to have the patient sit before you, holding their chin as I said; then turn the lip, and look at both veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, which can be recognized by their black color and thin lines around them: therefore, cut both, and if you do not recognize them and are in doubt, cut the thicker one from each side, as well as both veins that are above and below, for it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	From the extraction of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The extraction of the tongue's veins is the next most important after the removal of a foreign body from the throat, and it is used to treat eye diseases, mouth diseases; and the skill in performing this operation lies in that the patient grasps between his fingers under the sunlight, loosens the tongue, and looks closely at each side for black veins: then he should heal both, and do not cut too deep, as they are arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the neck that are commonly extracted are treated in two ways: either by piercing all the flames with a broad knife, or with a delicate olive-shaped instrument (called an 'aneisil'), which is as thin as a cut thread; and they are wide or narrow according to the width and tightness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	It takes on the appearance of a bright flame if it is very renowned, and it is wide as you can see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the broad veins that contain visible, thick blood and pus; and this has the appearance of an olive flame.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more delicately pointed, and it is for cleansing the delicate veins where there is subtle, yellowish blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The cleansing of the basil vein, which is one of these veins, is very beneficial for illnesses that are beneath the throat, and the collarbone, and the pelvis, and the stomach; and it is important for the healer to cleanse gently, and to wash out the artery below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it cuts the artery, and blood flow stops, as is desired, as I said; and the flame should not be gripping, but cutting like iron.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the vein does not open clearly, it is necessary that you extract it and change it for another; or you wish to draw out any fluid from it, or close the wound in its place: it opens clearly; and cut it with a sharp flame, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you come to recognize the place of the wound, it is necessary that you extract the arm, touching the wound until you feel the pulse; then mark the place with a sign, and bind the arm, and cut the vein with a sharp flame; and be careful not to injure the artery when you see it pulsate, for that is the artery: beware of it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it protrude at the top as urine from a child, and the veins are red and thin, know that it is from an artery: therefore hurry, and place your finger for a long time, then remove your finger so that it does not bleed again, which often happens; hold the arm still, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient; be on guard, and do not move until it heals.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the veins do not stop bleeding and it continues to flow, and no medicine is at hand, if you cut open the artery from its base, since it is the source of the problem; then stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a piece of fig bark, and cut it, and take one half of it and bind it tightly to the other side; if it stays steady, that is good; if not, cure it as we have said, with powders that stop blood; and the stopping will not cause any further harm due to the small size of the wound, and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The treatment of the vein is more effective if it stops blood from the top and from within, because it is composed of both basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said; and the healer should wash for the nerve that lies within, and if he does not clean it thoroughly, he might tear the nerve, causing swelling and pain, and perhaps it will not heal; and this nerve opens many times, and if it is not opened in any other person due to its subtlety, then it must be cleaned with an antiseptic instrument; and take care not to harm the nerve.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two bones, cut it lengthwise.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The treatment for the headache, which draws blood from the head and helps the joints; it is good to apply oil of olive or myrrh to the fire, as it is the safest of all veins, because it does not affect any nerve or artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, it is advisable to seek the lightest joint and not be concerned if it hurts the first time, and to try again; sometimes, the joints may swell up in certain people when they are handled for the first time, but this should not be a cause for concern.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the health lies according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about health is that health is maintained solely for the purpose of preserving wellness and avoiding future ailments; and healing should be done through one of the three veins, namely, the cephalic, fascia, or basilic vein. One should consider a cure at the onset of symptoms during youth, autumn, and winter after meals, when signs of congestion appear. The first day or third day after two to three hours is the optimal time for healing.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	Healing that is administered for ailments has no specific time frame, but rather as needed during the day or night, whenever required; and children under 12 years old and women who are pregnant should not be subjected to healing except in extreme cases, such as after four months of pregnancy until the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	One should not treat the old who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when anyone wishes to be healed, in whatever way, it is necessary that he purges the intestines with a light enema, if they have retained much feces, so that the veins do not draw the superfluous and harmful impurities from the principal members; nor should one heal someone who is too salt with meat, or too drunk, as long as this persists, or those who are lethargic; and be careful to heal after colic, vomiting, abdominal distension, frequent defecation, much sexual activity, hard work, wakefulness, and fasting, and all similar things; then gently purge the humors, if they have accumulated, through diet, beverages, and medicines, as far as possible; then enter the bath, if nothing prevents it, to purge blood, and heal the vein from the inside on the third day, as we have said; and be careful that day to avoid work, pain, lust, and similar things; and be moderate and cheerful, and let healing be more complete than that of others; then twice or three times rub the arm, then gently loosen the ligament above, for when it is too tight, it cannot be corrected; and then rub it with your hands until the veins swell up and you feel them. Then moisten the poultice with a little old oil, and place your left-hand finger on the vein below, where you want to heal, so that the vein does not break and injure itself.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flow as if they were strings in the body, and some of these become inflamed, so when fire is applied, it withdraws from the flame, and cannot open the vein, thus becoming one of those affected; and if he opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, for which reason the healers must be aware of such things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens the first time, it is good; but if not, he must try again slightly below the previous place, for then the veins are not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the veins are inflamed and the patient is afraid, let him wait a day or two and do not tie the arm: perhaps it will form an abscess later; do not enter the bath again, but resume treatment if it seems appropriate; and if the opening is small, cut it delicately without removing all the flesh, and you will doubt that there is no blood as abundant as what you see, being confident in this same opening to drain all the flames correctly; and work a little more gently so that the vein becomes inflamed; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the vein engorged, do not immediately reinstitute health, but apply a little oil, for it lightens the body of blood, and the oil moves in this vein the substance that the oil touches; and thus administer oil to each wound that you close veins, to stop the flow of blood; and the same is done with triacs and bowels when applied to the engorged part; if too thick, it subtley opens and spreads.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if a large abscess appears, which happens frequently, especially when the vein is only slightly opened, act quickly and apply a moist sponge with hot wool or silk for an hour; it is necessary that you do this after the blood flow from the vein stops, and if it remains in place for several days without any turning black or green, then it does no harm; and if you see, apply any aloe or myrrh prepared in calament juice, ointment, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there is an abscess and swelling at the wound of the sanctuary: then place your hand upon it, and if you feel the joint soft under the pressure of your hand, it is a bad sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	So be careful not to apply anything we have mentioned, as it might cut off the flow without an artery; but make a dry plaster to harden the joint, and then use other remedies until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each case of pain according to the quantity of its strength and the color of the pain.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	Because if the wound is infected, let it drain as long as it remains red; and if you see it swelling, let it continue to swell until it becomes smaller; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for the strong and robust person who needs to extract blood, to make a wider wound and have larger incisions; and for the weak person, do the opposite, making a smaller wound more frequently, and it is better to heal it by cutting across, not by pricking. This method of healing avoids infection and nerve damage, and is preferable to long or wide incisions.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And to him whose body inclines towards sickness, it is necessary to give a moist drink from the juice of pomegranates; if he is overheated, draw three or four times as much blood, and if he has a cold complexion, before taking the remedy, moisten his throat with a drink made from syrup, either of musk or aromatic honey with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and licorice, and an odorous syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	If he faints from sickness after drawing much blood, it is necessary that he inhale a brew of charcoal and subtle fragrant syrup, and use other things as mentioned in the previous section or chapter on syncope for vein evacuation.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to extend his arm and heal it later, if it is weakened by much bleeding, then he should clean it little by little according to the quantity of its continuous power.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wishes to extend their arm after the first cleaning and has a strong corset, should heal it seven hours after the first cleaning or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wishes to heal from another side, should be healed on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is much blood within the body that has cooled and causes fever; it needs to be extracted in large quantities, and the opening widened until it takes the shape of a palm; then you must consider all conditions of health, and place your hand on his pulse when he is well, so that death does not come in its place through lack of care, and this happens often when healing is neglected; and it is wrong to loosen the arm and make blood flow again after the opening has closed, for that would be harmful; but let him keep his arm still until it heals a second time; or if he feels a sharp pain at the tip of the flame, until the blood which is congealed in the vein leaves, put some string soaked in water on it and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is inflamed, let it be and do not squeeze it until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to treat the blood clot again, if the health in that place remains the same or affects another vein or the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthier in place of the vein from the head because it is composed differently.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the method of the vein is that the patient bends his hand in hot water until the veins become red; then it should be tied gently so that the vein appears well, and now through the middle, not too wide or too long; and the opening should be wide, and the vein should be close to the joint of the hand, and the blood should flow freely in the water, as much as you have. And if this is the case, do not pull the hand back into hot water because it is put in more heat than necessary. The vein from this method is healthier than all other veins, as there are no arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The salve for the salvation of the hand's health if valuable for all diseases of the flesh: stretch the hand and immerse it in hot water until the vein is inflated; if you see it twisted, straighten it, and if it copes with everything without pain, then it does not hurt; but do not press too hard, because the nerve is entirely devoid of its fat, and then return the hand to hot water, as if it were frozen in the wound, and it cannot escape.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the abscess as best you can, then apply oil and silk to seal it tightly, and do this for each person.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The healthy person holds the mouse in his left hand for the ailment of the mouse, and does everything just as I have told you towards the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The wise woman holds the soul in check for all the ills that affect the body, such as illnesses of the marrow, and retention of flowers (possibly a metaphor for excess moisture or growth), and diseases of the rain (could refer to joint pain or rheumatism), and old bones and legs, and similar ailments.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of her medicine is such that the patient drinks warm water and rubs the vein until it subsides, binding it over the joint; and if the vein is at the ankle, or above the foot, it fills with much moisture; so, in this case, one should use a wider bandage or one around the ankle, as best suited.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal it on the foot, be careful of the nails that are raised, and treat the wound as if you were bandaging; and let the flame be gentle.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the wound cannot be drained, immerse the foot in water and allow the vein to drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the dressing is done the first time, repeat it a second time on top of the previous one, because the wound is salty; do not doubt and be careful, as we have said, and do the same thing for the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein's lizard is at the ankle's fire, and its health corresponds to the pain of the back when it is hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its health is such that the patient should bathe and pull three times above the ankle, otherwise the vein will not open; and if it does open, wash it in all ways as you can, and use your hands to press; for the lizard is safe, and it is much relieved by human touch.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you cannot wash it, take a clean rain from the vein that opens on the back of the foot, towards the little toe, and be careful not to touch the nails; and make sure the blood flows as much as possible, then loosen the bandage, put cotton on it, and tighten it; it is now healthy.
des sainies de ventouse	From the vacuum of sucking.
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Vacuum are made of horns, or iron, or glass; and suction is performed in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this suction, performed without pricking, is also done in two ways: either with all fire or without fire; and the suction, which is performed by pricking and drawing blood, is made in twelve parts of the body, one at the top of the head, others in the middle of the neck, others on both sides of the neck, another under the chin, and others on both shoulders, both legs, both ankles, and finally, suction cups are placed on both cheeks. And this type of suction does not involve any blood other than small veins scattered throughout the body, so it does not weaken anyone as is done with vein suction; and it should never be performed with fire or without fire in any disease caused by congestion, until all parts of the body have been drained.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if, due to disease or habit, it needs to be ventosed, we should do so each hour at the beginning and end of the month, and every day; for there are those who, when they need to have it ventosed, become fearful and their head weighs heavily. And others experience swelling and redness on their face, head, neck, and body. Some experience a drop of blood in their mouth, their tongue is swollen, and they vomit blood. And there are even those who dream or see red and feel pain and suffer as if from a wound.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially in the middle of the month, we order it to be ventosed after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The surgeon of the muscle finds aid in the inflammation of the upper part ... that comes from the joints, and it does not suit to be after the evacuation of all the body; and this treatment is for the health of the head, and it is not suitable for those with a cold complexion or scabs, for they cause them much harm; and therefore it is not suitable for the elderly to use it, nor those who have cold diseases of the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who get cured often become obtuse, and for this reason, it is necessary to put the suction cup a little lower out of doubt about its effectiveness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation of the chest should be in accordance with the health of the heart and lungs, and for this reason it is beneficial to constrict the pis (presumably referring to a specific organ or condition), and to open up the channel of the stomach, and in all cases, and repletion (possibly referring to an intestinal condition). It requires gentle pressing, because if it is held too tightly, it can cause obliance (obstruction) or pain to the stomach and body.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventilation through the ribs should not cause any pain to the head, eyes, and migraines, or constriction and pain in the roots of the teeth, and it should be in harmony with the health of the heart and lungs; and it is important for the patient to relax his hand when placing it, so as not to harm the artery, preventing any complications.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The inflammations of the mouth are beneficial for oral diseases, and for the corruption of gums, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is in contrast to the health of both lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The inflammations of the shoulders are beneficial for diseases that arise from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The inflammations of the cuts are as beneficial as three veins in the arm, as they draw blood from these large veins; and instruct the patient not to press too hard, for the flesh is devoid of hair, and knows how to heal nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The vacuum that is on the back is worth as much as a deep wound, and it treats diseases from below, and it is necessary that the vacuum be large, and of metal, that it has to draw well; and by chance, if it were too delicate, it would break; and it makes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The leg vacuums close tightly, as they draw blood from the whole body, and they are worth old pains in the rain, and in the mare, and in the bladder, and they soothe the flowers; and they are located in the two knees, and in the two ankles, but nevertheless they weaken the body after a long use, and cause pain in various positions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying a cupping glass is as follows: you apply it at first while it is empty and suck gently, then press it firmly and move it equally, without ceasing to do this until you see the red and inflamed skin, and open up the pores of the blood; then remove it and place new cups, taking care of the position of the skin, because there are some with thick and others with thin skin: it is enough to make one single cupping, and it is necessary to make large wounds and deep ones; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the veins are thick, it is necessary to perform the cupping twice: the first time to open the way of the large and thick veins.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the pain is very sharp, it is necessary to strike the third time; and when we want to draw out blood little by little, we suffice once only.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want a lot of blood, we should do it often; and if the pain is sharp, striking with force to finish it so that the veins are pierced suddenly, it is suitable for those with thick and hard skin, and who have hairy pores, to apply oil from suction cups, both stimulating and dissolving: it can be violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or oil from pumpkin seeds; and if it is in ivy, watercress oil, or lis (nasturtium) oil, or chamomile oil, or another similar herb.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, take oil of ambergris, or balm oil, or donkey oil, and similar substances.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if anyone has a sore with narrow and small pores, it is not necessary to put oil in it, but after the application of rosewater, or cold water, or morelle water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or any other similar water, they should wash it.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those with excessive moisture, if it rises from these, or myrrh water, and sumac water, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have great excesses should rise from old wine, or water of sea-cress, or decoction of nettle or chamomile, or other similar things; and it is not advisable to use a cupping glass before the bath or after, but rather an hour or two after the bath; and one should not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that he bathe when he needs to be cupped and when he has been cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And beware of those who have a hot temperament and those who are too cold and inflamed; it is advisable for them to consume cold foods, such as grapes, endive, lettuce, and similar things; and also little, and porridge made from chaster (a type of grain), and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And he who has a cold complexion, should drink syrup of honey and fragrant wine, which is neither too old nor too new, and eat small berries and small birds and pigeons; and on the day he takes fresh air, he must drink more than he eats; and it is fitting to give any man at times triacle or mace before or after ventilation to strengthen the principal members; but it is unwise for those who are hot to do so.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The cupping glasses that are applied without causing harm are those placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and on the knee, and on the stomach and the bowels and the ribs, for these members cannot bear to be pierced; and it is only done to draw blood from one member to another, as we apply them to the nipples when a baby is being delivered; to remove the adhesions in the member, as we apply cupping glasses to the stomach and bowels to reduce a swollen member; and to relieve pain when there is inflammation or stone, it may by chance draw away the inflammation or shift the stone from its place; and so it is done when placed on the liver and spleen with retained wind, and these cups are left empty to suck up only blood; and they should never be heated together, nor filled with cold water as in cases of pleurisy, but one should fill the cup with hot water infused with suitable herbs.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the cupping glass administered with fire is this:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	It should have a width of two and a half palm lengths, with a small hole around the middle, about as thick as an awl, and be made of bronze or iron, so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the body; it has a cross-shaped handle, either bronze or iron, to grip, and their size varies according to the disease and age of those who use them; for the cupping glasses for children are different from those for adults, and for thin people compared to fat people.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	One should then place this cupping glass over the member: take a cloth of wax or linen and put it inside the cup through the handle that is in the middle of the cup, so that its clarity is at the bottom of the cup, preventing it from burning the patient; then place it on the member, ensuring your two fingers are on the hole we mentioned, so that when you look, if there is a vapor, you can remove the cup; and take up the linen as before, and repeat often, if needed.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the suction cup, when it is applied to treat a pleural disease, it has no edge or opening, and can only be effectively used when it is filled with water and placed on the member gently; this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Suction cups are only effective in members where they can be applied, such as the lips and gums, and similar areas; and on bare skin, like the hands or feet, and other similar places; and their quality is that when you find suction cups filled with clean water without impurities, take them; place them in water again until they become familiarized, and ensure they have nothing inside; then dress the wound and apply the suction cup, rubbing the member until it turns red. If they protest, and hurt, and it's a suitable area to apply a suction cup, do so, for this is beneficial afterward.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If he does not let the lion loose from its cage and then water it well, and wait for it to dry, and if the scales are too thick after the body of the snake has shed them, moisten a linen cloth with cold water, place it on top, until the scales are absorbed; and if the scales multiply, put vitriol or gall or similar substances until they are absorbed; or you can place half-peel fava beans on the lion, leaving them until they adhere to the skin, which will absorb moisture now. If you need more, take other snakes.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the snakes do not want to be taken, rub the lion with fresh blood, or insert an needle into the scales until they come out, and then place them back on, and soon as they smell the blood, they will adhere; and when you see that they are defecating, sprinkle a little aloe and silk powder or ash, they will now stick.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	We begin the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it restores fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear reader, that the wise minds of this chapter are from a subject that is not found in any ancient books, nor have they ever heard or read of it; and for this reason, knowledge has been hidden in our land, because I never found anyone good at it; and I know nothing about it, except through the study of ancient books, where I have devoted much time, and by experience, and through the familiarity of my life. And so, I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and have abridged it at the end, and have clearly shown the shapes of the instruments used, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we state in this prologue of this book the principles of speech and the chapters where the wise apply their understanding, and meditate on truth, so that those who are tested know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	When a fracture, dislocation, or twist occurs, it is necessary to quickly tend to the patient, on both sides, if nothing helps, such as weakness of the body, illness, or old age; or if the affected part is very close, or too cold; and avoid cold things like ice, and a horse's saddle, and dove's feathers, and do not drink wine, nor consume any fatty foods, and do not fill the veins with blood by eating meats that clog the vessels, until you have no doubt of an abscess forming hot or an excessive discharge of material from the member; then the patient returns to his previous state as he had before.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that we relieve the patient of foods that cause excessive belching, or have a viscous consistency, such as cooked flour in water, and laughter, and tears, and pressure, and flatulence, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For excessive belching can return and more often the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the bones of the very old and those that are brittle cannot heal or bind well according to their nature because of the immobility of the limbs, nor can those that are too soft, such as the bones of small children; but take no heed, reset the broken bone with firm grip so that it joins together the member in its original place, as much as possible, and avoid a complete immobilization, and for this reason, it is necessary to relieve them of heavy foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the leg, and in this chapter, I will tell you all manner of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another in sharpening, just like the edge of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture at every tiny crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each condition has its own mechanism and specific tool for restoration, according to the memory of the place where it occurs; the fracture of the bone is known because the limb is twisted and opens well when pulled away, and sounds under pressure from the hand; and when there is no deformity or sensation of pain in the patient, there is no fracture, but it can have deformity, or a crack, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It is not appropriate for you to move the limb with your hand, but apply remedies that will follow, and then gently tighten it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the fracture which goes up in the air, and the two parts are separated, it is necessary now to set them equally, so that abscesses do not appear; and if hot abscesses come, leave them no longer than they are calmed; then place them equally in motion as you can lightly and skillfully, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restorations of those where pieces are broken; then tighten it, as is fitting hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if a bone is broken into two parts, whether it's a hand or foot, or a small limb, or at the joints, or at one joint and your hand, place the member according to its natural shape, so that when the affected parts of the broken member are aligned, all the additions return to their places as much as possible, and be careful not to cause the patient any further injury or pain with your work; and adjust both sides of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And he will feel it well with his hand if it seems to him that it is not properly aligned; if the dressing is done nicely and not pulled too tightly, not pressed as those who cause abscesses and heat in the member through their own work do, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the member is at rest, gently comfort the patient so that he does not move it, neither awake nor asleep, nor by turning or any other way, and be sure that the member is well secured so that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, it is not yet properly aligned, and it is necessary to put it in such a way that he feels no pain; and be careful that it is put straight, so that no crookedness comes when it is restored; and the quality of the damaged member depends on what I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	You know that the broken limb is diverse in size and shape and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For it has small members, like arms and legs and similar ones; so it is necessary to wrap soft and thin linen around them; and for the larger ones, like thighs and legs, it is necessary to wrap wide and hard bands, as wider bands embrace the entire limb and tighten it equally from all sides, so that there is no movement; then add several lighter layers, three or four according to the member, and tighten your hand slightly on the band, then go above the fracture and tighten less, allowing the fracture to move a little; and gradually soften the band, pressing strongly on the healthy part below until you have pressed greatly, then take another band and wrap it around the fractured limb again; then return to the lower part of the fracture and tighten moderately, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first chapter above; then place soft linen or cloth layers between the bands, ensuring they are even, then bind everything with a wide bandage, and finally place well-made splints on top. And if there is no abscess or swelling, do so.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is a swelling or abscess, apply to it a cold compress that relieves the swelling, and leave it for several days; then strain your veins, and make them half the width of a thin cane, cut sharply, or of reed, which is used to make scalpels, or of palm leaves, according to this figure.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the thread placed on the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the others; and as long as required for the member, whether small or large; then strain the veins as you did in the first layer, and tie them with a fine thread, as in the first case on the fracture; tighter now, less later; and it is important that the thread be of moderate thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen; for if the thread is too thick, like the work of foolish men who make their bindings from twisted linen threads, it is a great error, because the binding cannot be even if it is too delicate, and it is not good for the veins to have less space between each one.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is troubled by the roots of the stars after dislocating them from their healthy places, he should apply moist cloth or other soft material to them so that they do not become damaged.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by a fracture, and the veins are broken, I will describe their treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not appropriate to extract all the stars (bones) from a member that has been broken on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the member is large, it is not appropriate to put stars (bones) back in place until after 5 or 7 days, or more, according to your judgment of the hot swell coming; and see here the ancient method of emplasting for restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsions: take flour that clings to the walls of the mill, mix it with enough egg, and make this mixture, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it. This is the common method of emplastery restoring fractures in various ways, especially on women and small children, for it is neither too hard nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of plaster for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: take equal parts bear's grease, dani (a type of resin), honey, asafoetida, and gum arabic; add X parts mirre (myrrh) and aloes, V parts alechil (a medicinal compound), and nine parts powder; mix with egg white. If the patient's body heat is high, this plaster should be used, as it is of good composition and restores badly broken bones, and is beneficial for many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another plaster for twists: take mugat (a medicinal plant) and vismalve (a resin), in parts X; myrrh and aloes, in parts IX; acaice (a type of herb) in parts VI; Armenian bole, in parts X; grind well and mix with vinegar or egg white, then apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method of plastering joints and realigning bones in their sockets, alleviating the pain, and using the saw on the bone, and the fracture: take a new cloth, moisten it with hot oil, and place it over the joint.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not restore, but they are good for alleviating hot abscesses and removing pain from the bones neatly.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of plastering that restores broken bones: take dry fig leaves and terrestrial pawpaw leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method for plastering to restore the broken bone, and to make the healing of the abscess more bearable.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take the roots of wormwood, chamomile, violet flowers, and oats flour, each in equal parts; grind them and mix with wine, and apply to the affected members, heating them first; or mix with fresh coriander water, or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another stronger method of plastering for the restoration of a member when a hard abscess has formed.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of broom, and flaxseed, and yarrow, melilot, and chamomille, and flowers from violets, all in equal parts; crush and prepare with vinegar or sweet water or wine, according to the warmth of the member and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates writes in his book that to restore a broken member, one should not use anything but a certain composition of wax and oil, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen states that one should apply to a broken member things that are dry but slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense, as we have mentioned.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of plastering that is beneficial for healing and pain: take lint and down from the beards of shorn men, or feathers from an owl's wing, and silk thread, all equally, and grind them to make a plaster and bind it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, after a little while, be careful that the patient feels no pain and that the bone does not move from its place; if otherwise, untie it gently, and if there is any pain, itching, restlessness, or swelling, hurry to untie it and remove the plaster immediately. Take a light cloth and a moist sponge, dip them in water, and lift the skin until the itching stops and the pain subsides; then let the member rest for an hour and apply dry linen, moistened with water or rose oil, and bandage tightly while ensuring that there is no fever. Rest the inflamed member, ease the pain, and then continue with the treatment using a little more plaster gently and without too much pressure until it heals completely.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is red, swollen, painful, and filled with pus, and you need to apply a plaster and bind it, then do so again as you did initially.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if the limb shows no improvement after what we have said, do not dislocate it again until after three, four, five, or seven days; and never leave it for more than twenty days, as long as the fracture heals and the adjustment of the bone to its place nears; then restrict it more tightly than before and fatten the flesh as I have said above; and if you see that the limb is drier than necessary, know that healing cannot take place. Then apply hot water every time you dislocate it, once every third day, and slightly loosen the bandage; through this work, therefore, the improvement of the limb is hindered, and one becomes a slave to pain, for I do not see anything other than leaving it or doing it correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various ways of breaking (bones)
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many ways of breaking (bones), each with distinct shapes and causes; for some breaks occur from the impact of a sword, or a sharp object like a spear, piercing through until all the bone beneath is reached, as if cut by a hatchet or axe; this type of break is therefore called "hatchet-like".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword may cut through the bone without piercing it, and this is called a "complete" break; and these two types of breaks can be either large or small wounds.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a concussion, or indentation, or cut through stone, or chipping at stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a recent fracture, which approaches the tendon attached to the bone, or it is on the bone itself, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound that is healed in the bone is as subtle as a hair, and the fissure is small, then this fracture is called "capillary"; and if the wound is caused by a stone, or a chisel, or something similar, and the bone fragment enters inside, and the edges are jagged like the edges of a pot when they are sharpened; then it gets caught between the stones.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this occurs more often in those with moist shoulders, as with a child's shoulder; and it happens in all these ways, that small fragments are torn off as if they were broken; and I will speak of it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all the ways of fractures from the detachment on them, and the inquiry at times, and by the corrupt flesh above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair is due to that when we have discovered the bone, and rubbed it thoroughly, it opens the fracture line.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fractures, be wary of accidents with the patient, and if you notice any ill fortune, such as vomiting, loss of senses, extension or stiffness, paleness, fever, sudden redness or other changes in multiple parts, then it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any alarming accidents and hope for healing, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the navel (or abdominal) pain comes to you first, especially in winter, it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if this happens, if you hurry to remove the bone on the seventh day, so that the tissue around the bone is corrupted, then the complications arise as we have mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the bone breaks up to the tissue that covers the brain, it is necessary that you split the broken part in this way: and it should be done by pricking the head of the patient with pain, and exposing the bone in every way possible, and carefully uncovering the wound, as soft as you can, and if a discharge of pus appears when exposing the bone, or an abscess, then aid them as necessary, and fill the space around the bone with moist, rose-colored cloth; and let the wound rest until the abscess is healed, and be sure of no further discharge of pus. Then begin to remove the bone according to two ways of working: one way is that you make a narrow cut in front, and this is its form...
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I use another treatment more powerful than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	The second method is that you have many different shapes, some with pointed ends and others wide, all made of iron indelible; and work them gently so as not to damage the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and dense, it is necessary that you pierce it from around, so as to administer cuts with accuracy, without going through the thin part of the bone, and there must be a margin or curve on the tip, so that the point does not go beyond the bone; and you need several of them, so that each one comes in its proper place according to the thickness of the bone, allowing for accurate cuts through all parts; and this is the form of the three types of cuts:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality to perceive around the broken bone is that you apply pressure on the bone and return to your fingers until you know the bone is perceived; then place the pressure elsewhere a little later, and thus continue all around, then cut with incisions the space between the fragments of the bone, and do this as carefully as possible, gently, while still holding the bone in your hand or using any of the tools you have, such as pliers or tweezers; be careful not to touch the brain or the sinew.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have perceived and treated the bone, it is necessary to observe the tension that remains between the bone and any other tool resembling an incision, but it should be more tenacious and subtle than the other incisors; and if nothing of the small bones or scales remains, gently remove them with the appropriate tools; then dress the wound with bandages and remedies as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of treatment is that which Galen says, which is safer; it is very powerful, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary that you expose a portion of the bone, either breaking it open or cutting it carefully, so that once you have exposed that part, you place the tip of this lens-shaped incision tool on top, which has this shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, but expose the acute part on the second side, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then gently strike with a small hammer, lightly covering the entire bone, and be very careful of the cloth placed below; if it is away from the bone, gently press it, as it can be removed without harm or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not reach the skin, and the bone is broken only from above, leaving small fragments, it is necessary to clean these asperities, and remove the scales with a fine rasp, having various quantities of this tool, to make each part as comfortable as possible, according to the severity and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you encounter great obstacles, and then even more subtle ones, do not cease from this endeavor until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other haircuts and subtle fractures, it is necessary to make an adjustment according to its location; and this is something that cannot be fully answered by anyone who has studied this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	If the patient is satisfied with the exposure of the wound, it is necessary to apply a linen bandage, according to its size, and moisten it with rose oil, then place it on the wound; take another doubled bandage, moisten it in wine and rose oil, and lay it over the first; do this as lightly as possible without pressing the syphilis, then administer another ligature, but do not tighten it excessively so that it only covers the wound; leave it thus for a day or two until the abscess is calmed down, then untie it and apply medicines such as lion's root, meal of times (possibly a type of grain), incense powder, aristology (a term referring to a branch of medicine at the time), and similar things; make a powder from these substances and apply it to the wound, also administering foreign medicines without incision; be sure that the wound is always clean, leaving no dressing on it or allowing bowels to form over it, for when they do, they will corrode and damage the patient, causing great harm, especially if a sharp object is applied to the syphilis.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, if no adverse event comes to the patient as we have said, it is questionable without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if darkness comes not from the medicine applied, and its virtue is in question, it is necessary that you mix a part of honey, three parts of rose oil, and a drape of glue; place it on the sick, and cure it in the manner of cures that are fitting, until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	You should know that the two parts of the bone are never broken at once, either one after the other, for they are two bones; and this part (the cartilage) does not break, but only bends or twists, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you insert your little finger or a thin tool between the bones, and put this fracture back into its natural position, both on the side and in the middle, until the bone returns to its original shape; do this gently, and ensure that the patient does not feel pain from your actions.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the bone near the joint and the fingers cannot be moved to their normal position, it is necessary that you place a thin, slightly larger rod at the top of the bone.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the fracture is from both parts, do as I have said before, and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or fifth day (after the abscess has subsided), then place thin linen strips over the joint, if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or turn to another part, if it is broken; and make the splints so thick that they fill the openings of the bones.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say that no restoration is required; one must moisten the splints with butter and change them each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I do not think that is good enough, but it is necessary that they be moistened with an egg white and flour powder mixture; then leave the splints, as long as the bones are hard and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never should one burn or cut the feathers of a goose in place of others, and if it causes pain around, and holds the fracture, and blows the patient; or do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses appear at the wound while you are treating it, apply a warm compress or moist cotton wool soaked in olive oil or a mixture of dill water.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses do not appear, apply a poultice made of flour and incense powder, confited with egg albumen, then place light bands on top without binding the wound; and if the fracture is small, and it is broken into tiny pieces, extract it using suitable instruments, then sew the gap closed and treat it with hot things, and use appropriate poultices and bandages until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	from the dislocation of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is dislocated and there is no external wound, and the fracture is only slightly displaced, not broken into two pieces, provided that a support is gently inserted from within.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is in the right side, you should insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is in the left mandible, insert your right index finger, gently displace the fracture internally, and then use the other hand to pull it outward, making both sides equal.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the mandible is severe in two places, you must then administer an extension to the second part, as long as it remains even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movement of the teeth causes a fracture, then a strain of a gold or silver wire or silk should be applied to the broken mandible, and then place a double cloth on top; put the cloth with a well-made large star or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the mandible, secure it to the jaws as best you can, and instruct the patient to rest and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	If you notice that the figure changes after three days, then remove it and reset it as it was; apply plaster afterward, made from fine powdered chalk with plenty of egg or linseed flour, after removing the cerate; put on a thin layer of the plaster, and if it hardens without changing the patient's condition, leave it until it heals; often it heals in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses appear, then apply as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is both a fracture and a wound together, do not remove any part of the bone that is broken; it is necessary to use suitable instruments for this purpose.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, expand it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and it does not linger, if the wound is wide, then sew it up, using suitable bands for this purpose, to promote healing as long as it remains healthy.
de la forcele	from the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forceps break many times against the shoulder, and the fracture is in three ways: it may be broken and detached into two parts, with pieces, and is the easiest to restore; or there is a fracture with an associated wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And for the work when the fracture is without a wound, you need two assistants: one to hold the aid that is the forceps; and another to stretch the collar towards the affected part. Then place the fracture equally on both sides, so that the shape is as it should be, with no bulge or deformity.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to further extend it, place a round spear of cloth or wool beneath the shoulder of the patient, as thick as necessary; stretch and gently pull on the spear, holding it firmly in your hand, so that you equalize the break, as is appropriate.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the spear from the patient due to its strength, because it penetrates completely, then it is necessary that the patient lie on his side, placing a medium-sized pillow under the shoulder, and ask the assistants to push the spear's handle downwards, until the bone of the spear is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then address the fracture with your hands, and if you feel any debris, it is necessary that you cut through it; and pull out the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot be joined together in any way, take hold of one of the incisions you have made; but apply all your strength to this instrument to achieve the desired effect.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and it seems like a spoon, and is not too thin, and as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the scope of the work; and it has two parts, as you can see, with one wider and the other narrower, corresponding to the curvature of the wound you made when you treated the bones; and when you are certain of the hot abscess, if the incision is shallow, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt the hot abscess, apply the wound with rags and bandages according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if abscesses appear, take some moist cloth, dip it in rose oil and honey and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The binding of the bone, when it has wounds and cuts, is that you place the soft plaster of finely ground powder and egg albumen on it, and then lay light bandages over it, and insert a spike under the collarbone, if necessary; then take a very wide strip of cloth, about a palm in width, and wrap it double over the bandages and plaster; then take a thin piece of wood, three fingers in width and length, and wrap it around the cloth, so that the end of the cloth hangs down from the collarbone; place the wooden splint on the fracture, and turn the bandage back over the healthy collarbone and the affected one; and repeat this for each part. And when you see that the binding holds well and clearly see that the wood does not move over the broken bone, strengthen it every day, and when the bones heal, release the splint; and do this again, if necessary, and leave it until the bone is healed; and a man will be healed in about twenty-eight days, or less for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	from the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	If the shoulder is dislocated, it does not move in any way other than through touch; if you arrange it according to the shape of the dislocation and restore it to its natural form in every possible way, then sprinkle a little fine powder on it, apply light bandages, and cover with a double cloth. Then place a wide and thin plank, slightly wider than the shoulder, so that the ends of the plank rest in different places along the shoulder; use strips of linen for this, ensuring the plank is cut evenly. And then tighten a great firm bandage around it, so that the plank does not move from its place, and check it every day. Whenever it becomes looser, tighten it again, and ensure the plank remains in its place. The shoulder should be restored after 20 or 25 days, and when this number of days is reached, carefully untie it, for it is not a bone that will easily come back into place.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone sticks out and is not freed from the heart, it pushes up the abscess and does what we have said about calming the heat of the abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	from the breaking of the worst abscess
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The fracture is never completely healed in the middle, but that happens rarely; it often breaks again when healing from the outside.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is fractured in the middle, it declines downwards and the patient feels great pain, lacks strength, and sometimes vomits blood, opening up the joints in the broken bone, and he feels better.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on their side, and places a cushion between their shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and aligns the ribs with both hands, subtly making them even in all ways as it should be; then apply plasters and bandages over the affected area with subtle salt or other light material, wrap it in a cloth, and bind it to the broken bone so that it does not move; return the ligament to its natural position on the back, tighten it appropriately, and check the limb every hour. If it becomes soft, tighten it; if it needs to be released due to decay or itching that arises at the site, or pain or abscess, act swiftly, release it, remove the plaster, and address the condition in a therapeutic manner; then reapply the plaster and tighten it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	from the fracture of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	You know that the fracture of ribs only occurs in the upper back and at the top, and they do not bend unless they are broken; and this causes great pain to anyone who experiences it.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is such that you place the fracture back in its proper position, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply the plaster and fasten it with a stick, if needed.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs inclines inward, the patient feels very great pain and piercing, as if from crying out, because the bone pierces the skin; and it causes weakness in the arms, and sometimes fainting and vomiting much blood, which is a great cause of illness, and they have put great effort into treating it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if for those who say it is appropriate to administer foods that cause bloating in the stomach, to drive out the fracture to the outside.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not pretend that abscesses will not come if they have not already.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it comes, if the healthy.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say none of you should place suction cups over the joint to form a vacuum, which seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt that the suction cup might draw away the excess fluid from the joint due to weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say none of you should cover the joint with moist wool in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to equalize the pressure around it, then treat the cure for pleurisy, flesh, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear due to the broken bone, there is doubt in the mind of the patient, then it is necessary to cut through the bone of the broken rib and place an instrument to hold it in place; and then one must break the bone and pull gently, and then sew together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, and dress it with poultices until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses form, place moist, oil-soaked cloth over them and on the affected area; and dress while caring for the abscess until it heals, keeping the patient lying on their side where necessary.
de la brisure dou col	From the rupture of the collarbone.
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No rupture occurs to the bone of the collarbone, and rarely does it happen without rain; also to the spine in the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this occurs to anyone, and you want to know if they will recover, pay attention if you see their hands becoming soft, swollen, and numb, and are unable to move or stretch them, and if you poke with an needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Knowing that it is deadly in numerous ways, if they are mute and feel well when squeezed and not at all, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the patient will be cured, if proper treatment is given.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar thing happens in the spine, you must know if it is healthy or not, taking care to see if the bones are soft, and if there are accidents that are in the hands, and on the back, there are sudden evacuations and defecation without will; and when he remembers it on his belly, then sudden defecation without will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he remembers it on his back and wants to defecate, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Knowing that it is deadly, one must not labor in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not happen, then the matter is more delicate.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is as follows: if there is a hot abscess, apply rose or oil of lard to it until it is soothed; then place a comforting and drying plaster over it, secure it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and let them not sleep on that part where they feel pain, until they are healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is out of place, it should be reduced; then, after removing the bone, close the wound with stitches if it is large, and dress it with a poultice, until it heals; and if the broken piece of bone, called the "chip of the joint," is still in the hand, press it back into place with your left-hand thumb, and then apply the plaster and bandage as needed; then tighten it, and if there are any further displacements, reduce them, and dress the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	From the fracture of the bone in the hip.
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	If the hip bone is fractured, and if there is not even a slight reduction in size at the site, it causes pain, swelling, and inflammation at the broken place.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the reduction is that you extend your hand over it, as long as you are on top of the fracture, and you know what the fracture looks like; if the fracture is only at the top, then make an equal reduction, as much as it looks natural.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, it curves inward, then have the patient lie on their stomach until the restoration of that fracture becomes apparent.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And once you have made it even, place a splint over it, then put a wooden or iron bar on top and tighten the fracture so that it does not move, and hold the patient's side beneath the ribs until the break is healed.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess appears and is not touched, as long as the abscess remains calm, follow what we have said above; then return to restoration, holding it tightly as appropriate, unless there is some adverse event; this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of the dislocation of the shoulder.
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The "ajutoire" refers to the joint between the collarbone and the shoulder blade, and if it is dislocated, it should be restored using one of two methods. One method involves taking a thick, medium-sized stick and applying it in this manner:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And hold the two feet together, and stretch them upwards, and look at the patient's wound; then cast one broken arm over the other on the leg, until it becomes loosened, and place a wooden splint between them, then stretch it down to any heavy object where the attendant extends it below; then make the break even with both hands together, until it returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And another way is that we place the patient on his side, and tie his hand to his neck, then command the attendants to one holding what is on the break in both hands, and the other loosening it from every link, and stretching them according to their parts.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that extraction is too forceful, tighten the ligature around the fracture, and on the fracture, extend each of the attendants to their side.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the top of the shoulder, it is necessary to place a medium ligature below the acromion, and another towards the collarbone, below the fracture; and if the fracture is on the side of the collarbone, it is necessary to put a light ligature without strain, as long as the fracture remains level on the bone, then set the fracture correctly and tighten it, avoiding complications.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an abscess appears, it should not be squeezed for seven days; then place a moist linen cloth on it, in rose oil, until the abscess subsides; afterwards squeeze it, and the manner of squeezing is that you apply a splint to the break, then bring the arm over the shoulder or to the chest, and cover with a bandage, and squeeze on the arm and over the shoulder so that the arm is straight, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	If you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and place a wider and stronger splint on the break than the others, leaving two spaces between each splint, and each splint should be so large that it passes over the break three times; then squeeze the splints as I have said at the beginning of this chapter regarding the splints on the break, strengthening them less apart.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the position of the stars and the constriction, as we have said, when you return the broken member, and you doubt the heat of the abscess, leave it bound for up to seven days, as we have said; then every three days check the binding, that no swelling or pain comes, or the circulation cannot come to the member because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If it is necessary, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accident occurs, do not remove the binding for more than three days, and let the patient sleep on their back with their hands on their stomach; place a soft cushion under the affected member, equal in thickness, and check every hour during the day or night to ensure that the shape of the member does not change or the bindings become loose; if it improves by the power of medicine, give him food as we have previously described, in such a way that the food is first made delicate; and when he begins to regain strength, it will be substantial.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be re-set after forty days; and then one must release and apply baths and ointments to the joint to direct its healing.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the contraction is severe and painful, it may take several days or even months to release.
de la brisure du bras	of the dislocation of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, called the "fossa" (sockets), of which one is smaller and supports the elbow, and the other is larger, located below the smaller bone; perhaps only the large bone breaks, or both, and then they are dislocated from each other.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, their restoration and healing is light, but when the large ones are broken, the healing is poor and more difficult than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the small bones that are broken, then it is sufficient to extend them slightly and arrange them equally.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large bones, then it is necessary to pull harder; place him on one pillow, and tilt the hand higher than the others, and the small bones lower, so that the patient does not suffer any pain. Then extend the assistants' arms towards the back of his hand, or to the fingers, while another assistant extends his arm above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then arrange them evenly, according to their best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture, each one is put back in its place, and if there is no muscle or nerve that is caught, and you cannot restore it to its place, then doing as we have said before on the bone and joint, ...
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture there is an open wound, I have spoken of it in a particular chapter; then take the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of restoration appears an abscess, then I apply a bandage made of rose oil and white wax, not too hard nor too soft; and I wrap it subtly over, until the abscess is calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the plaster, and mix the powder from the soft mill with enough egg, then place the needles, making the needle of the fracture stronger and slightly wider than the others; know that there must be six needles or more in various positions: whether the fracture is in one bone or two; tighten more over the fracture than elsewhere, and always less as it heals, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the cloth covering the fracture be soft and moist, and not too hard or too rough; and let the thread used to bind it be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the ligament after no days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if no bad accident comes to the member, such as itching that appears on the member, then you should apply hot water to the member until the itching is soothed; and let the member not be tightly restrained at rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	Then repeat the straining, and if the ligaments loosen and the bones move out of place, or any similar thing, address it accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if coldness prevents the member from straining because it is too tight, then you should loosen it slightly and leave it for a few days until the stiffness passes, and then strain it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said comes to the patient, then he should be dislocated for twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	If uncertain, bind his hands to his chest, ensuring the collarbones are even, and guard against movement and digitation, and have him sleep on his back. Know that this fracture will be healed in thirty days or forty-five, or perhaps in twenty days, according to the combinations and complexities of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	You know that on the back of the hand and between the fingers, there often occur small fractures, and it brings nothing but pain many times over.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary for the patient to cut across the injured area, and place it straight in front of him equally; then he places his hand on a flat surface and extends the broken bones with the aid of another person, aligning them correctly; and applies a poultice and compresses if an abscess forms, then adds salt according to the severity of the injury; and it should be wrapped in a piece of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is near the stomach of the plant, make a ball of cloth, and instruct the patient to hold it against their fractured limb; then stretch a long cloth around it, and wrap the heart-shaped soft material as large as the hand plant, and tighten it as necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the open air, it is necessary that you place a stick above and another below in the plant, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand, and stop the gap between them.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture occurs in either of the fingers, it should be made even, as necessary; then tighten it with the plant, and if you see that a small stick needs to be placed to keep the fracture still, do so, and do not move it; and if the fracture is in other fingers, like the index or any others, make them even, and tie the affected finger next to the healthy one; or tie them all together, whichever way seems best, or place a stick on it, as with the knuckle; and be careful in the restoration and arrangement of the abscess above, and assist whoever is suffering from it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	from the broken hipbone
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The hipbone is often broken, and one can clearly see it when it returns to its position in front and behind; its restoration is achieved by binding it tightly over the break, from both above and below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	The patient lies on their face, then extends each limb equally to its side; this is when the fracture is between the bones.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is near the root of the hipbone, one of the ligaments should be bound towards the knee, and the others should be bound below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And also if it is close to the knee, then loosen the ligaments of the knee, and perform the extension; then place the splint so that the bone is in its natural position, and then apply the plaster and bind it, so that no deformity occurs.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, leave it to heal, then return to your work and treatment; the binding is done in the same way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap the fracture with a hard bandage, in two or three layers, and remove the excess, then turn the leg until the heels reach the root of the toes, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and bring the end above; then turn again on the leg and thigh the bandage, then put on the brace stars, and place a star on the bone of the leg; then use eight pieces of cloth between the leg and the thigh, soft, to equalize the tightness, then begin to tie three or four turns around the brace; and as you go higher on the brace, loosen it; then take two threads that you have passed between the leg and thigh, and tie three stars that are above, and return below with the thread, until you reach the foot; tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that no abscess or swelling occurs.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens that he dislocates it again and turns to what comes next, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of the bone caught, if possible, without causing further damage; and if it cannot be done, then it is necessary to break the joint and pull it out forcefully; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never should the leg be broken in this way with staples, as is done in the case of the arm or other parts; however, even after such restoration, the patient does not recover.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the leg is restored in 7 to 10 days, or even less or more, depending on the different conditions of the patient.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the alley of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	You know that in the alley of the knee there is little breaking, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, even if it is only a crack or an opening, and becomes a wound, and feels like a wound, and one feels well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that one places equally what is broken to its proper place as much as possible; then apply the plaster, and put a round bandage if needed, and tighten it appropriately, then follow all the arrangements we have mentioned for other breaks, like a hot poultice or anything similar; apply whatever is appropriate for each case, as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	from the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	You know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "fibula" and the other "tibia"; and every fracture occurs as it does in the arm, and therefore its restoration is the same, and all the work is involved. And if both bones are broken together, the leg returns to its normal position from all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the slender bones are broken, they return to their original position.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain, and one can see it well; then it turns blue.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then apply extension, and set it even, and tie the stars equally; however, it is important to note that if the fracture is ugly, with multiple pieces, then the extension should be less and lighter; and adjust it according to your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your task, take two strips of cloth that cover the leg on both sides, extending from the knee to the ankle; then wrap two bands around it and tie them in the middle, so the leg cannot bend to the right or left, and thus is well; no one should apply anything along the length of the leg, and if it is made of cloth, place the leg in a position to prevent movement, and carefully perform this on the fracture where there is an abscess or any other accident; move the leg each day to see if there is any pus or other complications, and cure it as long as it remains healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	from the fracture of bones in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but the bones in the foot can be fractured and the joints can dislocate in various ways, leading to severe pain.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	If the bones in the foot are fractured and you see them pushing against each other, the patient will experience severe pain in the foot, as if they want to walk, then place your foot on theirs, keeping the broken bones aligned, and press gently until they return to their original position; then apply a splint and bandage over it, and place a small wooden board under the belly of the foot, close to the toes, tighten it around the foot, then wrap it with cloth and other materials as needed.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And after three days or four have passed, if you loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones even, either broken or discolored.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if none of the bones are broken, but they are discolored, then restore them as we have said about the bones of the hand; then place a steel along the length of the bone, and make it slightly wider, and put the board from below, as I have said, and hold it firmly; and if there are two or three, or more, broken bones, then place on each bone a steel according to its quantity, wrapped in a cloth of linen, and tighten the board from below the foot; and let it be firmly fixed on the head of the table against the belly of the foot, so that it holds well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have discussed; and treat each case as it should be.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	On the fracture of the bone in the hand
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When a woman's bone in her hand is fractured and the swelling subsides, then she should incline her body forward with the affected arm behind her. Next, fill the palm with cotton and place it firmly inside; then stand up and gently bend the back up and down, allowing the cotton to reach the entrance of the hand, and the bone will realign with the joint. When she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and after urinating, replace it, repeating this process for seven or eight days. If done correctly, the fracture will heal, and if you notice any signs of infection, take a bladder from a goat, tie one end of a cane to the gap, and fill the bladder with water, blowing into the cane until the bladder is fully distended inside. Place this back in the hand, and repeat this process daily until the bone heals. Then fill the palm with cotton again and leave it for several days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the hand or foot is broken, in man or woman, restore it as we have said concerning the bone of the hip; and these fractures are not hidden from him who puts his study and skill into it, and listens to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For these fractures indicate various dispositions for the right way of restoration; understand this therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the staff, when it is broken, take a goose throat and insert it into the staff; then wrap cloth around it, leave it for three or four days, and it will be healed naturally.
de brisure avec plaie	from fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	For one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is great, such as the bones of the leg or shoulder or similar, it is important to seek healing immediately, so that the healings we have mentioned bear witness to it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, and there is no delay due to vitriol, if you do not have another remedy, then begin to restore the fracture in the same hour or day, before abscesses form.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if an abscess appears after treatment, let it heal for a new day or two, as long as the abscess is calmed, and do not touch it for a third or fourth day, lest you bring about a harmful consequence.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if a broken bone is visible upon uncovering the heart, it is necessary that you set it gently with your hands, slightly extended.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not appear even when setting your hands, you should use this instrument made of iron, with seven or eight inches in length, and its width should be according to the amount of the wound; and for this purpose, it is best to engrave three or four (marks) on it, depending on what is needed for each break; and it should be round and slightly thicker so that it does not bend under pressure upon your manipulation, and wider in front, thickening towards the middle.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche," so the dislocated bone must be placed back on top of the visible joint; and twist it once, until it returns, and becomes even one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle and the instrument cannot properly grasp the bone, you must hold the head of the bone so that the instrument has a firm grip.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back as we have said, using an appropriate instrument such as a plier or a saw, then use your fingers to remove any remaining pieces of bone that are stuck together by friction and small cuts.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reduced, and the patient feels great pain afterward, knowing that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you do all that it is in its place, then moisten the cloth with a dry black vinery, and arrange it properly; do not put any wax or other substance on the wound, otherwise it may cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer stars (possibly a type of herb or medicine) when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it around entirely according to the amount of the wound, and be very careful that the wound is not squeezed with the fracture; and often the ignorant do this, and bring upon the patient death or corrosion. And let the bandages be softer and more soothing than others.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or great, and you doubt that some ill accident may come of it, as we have said, and you feel pain in the place, if it is not proper to put a bandage on it; but wrap around, instead of bandages, firm cloths, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound is bowing, then remove whatever you have placed over it, and apply a healing ointment for wounds, such as an ointment with four ingredients or similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you dislocate the member twice a day, in the morning and evening, as long as it is swollen and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be separated in such a way that the bow of the body gently slides downward.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if it persists for many days, and it cannot heal but keeps returning to the bowed state, knowing that there are small fragments of bone, then you must clean the wound thoroughly, and remove all these misplaced pieces which cause the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula forms in its place, or any other kind of corruption, then you must treat it according to what is said in the chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and open on the member, as the bone of the leg or the shoulder, or other similar bones of the large members, do not pull it, for many times death may result, but let it heal until it rots; perhaps after 20 days or 30, then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	burns that come from the solder
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often encounter after the healing of the burn, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a bad sight to see the shape of the affected member; and in some cases, it cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care then, if we must treat it: if we administer astringent medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, sarcocolla, acacia, and similar ones, make sure you don't apply any of these things, or all together, and preserve them with astringent wine, or with plenty of heat or cold; and place them on the wound in bandages, tightening it well, and do not release it for many days; then release it and begin again with another, until the swelling is gone; or press down with a well-made plug; for the property of a plug is that it removes all swellings from the limbs; and if the nodulation has already hardened like stone, it must be removed, cutting off the excess, and healing it as long as it is healthy.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The weak member after treatment.
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is healed and the weak and delicate members remain, this can happen for many reasons: one is because it was tied too tightly and not tied as it should be; or because there are too many ligaments and it cannot assume the natural shape of the member; or due to excessive swelling; or because of too great movements, not at the right time; or because it has little blood in its body, making it weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	The cure is as follows: you make the patient eat, and tighten the body, until the blood flow increases within it; then you apply a poultice, providing joy and relaxation, then place lead on the member, so that the lead attracts great blood flow, frequently moistening it with warm water, until the circulation reaches the member, and it recovers its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The affected limb twists after health.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When a limb is twisted after healing, and the bones are broken open, and the form of the member is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural strength: do not believe the foolish ones who say one must break the limb entirely at once; many fools have done this in our land. Such actions are blameworthy, and great harm, and perhaps death, can result. However, if the contortions and torture are recent, they should be treated with hot water or softened herbs, such as chamomile leaves, roots, melilot, and similar things; make a mollifying plaster like the well-made daiquilon, and take the mucilage of chamomile, and preserve it with goose fat or oil of sesamum, and apply it as a plaster. Alternatively, take fig fats, and crush them with fine colon powder and similar medications that lessen inflammation.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never should the dislocation be separated by rubbing continuously and for a long time with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And allow the affected limb to move every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	If the swelling and hardness persist, similar to stones, it may be necessary to remove them with a hot iron, if required, up to the bone, using a delicate incision; and apply compression and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book on dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocations occur from no joint being in its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs from no cause, it is necessary now to bring the limb back to its proper target.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Because if treatment is delayed, the swelling may increase, and if it is reset too harshly at this stage, it may cause further pain; in many cases, this leads to inflammation and other pains. However, once the swelling has subsided, the patient should be made better, then the limb left to heal until the abscess is completely healed; then the affected area should be treated with hot water and oil, and the limb reset gently, as appropriate for that particular joint.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the shoulder, hip, and foot.
des mandibules	of the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It is often the case that the mandibles are dislocated, and there are two types of dislocation: either they are slightly out of place, slightly bent, or soft; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the lower part, preventing the patient from closing their mouth, holding saliva, and affecting their speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is minor, it often returns on its own, thanks to various dispositions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and complete, you should reset it immediately, without delay, so that the healer places his thumb on the patient's jaw, at the root of the dislocation inside the mouth; then the dislocation is in two parts, and he should hold the other fingers away, to make it even. And command the patient to soften his jaws and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And he should make the other fingers even, until they return to their place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if they return to their place, especially both jaws together, then apply hot water and oil, gently resetting them; do not delay in returning them, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient closes well after softening, place moistened cloth bandages made of rose oil and wax on it, then gently tie it with soft cords; and let the patient sleep on their back, with their limbs between two cushions, so that they do not move to the right or left, nor make any effort to raise themselves, but eat light food until the pain is gone and the jaws are healed; and then begin to drink, without opening the mouth widely for eating or drinking until the jaw is completely healed and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be brought back to their proper place within an hour and are not properly aligned, fever and severe pain may occur, as well as abdominal distension and perhaps purulent vomiting.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a catastrophe; and often death comes to him who suffers from it within nine days.
de la forcelle	de la forcelle" translates to "of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The fork cannot dislocate from any side in the continuity of itself and is never dislocated properly towards the outside, and it feels very bad.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And its restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then he presses the joint with the palm of his hand, and it returns; then he places the splint and the bandage, and holds it; and the limb that is towards the neck cannot dislocate; if not, and if it does not dislocate even once, then he must put it back in its place, as we have said; then he places the splint and the bandage, and holds it, and instructs the patient to rest until he is healed; and thus same is done with the shoulder joint when it is out of its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	You know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: one when it dislocates at the acromioclavicular joint; and the second at the glenohumeral joint; and sometimes dislocates upward, which happens rarely, and never behind the shoulder or inside for the nerves; and more often dislocates downward toward the acromion, especially in those with little muscle strength, as it easily occurs; but in those with sufficient strength, it slightly and seldom dislocates.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to no one with a bruise or fracture, and swells the shoulder with a hot abscess, and thinks it is dislocated because of that.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is therefore necessary that you test it, as long as you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And dislocations are known when they move towards the joint, and make a distinction between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their diversity manifest; and you will find in the top of the shoulder a hollow place, and by touching it, you can feel the top of the shoulder as if it were one; and the patient cannot bring his hand back to its natural position, nor move it in any way; and if it is dislocated upwards, unless it is completely hidden, for you will find it clearly visible by touch; and this kind of dislocation is not always easily reducible when it is new or if the disease is in the shoulder.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the healer should place his hand on top of the patient's body, then put his palms beneath the joint, and pull the joint upwards with force; and the healer should lift his hand and extend it upwards, then place it below; this will bring relief.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	If, however, relief does not come as described above, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; administer a gentle, soothing treatment with a decoction of althae and fenugreek and melilot in water, and then apply this to the affected area. Then, have the patient lie on his back, and place beneath the joint a piece of equal thickness of wool, neither too soft nor too hard, then place the heel of the foot against the joint and gently pull on the top of the shoulder, while treating the hand of the patient with care. Another healer should hold the head of the patient to prevent any movement below. This shoulder will immediately return to its proper position, as you will see if you follow this method: and it is important that you have present a man who is larger than the patient; he should be straight towards the side of the affected shoulder, and pull the shoulder away from beneath the joint of the ill-affected arm, and pull the joint upwards, so that the patient's arm hangs down; another healer should then gently pull on the hand of the patient towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too weak, and any heavy thing is laid upon him, the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And it is also adjusted in another way: one inserts a long stick into the ground, so that the joint is as flexible as a pistal, and neither too thick nor too thin; then place it under the patient, but with soft cloth above, and the patient's limb should be stretched downward on the other side, and the joint will return to its place; and if it does not want to come back for all the reasons we have said, then do this cure: take a stick from both arms, broad and four fingers wide, which has a pointed end to enter perfectly beneath the joint, according to this form.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then place a heavy cloth over the affected area, so it does not hurt the patient, and put the limb down on the table; then stretch the arm above the affected area, and bind the aid to the arm, starting from the wrist, then place the arm on a wide shield, and let the hand hang downwards, and leave the body hanging from the other side: now the joint is re-aligned.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is dislocated in any way, it is necessary to put under the limb a piece of equal woolen cloth, then apply the plaster made of ground powder with incense and egg, over the entire shoulder and around, then extract the limb gently, and tie the bandage again on the plaster, and embrace the hand at the collarbone, and let the hands remain in that position.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he move little, as long as the limb is comfortable, for it will heal more quickly; and then move it again after one or two days, and if it is stiff and not softened, it will be healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is stiff due to moisture or any other cause, it is necessary that you apply cautery at three points, as is shown in the chapter on cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and after seven days the limb loosens, and cannot raise its arm high, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is either compressed or stretched or damaged; and know that the joint will never be firmly fixed in its place again.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the worst, and the limbs, or behind, if it is done by a jolt, and stretching of hands, and is held in another position; and treat until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after healing comes cracking in the limb, and slow movements; if the patient uses it many times, until the cracking is relieved, and it returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation costs
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You know that the jointure that is dislocated is weakened at the joints, and the joints return; if it is dislocated from all sides, and most in front and behind, and the dislocation is not corrected, because it is seen well and felt well; and treated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick part with the healthy, if you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is stiff, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch the shoulder to anything.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it in such a way that the abscess closes from the inside, for if the abscess closes from the outside, it would be painful to reset it; and perhaps it cannot be brought back completely, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and perhaps death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, as it can be brought back, that you extend his hand with both of yours; and his arms are spread out, and the hands placed with care according to the shape around, from above and below, and bring the joint back to its place in his palm, until it returns to its original position.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to its original position, and bring the joint back to its place at the root of the palm, where it was misaligned.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, apply a strong extension; and have the other assistant extend the arm, and wrap it with a double long and wide bandage, so that when you look at the joint connecting to the hand, you moisten it with no oil to soften the joint, then bring the joint back into shape, until it returns to its original position. And once it is in place, apply dry plaster with egg white, tighten the bandage, and keep the arm close to the body of the patient, without moving it for several days, then loosen the bandage.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	If the joint is firm in its place, gently loosen the bandage and leave it; if you see that the joint is not firmly attached, reapply the plaster and the bandage, and leave it for several days, until it is securely set; then loosen it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if the patient feels pain after resetting the joint, and it becomes stiff, bathe and gently rub it, applying pressure until it is relieved; or place a greased sheep's fat on the joint, leave it for a day and a night, then remove it and immerse it in a bath; and when it is warm, rub the joint temperately, then apply the fat again, and repeat this process two or three times until it is healed; and if you notice, use fine moist warm vinegar with butter, and strain it on; and it will return to its normal state.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The hand joint is misaligned and its return to normal is slight compared to other joints. However, it must be carefully reset while it is still in an abnormal position, so that the muscles do not swell or an abscess does not form.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the resetting is done by placing the patient's hand on a table, extending the fingers, and looking to ensure they are even, so that the palm rests on the joint, holding it until it returns to its normal position. However, you must check if it is in its correct place; then, place the patient's hand with the back of the hand facing up on a table for extension and resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, let the patient place his palm on a table, and look to see where the joint is visible.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, then do this; if not, continue applying soothing plasters to the abscesses until it ceases.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if the patient cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place for several days, then the joint remains distorted; and do not harm the patient further that while the hand is swollen, and they cannot squeeze anything: then know that a nerve or artery is cut; there is no other cause but to use cautery to extract it from the case, and perhaps there is nothing else of value.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is dislocated, if you place it in the splint as we have said, then pull it firmly and leave it for a day, then release it and let it be so.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is no fracture, then apply warm water moistened with oil, and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	on the dislocation of the two fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	The two fingers of the hand should never be dislocated at each joint, neither at the back of the palm or on the palm itself; then, pull them and reset the dislocation in their proper places as they return, holding the thumb in a bent position, and stretching it towards the part where it is separated. Leave it for a day, and then reset it to its original position; do not bind it tightly, but release it the next day, and move it again, relacing it when necessary; and repeat this process until it is healed, whether dislocated at the palm or on any other side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	dislocation of the spine
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine or the collarbone is dislocated and there is no cure, the patient often dies quickly.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the limbs jump spontaneously without control, and they cannot hold them, and often the members become limp, either both legs or both arms, or sometimes only one leg or one arm. Sometimes the spine becomes bent to four parts; this is called "gibbosity". The cure for this gibbosity if it occurs in childhood is that there is no cure or healing from it at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from a fall or percussions or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment speak in great words, where there is no great benefit; but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the stiffness that comes to the penis in front, no one has any health; and also that which comes directly to the second side, and it is impossible to cure from outside except for the one who comes to the back, as I say; and it is that the patient should be stretched on his face equally in the first position, and have strain from below so that he does not move; then insert a splint into the head in the earth-formed shape, and another at the ankle, and tie a strap around the parts of the patient that are sore, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles; and these assistants know the straps, one on the head and the others on the feet, among the two splints; and they should be well secured, the splint as we have said, and the doctor places his palms on the formed spine until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return with this treatment, take a table three feet long, cut a groove in the wall, place the patient on their side, and turn the head of the table away from the wall; then place the middle part of the table on the spine, and put mirrors under both ends of the table, and press firmly until it returns to its place; and if you see fit, do this in a rotating motion that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And take two splints, each one a foot long, and place them on the patient's head from either side, and put two more splints under the feet, leaving an interval of about half an inch between each splint; and make in each splint a hole through which the screw turns, and fix the splints firmly so that they do not move; and between these two splints, place another splint turning, so that it binds them together, and let this additional splint have small holes of about half an inch long to turn the screw; then tie the screw that goes through the joined splints to the head splint, and the other end to the foot splints at the opposite turning, and each helper turns his screw until the spine is in place, as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, apply a drying plaster with plenty of heat, then the compresses, and then the end of a tablet three fingers long, which preserves the healthy joint from the stiffness and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage, as we have said, and use the patient's relief gently, until they are healed; and if any occurrence comes to an end of health, then administer softening and soothing medicines, as we have mentioned before; and never apply a piece of plaster, nor does its appearance appear in the rear spine, and be careful that it is not dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, for which one must not have too much confidence: perhaps death would come.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of dislocations of the spine
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	You know that the joints of the neck and the joints of the shoulder only cause dislocations, unlike other joints; and the joint of the neck is misaligned according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and more inside, and less misaligned in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation within itself is such that when one joins the injured leg with the healthy one, the injured knee is further apart and opens wider than the healthy one, and the patient cannot double up their knee; and it is the warmth from the abscess that causes swelling around the joint, because the bone in the thigh comes closer.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him who experiences this at death is that this event is contrary to what has been said before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him who experiences it beforehand are that his leg is sound according to its strength; nevertheless, do not bend the knee without pain, and if he wants to walk, he cannot do so before, and he retains urine, and the ankle swells, and when he looks down, he sees it pass over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who experiences it afterward are that he cannot spread or bend his knee, and one leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the urine flows from below the hipbone along the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	They reset this appearance of dislocation if it is such that you reward it when the dislocation is old and persists according to its nature, as there is no cure; and he should not dare to have any confidence in it.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for the one whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of the four types of dislocation, you must act quickly, restoring the joint to its proper position both inside and outside, and aligning it to the right and left; then it will likely heal on its own and no other treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	If it does not return in this manner, you must then apply a strong force, holding the leg firmly with two hands or binding it tightly above the knee; and other ministers should stretch their hands from above in such a way that they bend the patient's hands beneath his armpits, then pull strongly on a tight ligature above the ankle; and others should hold the head with a rope; and all must stretch upward and downward simultaneously until the patient is completely lifted off the ground and remains still.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to all four limbs, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, that's good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If the dislocation is in an exposed area, it is necessary to treat the patient by placing them on their healthy side, then tying a ligature on the root of the thigh, and the joint that is beneath the injury, then extending the ligament towards the injury and against its strength; then another assistant should support the patient's arms, and embrace the large joint of the injured thigh, and extend it to an extreme degree: it will return to its place now; and this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot hold it in the manner we have said, then you should tie both feet of the patient together with a strong soft cord on the heels and on the knees, and let the leg of the patient be extended two fingers more than the other; then hang it from the top of a post, and let it be two arm-lengths above the ground; then command the attendant to embrace the head of the thigh, and let another assistant hang with the patient, who embraces the thigh, for the joint will now come back naturally.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when dislocation is external, if the patient lies as we have said in the case of gilbosity, then tighten the ligament on the leg of the patient precisely, and also on the foot; then place two hot coals, one at the head and another at the foot, and insert a hot coal between the thighs of the patient in the form of a dislocation; and surround it with moist cloths to prevent it from burning the patient, then extend each assistant towards him, and let them all look at their hand holding the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it does not return, place it on a table and press it as we have said in the previous passage, and lay the patient on their healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is present, it is necessary to extend the injured leg forcibly, as I have said; and alleviate their pain of being on the hurt limb, then press with the other hand and stretch it downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is at the back, it is not necessary to stretch the injured part downwards or lift it up onto the ground, but rather, it should be left as it was when the joint was dislocated towards the back; just as we have said before, tenderly on both hips. And it should be on its face, and the stretched limb as we have said previously, and all pressure should be applied to the joint on the table; and this will be at the right moment when the patient extends their legs, and they are even. Then tighten the socks, apply a plaster, and a bandage from a cloth, so that the hip does not move; and rest for three or four days, then remove the plaster and apply another one; and gently move the limb until the member is healed.
de la dislocation dou genoil	From the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The limb is dislocated in three ways: internally, externally, and rearward; but not frontward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if it does not return to its place at the knee, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend their leg if they can, and place their face on your hand, and rest their foot on your feet. Then take hold of the thigh in your palms, and gently pull between your fingers, then bend both sides of the thigh where it joins the knee; another assistant extends the foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that the leg returns to its joint slightly. And apply a poultice, and keep the leg at the knee, and bandage together firmly for three or four days, then release them; and let not the patient try to move about until the limb is comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not straight, apply firm extension as we have said in the treatment of the spine, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	On the dislocation of the heel.
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heel is neither fully extended nor completely relaxed, both inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and there is tension before the area where it is dislocated; the reduction is gentle, and one should gently extend their hands towards the affected side when it is slightly extended.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is dislocated from everywhere, you must make the patient lie straight, and hold the leg with both hands above the ankle; then take the foot in your right hand, and twice with your left hand, then stretch it upward and turn the foot nicely upward; do this twice as we have said, pulling and stretching the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, repeat the procedure, for it will return; and if it cannot return in that way, make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and insert a firm stick into the ground between his thighs, and wrap the drapes around him so he does not hurt himself; then have each minister hold the thigh, and another extend the foot to his hands or ankles, so it lies on top of the ankle; then stretch each minister equally, and the stick should remain between the patient's thighs as they pull; then place both hands equal to the dislocation, and another minister turn the healthy leg downward at the ankle, and the dislocation will come back firmly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when the swelling has subsided, apply a compress and bind it tightly, pressing the foot to the leg, and securing the stirrups behind the ankle so that the binding is not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the swelling decreases, remove the binding on the third or fourth day, and urge the patient to walk within four days; if he follows this course, there will be no further harm.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses occur, it is necessary to soothe them as we have said elsewhere, while they are still fresh.
des dois	From these two (words/parts).
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the joints are dislocated, if they need to be nicely extended without effort, it is a light task.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any new or unusual part of the body, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back or on a table entirely straight, and place your foot on what opens from these joints, then press with the shape of your foot until it returns; and when it is even and nothing is opened, put a table under the sole of the foot at two joints, then stretch against the shape, and leave it for three days, then release it; and make him rest until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	from wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation and you wish to restore it, often the patient dies if you are not careful in treatment. Do not be presumptuous in your care unless you are skilled in the art and have long practiced it, nor be hasty; rather, at the beginning, apply warm poultices to the abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands if there is no hope for recovery. But when there is hope, immediately reset the dislocated member, so that the abscess does not worsen; and once the limb is set, apply warm poultices and treat the wound as appropriate, using dried herbs. If with the dislocation small bones are broken, as they often are, then do as we have said for simple diseases; beware, however, to enter a path of fear, because this will guide you according to your Creator, and for the knowledge of your arms and body.
Amen	Here is the translation of the
