O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, dear children, I have completed this book which is the end of the science of medicine, its fulfillment, and have concluded it with explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I completed this with a treatise, which is the part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And since the work of hands is closely guarded in our region and unknown throughout, the science has degenerated and become depleted, and there remains no trace of its power other than small descriptions in ancient books about what the hands have done.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes error and vanity, and intentions are closed, and knowledge is estranged.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I will revive this treatise by ordering it according to the method of exposure and description and abbreviation; and I will bring together the forms of cautery instruments and other tools used in the work with the addition of descriptions and preparations for their use, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are to be found in our time, the art of medicine has become neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who wishes to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, must know the judgment of the members, their forms and connections and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the number of their openings, and understand the movement and rest of veins, and from where they originate.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And Hippocrates says that ignorance is death, and knowledge is life; especially in the art of medicine.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that he who is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, risks being led astray and mistreating people; as I have often seen happen to many who engage in this science without knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a most strange sight, where an abscess on the scrotum or neck of a woman burst, and the arteries in her neck flowed; so much blood came out that the woman died in her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another sight where a stone was extracted from an old man's bladder, and the stone was large; it took away a piece of his bladder, and he bled internally for three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone; I knew well that if it was not cut out, he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another marvel that took place in the care of our duke who had broken a leg and suffered a wound from the fracture; all the ignorant healers held the fracture over the wound as if it were a strong hold, leaving no trace of healing to the wound, and they left it like that until the end; and they commanded him not to dislocate it; and he waited until the leg was completely swollen and gangrenous and came to a bad end.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	They called me to come to him, and I hurried to dislocate the leg; and when I heard it dislocate, it was as if it were at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But every way of corruption was already confirmed in the member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the member was completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I also saw another wonder: the abscess became worse, and then it was inflamed due to the malignancy of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For the ulcer, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not suit that one should touch it with iron if it is not in a part that can be entirely removed what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, dear child, it is necessary that you know that the art of healing is divided into two parts: that is to say, the work of hands where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show you in each part of this book where there is fear and peril.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Therefore, hold yourself in such a way that the evil eye cannot speak ill of you. If you take up your weapons courageously and gently, and embark on your sick with resolve, using the best means so that by the grace of God you may be saved and rejoice; cast away diseases fraught with sorrow, disarm those things that make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can pass from this world to the other in glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in none of his warnings: "Do not take any sick condition too seriously, lest you be called a fool.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cautery and medical agues, and it is ordered from the head down to the feet; and includes the forms of instruments, the tools for cautery, and everything necessary for the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and the use of suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and it includes the ordering and forms of the instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar conditions; it ordains the use of the hands and shapes of instruments from the wrist to the foot.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	So, remembering the work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of aid and the harm or benefit of each condition.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and their harm are the longest and most subtle knowledge, revealing secrets; on this topic, many sages have spoken and agreed, and I will leave it at that, as I fear to prolong my words.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery helps universally for every complexion where it has matter, whether the complexities: that is to say, a hot complexion without matter, and a dry complexion without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In both hot and dry complexions, matter is present, and some people devise that cautery is great help, while others say the opposite: that cautery is useless for illnesses arising from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be treated with heat for hot illnesses, nor by dryness; and he who says the contrary states that cautery provides great help to hot and dry diseases that come upon the body of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the heat of fire, you feel the body is warm.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	Because I have found it to be true through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in any case, no one should attempt it unless they have tried it themselves, and know by long experience the chapter of cautery, and the diversity of human dispositions, and the causes of their illnesses, and the remedies and the time of day; for other dispositions we only have fear, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all agreed and came together for the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know this, son, that cautery combines fire in a way that is a secret of healing, and indeed it is a greater kindness than the fiery medicine cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and it does not come from outside except to the member that is hot, and it does not harm any other member.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fiery medicines pass from one member to another by distance, and they bring to the member diseases of sorrow that have no cure; and sometimes the fire causes the patient pain because of its high intensity and the goodness of its substance, unless there is an excess of it.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And if you have found me through experience and the long service and study that I have put into this art, and it is in accordance with the truth of things; and because I excuse myself for the length of my words, as I do not wish to reveal the secret hidden within fire, and the quality of the work, how it heals the ailments of the body, as the philosopher demonstrates; consider it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know this, my son, that there is agreement among them as to when cauterization should be performed and the prayers recited.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, because the pain causing harm is removed with the help of cauterization; and most importantly, cautery is for necessary and urgent pains that cannot wait until a greater evil comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear child, as they do who follow folly; for to the illness that is healed by cautery there is no return; and thus it should be. But they are mistaken, because cautery is not a cure that changes the constitution, dries up humors that cause pain, and is effective only for the urgency of its value and the virtue of its work and mastery.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And another thing to consider is that illness comes in various forms according to the constitution of the patient and the place where it arises, and its power; and impurities gather within it through the acquisition of foods and similar things. But if cautery is administered when there is a lack of impurities and moisture—as with the cautery for pain and similar conditions—this type of pain does not return, but rather occurs rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last resort of medicine; it's clear. But they do not believe that cautery has any value after medicine, as when we administer methods of treatment for any illness and they are ineffective, then we should resort to cautery, and it does have value.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it becomes clear that cautery is indeed the last resort of medicine, not at all according to the understanding of learned fools.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that gold cautery instruments are more effective than iron ones, and they only spoke of fire for the quality of gold and for the excellence of its substance; they said that the heat of cautery does not cause blisters, but this is not certain, as I have tested it, and I have found that it is true in no one; and gold cautery is more effective than iron, as they say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet when you heat the gold instrument, you are not sure if it is heated by the color of the gold, and as soon as it cools down; and if it is heated too much, it becomes damaged; thus there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason, we use fire cautery as we have equipped it with our tools for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now we have ordered this chapter from the beginning to the end, so that the way may be lighter to follow.
dou cautere olivaire	olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	Fire cautery is useful for moisture and cold on the head, and it helps with conditions caused by a disease called "soda," and by many humors that flow from the head to the ears, and due to numerous dreams and toothaches and throat pain, and especially with all diseases caused by cold such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient be purified by a solvent medicine, cleansing the head three times or four, according to the virtue and age and usual condition of the patient, and then make the head dry again.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make it rest crossed in your hands, and place his hands on some weight; after, put the root of your palm on the root of his neck between his two fingers; and let it be where your two middle fingers meet, if it bleeds, then heat the cautery called "olive," which has this shape:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And mark it on the skin with ink, then gently lower and stretch your hand slowly, dislocating it; afterward, lift your hand carefully, and reset the joint when you see the bone is slightly out of place; if you do not see it, repeat the cautery process until you do. Then take a small piece of rope, put soft, melted butter and cotton inside, place it on the joint, and leave it for three days; afterward, cover it with moistened cotton, leaving it until the burn from the heat is healed; finally, treat the wound with 'tetrafarmacon' ointment while it remains clean.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And they say that the older a wound is, the more it purifies itself; and for this reason, aid must be moved quickly.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say that one must not leave the cautery for so long that the bone itself is burned; then remove the burned part from the bone, and it will be healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And another says that one must not leave the cautery for so long, and push with such force to remove the bone as wide as a woman opens her legs to let humors out; one should keep the wound open for a long time; then one must clean it and dress it properly.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem good to me in all cases, except for those in which any man has no choice but despair; and I think I should leave it. For the joint is weakened by continuous dissolution of nature, as we witness in other members; and also when the patient's joint is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization seems safer and more mobile to me, and from this I use them together for the greater good.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When chronic pain in the head comes on and lasts for a long time, patients must use herbal remedies and pills known as "cough drops", and applications of poultices; and if one undergoes the cauterization that we have mentioned above, it is ineffective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care if the patient's limb is of strong nature and not too stiff; then cauterize it from below, as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After cauterizing each horn of the skull up to the bone, as we have said before, and cauterizing the one called "vasselz" (the vessel), which is where the ventosas are placed, hold your hand slightly away so that you do not see the bone. The patient feels much greater pain from this cauterization than from others, and I will speak of it then; it is necessary that the cauterization of the horns be more precise than that of the middle part of the skull, and this is its form.
dou cautere dou chief	For fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in a part of the head there is sudden pain, and the disease extends to the oil (or perhaps meaning 'body') up to the very last moment, and the seeds are expelled by means of medicated drugs, and all other cures as I have mentioned in the division of diseases, prove ineffective; then one should perform cauterization according to two methods, that is, with hot ague medicine and by fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauterization with hot ague medicine involves pricking a dose of alder (or possibly another herb) and removing the bark and covering it with wax in such a way that you can replace the alder beneath the skin; hold it there tightly for twelve hours, then release it and treat the wound vigorously with hot compresses for two or three days, then apply clean cotton soaked in butter until the discharge ceases.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment with ointment as long as it is healed; and if you see fit to use any burning medicines that I have written about or dosed in the treatment of burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery is done according to this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the fire cautery with this tool:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "close" because the head is shaped like a circle with a small depression, and in the middle there is a slight appearance; place it on the painful limb, hold your hand, and gently turn it slightly until half of the thickness of the heart is burned; then remove your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is dangerous, and abundant blood flows.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing cotton in the wound and keeping it there for three days, then he moistens the cotton with butter and continues to treat the wound until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called 'cultellare' (scalpel), be careful not to cut into the artery in this migraine which is not old.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When treating migraine as we have previously discussed in divisions of diseases, and it does not benefit from the cautery that medicine recommends, then you must heat the cautery called 'cultellare' (scalpel) until it is bright white; and then make a sign on the suffering limb with a line half an inch long, pull your hand away once, so as not to cut into the artery and do not let blood come to the bone; and be careful of the lower jaw when chewing, so that the teeth do not move and spasms do not come to the patient, and beware of the flow of blood from the artery when it is cut, or great fear will come especially to those who do not know how, and who are not well-versed and experienced; and leave the work half-finished. But I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it is mentioned in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery is not enough to heal the disease, and the patient suffers, apply it again to the main part as we have said, and cure the wound while it is still healthy; and if you notice, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on extracting an artery, with a cautery having two blades; and this cautery is better and more helpful than the others.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	about the pain of the ears due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is pain in the ear due to cold, and various solutions and treatments as we have mentioned in the previous section have been applied, but the pain persists, use this cautery called "point," which has the following shape:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After having marked around the painful ear, or both ears if they hurt on one side and the other, and moved it slightly away from the root of the ear after having signified the joint's position, place 10 points around each ear; then treat the joint until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	regarding the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	The torture that requires cautery is limited to those that involve fluid movement, as we have mentioned in the divisions of illness; and do not perform cautery on parts that are merely dry, sore, or swollen.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this type of pain that mutates from fluid of water and purging from the head and gargarism, and it doesn't improve, then you must cauterize the patient with three types of cautery: one at the root of the ear, another slightly away from the temple, and the third in the adjustment of the two lips; and place the cautery on the area that opens to a healthy part, burning half of the heart's base, and this is the shape of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it resembles the surgical knife we have described before, but this one is a bit more subtle, and the blade should be slightly thicker; after curing it, as I have said above, as long as it remains healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but it does not benefit the patient, and they do not have a fever, then make four cauterizations: two on the temples at the back of the head, one on the forehead, and one on the liver, which is called "vessel" as we have previously mentioned, and no cauterization on the mouth of the stomach; treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	The term "de litargie" seems to be a
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness, it is necessary to give the patient large amounts of herbal tea to purify the mind; after resting the head of the patient, place a poultice of mustard on the back of the head at the occiput, as described in the treatment of poultices; and this is the method of cauterization: if he does it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If the patient is sane in this way, it is good; and if not, make three cauterizations on each side of the thigh down to the bone, and leave two finger-widths between each cauterization, and treat as with others, and if you notice it becoming inflamed, and the patient suffers, make one cauterization in the middle; and if necessary, two more on each side of the two horns, and treat until he is sane; this cauterization is called 'olive'.
de la froidor dou chief	from cold at the top
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be purified with earth and water as we have said before; after cleansing the head of the patient, make a cauterization between the chief and each horn, and three on the spine at the base of the neck; and if you need more, and the flesh is moist and the patient suffers, and the disease is severe, make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; leave it until the most sensitive heart is burned, and then remove your hand. After this, treat until he is sane, and remember that the cauterization called 'olive' has been mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	From epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is first necessary to purify the brain with years and other remedies that we have discussed in the section on great suffering from long-term medication.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot bear it, make them gargle and chew to purify the brain often with good meats; then place the hot compress in the middle of the head, and perform cautery as we have said before, and cauterize the veins and every horn; and if the patient is very ill and suffers greatly, perform cautery as I have said for those with paralysis and softening of the limbs, on the spine and neck, and apply olive cauteries in the manner I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is sick, make them undergo cautery gently according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When, due to melancholy, there are excessive or corrupt moisture and thick flux, then use cautery on parts as we have said for those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if, due to melancholy, the excesses are declining towards melancholy and the body of the patient is moist with sorrow, then give them something to drink that cleanses the mind as it has been previously discussed in the section on division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After removing the head of the patient, make the dislocation well-made, as round as a circle, and place it back on the head; let the patient lie with their eyes crossed and well held from all sides; then apply the liniment, and rub with butter of old nettles; heat it over fire temperately, so that the patient can bear it; afterward empty the circle inside the head and leave it to cool; and repeat this to the patient once a week with another good treatment until he is healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or, if you must cauterize it, make many points at the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cautery moistens the wound increasingly; then apply cotton soaked in butter and gelatine.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eyes come first through the signs I mentioned in the previous section, then begin and give to the patient something to drink, a purifying medicine for the head, and guard against all moisture, and make him sweat or take a bath while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After ordering the patient to raise their head, he performs a cautery over the head, and applies a second cautery on both temples if the eyes are affected together, or separately if only one is; he cauterizes all veins and arteries beneath the heart, making the cautery long according to the width of the temple; be careful about bloodletting, and if too much blood issues, stop immediately as you have been taught.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and the careful use of cautery how to stop it; and never should cautery or heat be applied directly to the two rear bones.
dou cors des larmes	two parts of the eye
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears from the eyes have been old and habitual and are in the veins, removing the arteries that appear from the inner corner of the eye; and one sees that it is a cold, phlegmatic excess, then apply the cautery as I said at the beginning of this treatment, starting with a cautery across the bridge of the nose, and two cauterizations on each temple, and two cauterizations directly below the bones behind the eyes; and if more is needed, cauterize gently over the eyebrows with all small cauterizations.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Let the body weep through the eyes.
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate it according to what we have said in the previous section, and it does not benefit, then give the patient to drink three cups of pure wine; after that, take hold of the head and perform cauterization in the middle with olive cautery; make two cauterizations with the cautery called 'clavilis' on both sides of the jaw, a little below the teeth; and be careful not to cover the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	This is the form of cautery called 'clavilis':
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil becomes softened by disease and moisture, then apply this cautery which is called "olive.
de coi ci est li forme:	Due to which the form is:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that the cautery on both sides of the wound is as long as the wound itself, do not let go of the instrument until one-third of the paper has been burned, according to the manner I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hairs that prevent the oil from entering
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	No time does it happen that the hairs of the skin turn white and prickle, and they point towards the flesh; and cauterization is performed in two ways: namely, with fire or with hot medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then place the patient in a clean environment; next, draw on the skin with a figure that is as large as the full moon, and it should begin where the hairs are; then apply moist cotton coated in egg glue and musk from persil to the flesh, and heat up the cautery according to this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the affected area little by little, burn the hair at its roots; and the sign of the work's success is that you see the skin retreating, and the hairs standing on end like a bird's feathers; then gently let go, and leave it thus for three days, then apply moistened cotton in butter until the burning sensation disappears; after that, continue treatment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if the hairs grow back, and the skin becomes soft again, then repeat the cauterization on that same area as you did before; and if the hairs are fallen out, cauterize it again while the skin is raised to its natural state, and even, and let the hair not prick the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The medicinal cautery of burning herbs is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make a parchment shape of the leaf of mirth. Take French soap and bright charcoal, each one part, and grind together well. Apply it carefully so it does not cool, then spread it over the shape made like the leaf of myrth, and place the paper on top. If the illness persists in just one spot, you must operate there, and also on both; put cotton oil moistened with egg into the wound in abundance; let the patient's part be in your healthy hand and apply yours showing the medicine, pressing lightly and slowly each time the patient feels a stinging from the medicine, for it will sting like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your body.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the infection has passed, then raise the limb from below, and observe if you see the skin lifted as it was lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; and if so, it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, apply more medicine to the limb while the work is still even and your joints are aligned; then place a moist cloth in butter until the burning of the colors subsides, after which cure the limb with the dressing called 'dyafenis' and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you have to take care of yourself, be very careful with your work so that it does not seek out the medicine by itself.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft after and the hairs grow in oil, recommence the treatment on that place which has been softened by the paper properly, as you have done before; then cure it until it is healed; and this is the form of the fuell with a little oil.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the ability of men is diverse in size and strength, and according to your constraints; and do not turn away from the right path those who have study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the treatment of a fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have discussed regarding diseases, and your treatments do not benefit the patient, then it is necessary to perform cautery on them in this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head on a healthy surface, and hold their neck between your hands in this manner so that their head does not move, nor do they remove their head from your grip. Afterwards, apply moist cotton or persil juice over the oil. Then, heat the cautery tool until it is hot, making sure its shape resembles a quill, with the end being the cautery point. If you see fit, the point can be angled downwards or upwards, and if not, it should resemble a tent. However, any position that ensures stability during your work is preferred.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula, open it and drain the pus and fluid; if it is closed again, work on it and extract the bowels; then apply hot cautery, holding your hand over the cautery at the affected area above the oil, so that your hand does not cause damage; place the cautery on the fat of the oil and burn.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you begin the cautery near the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If that does not work, repeat the cautery again, and if necessary, a third time, leaving it for three days; then apply moistened butter cotton and cure the dry dressing until it is healed, and if forty days pass without healing, apply a corrosive medicine as needed, depending on what comes in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a kind of cautery for a fistula that no one of the ancients spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Understand the fistula, and fix its position; then place a fine, sharp instrument into the gap, by which the shape is formed.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and it should have the quantity of a drop of water; and hold your hand firmly, so that the patient does not move at all, until the pus has drained completely to its core; and one should put cotton moistened with oil on top of the wound for healing or in order to stop the flow: the pus will be gently pulled from the fistula, and health will return miraculously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the ulcer is clean through the cautery we have mentioned, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If this is not the case, then it is necessary to administer ice or cold water, and return the ulcer to the body within the cold, according to what is appropriate for its place.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times cracks appear in the lips, which are called "poil," especially on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these wounds as we have discussed in detail, and the treatment does not benefit, then use a small cauterizing instrument according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	Place the instrument in these wounds until it reaches the bottom; then treat the area with wax until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	from the abscess of the mouth
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess forms in the root of the mouth or in the uvula or palate or at the roots of the teeth, causing putrefaction and rot and becoming a fistula, then treat it as we have discussed in detail; however, this treatment does not benefit. In such cases, you should perform cauterization according to the size of the fistula. After emptying or opening the fistula, hold your hand firmly until the heat from the cautery reaches the bottom, and do this once or twice, following up with treatment as we have described in detail, until it is healed; and if it heals in this way, that is good. If not, it is necessary to expose the area and remove the corrupt bone, as you will find specified in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	no movement of the joints
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and treatment with medicine is ineffective, then place the patient's aching jaw in a healthy position; afterwards, heat the cautery instrument according to the shape that comes, as if you put a cane on the tooth; and apply the hot cautery to the root of the tooth firmly, holding your hand until the patient feels the heat reaching the tooth's root; then release your hand and repeat the cauterization according to your will; afterwards, make the patient rinse his mouth with salty water, and do this for an hour and a half strong.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this same manner, the tooth that was moving becomes confirmed, the gums are softened and restrained, and the moisture is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	about the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from cold, or there is frost or chill, and the remedies of medicine are ineffective, then it needs cauterization according to these two methods: the butter cauterization and the fire cauterization.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	The butter cauterization is such that you press melted butter into a copper or iron spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a stick, dip it in the melted butter, and apply it to the aching tooth until it cools; do this often enough so that its effect reaches the root of the tooth. If you see that the butter and cotton are too dry, apply it again to the aching tooth, and hold the hot iron until the heat rises up the side of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	He uses fire cautery, making it as hot as you can bear a metal pin or arrowhead, so the flames do not reach the patient's mouth; then heat the cautery, from which its shape will come, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools; do this often, for the pain will be alleviated that very day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is important that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the haste of this cautery, and then sucks on a hot cloth; and this is the shape of the cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And do cautery on the upper lip where you wish, according to what you can do; and this is the shape of the pin.
des scrophules	Of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula is from cold moisture and does not respond to medication, then heat the cautery head with this after which the shape should appear, and it should have openings for the smoke to escape from the cautery of the other part; place the hot cautery on the abscess once or as needed until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; if the abscess is small, apply cautery according to its quantity, leaving it for three days; then cover with moist cotton and butter until the burning is removed; afterwards treat the wound with oil and bandages until it heals.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture conquers the channels of the body, especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient should be relieved first with solvent medicines; after that, make them cough up at the root of the throat, and be sure not to go down to the throat, and only cough gently.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, make another cautery at the joint of the collarbone and the top of the spine, and these cauteries that are called "claws" from which we have the form above; and treat the limb as we have said above until it is healed.
de la toust	from the heat
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and any disease of the muscles is due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or inflammation, and it is an old illness, then make two cauterizations on the strong parts of their own will; and another cauterization between the two breasts; and this cauterization which is called 'clavile' according to the shape mentioned above.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make a cauterization by pricking all the cauterization called 'poins' from which the shape is as mentioned above in the illness of the ears; and the points can be up to 30, or more inside.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After the treatment, reset it according to what is said above, and make the cauterization in three parts according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because the cautery is lighter, because you do it three times in turn.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	On the dislocation of the shoulder.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, remember to have the patient recall their pain on their back and side. Afterwards, gently apply pressure with your left hand to the area where the dislocation is located; if the joint is misaligned inside, heat the cautery with two thin irons until it forms this shape:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and burn the heart as long as it feels burning, and make the shape of the burn with four burns, and for this reason, the burn is made with a burn tool having three prongs, so that the burn shapes are six burns; and the nerve is according to the subtlety of a thread, and this is the form of the burn with three prongs.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never should it be adjusted on this nerve, for there are eight burns.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying the burn, put a cloth made of silk over it; then rest the patient, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated from above, such a thing happens poorly, then make a fire cautery on the thick skin with a cautery claw or many cauteries with sharp points.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and moisture is removed, and health returns to the patient.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach while it is being stretched from its natural state, catarrh multiplies within it, and conventional treatment methods do not help, then the patient should be careful on his back, extending his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From this and afterward, make three cauterizations and remove the knife with the least amount of a finger's width, cauterizing all the way to the bone; and two cauterizations should be made on each side until the shape of the cauterization is at three angles, and there is enough space between them that they are not joined together while they rot; and make the cauterization so complete that it sears both parts of the heart, and the shape of the cauterization remains unaltered.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you are to be cauterized with a large cautery on the stomach according to this form, and he who is afraid of this cautery, make a single point with the cautery and sign on the stomach according to the amount that you see fit; then cauterize all the way through the cautery called "point.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment we have previously discussed, as long as it is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver experiences pain from cold and moisture and excessive flatulence, as long as it is out of its natural state due to superfluities; and the patient is treated according to what we have mentioned in sections, but it does not help, then it is necessary that the patient be mindful of his head. And a sign of three cauterizations following this form and figure and quantity on the liver, to remove the humors, should be performed; and there should be enough space between each cauterization, approximately the thickness of a finger; and the cauterization should be long across the body, without pressing too hard with the hand on the entire cauterization; and it should only burn the middle part of the heart, and the patient should be straight on his feet; if he cannot, he should lie down, extend his legs, and ease his breath. And this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you wish, cauterize these wounds with a cuttlefish knife, if you are skilled and sharp in the art, and be careful not to burn yourself entirely, for you would scorch the whole body; and that it does not come to a boil, because the blood vessels there are very delicate, and only the wise will see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you need to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels moderate pain; but if it is in the membrane, they feel intense pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this cure requires a mirror, the patient must rest their head; then clean the wound where the abscess is, and apply the hot cautery which resembles a rose, in this way:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize with the cautery until the veins are burned, and come close together, as long as the pus is completely drained; after treatment, follow it up with cleansing until it is healed; and it is not advisable to use this cautery unless by one who has studied medicine for a long time and knows how these ailments can be worsened.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can safely operate, but I still think it is better to leave it.
dou cautere de pleuresin	Fire cautery
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	They say that one should make cautery on the pleura with roots of aristologe, in this way: take a long root of aristologe, the largest you can find, dry and as thick and as long as your arm; moisten it in oil, heat it over fire, and cauterize between the ribcage and collarbone, and make smaller cautery descending into the area beneath the beard; and cauterize between the fifth and sixth ribs, slightly sloping behind; and one cautery across the anus, and another on the stomach, and between the shoulders, and along both sides of the lower ribs, removing the cautery between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but hold it open as if smelling something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And they say that no old man should use fire cautery like a razor, scorching it and placing it between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess; and there is great pain, as we have said about the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this case, there is great fear among the patients, and many die now, or a fistula appears that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said about the divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit, then they attach three ways of cautery that are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Dislocate the joint in such a way that you make three cauterizations, or four, according to the length of the bone, and the figure of the cautery we have mentioned before; do not press your hand too hard on the cautery, and let the patient be cautious on his back. Another method of cauterization is to heat the cautery with two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; ease the pain that is in the bone where you remove the cautery, or the patient's complaint comes from the left side, and raise up accordingly to the pain, according to the length of the body, and make the cauterization according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After you have withdrawn the two nerves, inflame them until the bone is felt on the other side, then quickly remove the cautery, and thus you will have four. And if you see that the cauterization is not complete at three nerves, continue to cauterize at three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After treatment when the pus has drained for a long time, this is more effective than any of the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	The term "ydropisie" is the Old French form
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery is not effective against hydrops, except in the manner known as "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	If your treatment according to the methods we have discussed in sections does not help, then you should make four cauterizations around the wound, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in the anus; and the cauterizations should be close to the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the cautery open for a long time to allow pus to drain, and not letting the treatment of the sick person continue after the cautery, healing would be hastened, and the two cuts would heal together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the abdomen is the nail that we have shown before, and for the back it is olive-shaped, according to what has been placed before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the stones
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the stones are swollen in a person who is jaundiced and filled with dark urine, you should cauterize just below the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and gently hold your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not press too deeply, so as to close the natural opening; thus the heat from the fire will penetrate the flesh according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After that, make two fires on each leg, one at the tip of the cutaneous edge, and the other opposite, near the knee; leave the fires to grow long without healing, allowing the skin to heal; then perform the other treatments we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the wound
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When abdominal pain arises from cold and moisture, the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by any means; you see the patient suffering greatly with intense pain, so perform a large fire on the stomach according to what has been said before about the stomach fire, or a fire around the navel with subtle fires placed at every cautery, and two fires on the haunches.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, make a burn on the finger, and a burn on every part, and small burns on the gentle stomach, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	**On the Treatment of Hemorrhoids**
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are at the root, or in one or more places, and they have been long-standing and are composed of corrupt cold and moist humors, they are treated as we have said in divisions, but these cauterizations do not help: On the spine of the back, that which is entirely deprived of warmth, gently apply and gradually in a triangular pattern; one cauterization below the buttocks two times; and if you think his stomach is chilled, and the meat does not cook, and bloating is seen on the face, then apply a strong cauterization on the stomach as has been said before, and another on the liver, and yet another on the heart at all cauterizations; and leave the cauterization open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, reset the shoulder as long as it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	from the fleshiness called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you deal with the fleshiness (thelul), if the cautery appears too sharp, then take a hot iron and burn it into that flesh; leave it in place until the cautery has healed, from which the wound will close; do this once or twice, and if there is much flesh, cauterize each area as we have said; after the beneficial treatment of ointments, as long as they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large iron on the chest (alchatim), it will provide greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	From the poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or incising, which we will describe in its place, such a disease comes that it cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When no vein becomes fistulated, and there is swelling, putrefaction, and corrupt moisture, you must try all sorts of subtle remedies, and be sure to know at every stage how effective they are.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery to a sharp point, insert it into the fistula according to the amount that the attempt has entered, and repeat the cautery until the putrid and corrupt parts are burned once, or twice, or three times, depending on the amount required; be careful not to burn the surrounding nerves and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	It seems like there might be a formatting issue with the text provided, but I will do my best to translate each line as it is:
de la maladie des reins	Of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When kidney pain accompanied by heavy urination and a weak woman cannot be treated otherwise, it is necessary to perform fire cautery on both sides of the kidneys with the cautery clamp that we have mentioned before; if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a row, and this will bring greater relief.
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from pain and moisture, preventing patients from urinating, cautery should be performed in the lower part on the surface of the bladder, where the hairs begin to grow, both on the right and left sides, making each cautery about as long as a thumb; it can also be cauterized at the back, if necessary; and the cautery clamp is used according to the shape mentioned before.
de la marris	Of the pain
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the wound is cold and moist, it does not allow for healing, and the flowers (scabs) are corrupted and their growth is delayed; when they do form, they cause great pain. Then you must make three cauterizations around the edge, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizations on the back; and these cauterizations should be done with a knife, as we have said.
de la hainche	de la hainche" translates to "of the spine
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moisture descends to the spine box and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the leg appears shorter than the other when measured together; and there is found a weak department of the nerves, then you must cauterize the patient over the spine box with a cautery in the shape of a circle, marking before the bone around the box as it turns, so that the box is within the circle; and the cautery should be like that which was used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present for you, perform three cauterizations from the great olive tree, and let the cauterization be as effective as all the others; and treat until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the back (or "hainche" as written)
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain arises in the back (or "hainche") due to cold and moisture, and the patient is cured through the methods we have described, but the cure is ineffective, and the illness persists, then it is necessary to purge the patient of foul humors with either bad-smelling pills or other similar good pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	Afterward, he performs cautery; and the manner of cautery is according to two methods: that is to say, together with burning medications, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is performed in many ways, of which one is: you cauterize along the collarbone, making three triangular cauterizations according to this form, with a good depth and width, and leave space between each cauterization equal to the thickness of two fingers, and they are olive-shaped. Never should cautery be performed in the middle on top of the collarbone, for there should be three according to this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, cauterize with the cautery around the circle that we have spoken of in the dislocation of the spine; but do it in such a way that the circle contains all the spine, and all the branches of the heart are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the method used in sciatica when the pain is confined to the spine and does not reach the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if the pain reaches the thigh and leg, make two cauteries here where the patient feels the pain, and one above the ankle, slightly to the left; these should be cutting cauteries, and burn the thick parts of the heart; and if the patient feels the pain extending up to the knee or near it, cauterize that area three or four times, depending on where he feels the most pain, and this cautery is called 'point'.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the pain is so intense in the knee and down to the thigh, then apply a hot iron or circular cautery, but be very careful with all your cauterizations that you do not leave them burning for too long and damage the tendons and large arteries, nor cause the patient any greater harm or contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who have applied cauterization to the ankle of the foot, and left it until the leg was completely swollen, and the foot as well, and it became pierced and corrupted throughout the entire foot.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After an abdominal solution, he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, apply cautery to one and the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise ones say about the cautery of the hainche (ribs), which is the way, take a hot iron, as thick as a new date palm twig, or slightly thinner, and make it twisted, either spirally twisted or with one end twisted towards the other; twist it over both parts, keeping it tight like our little finger, and use a well-made iron. This is its shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heat it until it is completely red and emits steam, then place it on the diseased rib cage, twist towards the healthy side; cauterize once the cautery is hot, and leave it for three days. Then apply butter poultice and keep the wound open for a long time; after treatment, as long as it heals.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albuscasim says that we should use this cautery little because of the fear of its regard, and we should see few who use it; yet these are good cauterizations, which the patient can endure, and where it is appropriate.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The burning medicine cauterization is such that you make a tool with a descending edge along the margin of the door, and it should be either of iron or steel on a long pole. In the middle, there should be a space as wide as a finger, and it should be opened both from below and above, and they should join together in this form.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing the board of the loin on the patient lying on his side, and quickly covering your hand with the board of the loin, pour between the two circles of hot awes that have been heated over a fire, and leave them for an hour, allowing the patient to endure the heat and burn.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it has a true bite, similar to fire. After the bite has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and remove the hot awes one by one, leaving them for three days, applying butter until the blackening from the burn disappears; this should be left for three days, allowing the wound to heal completely.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make the instrument that turns according to what you have done in the hip similarly; and this is the way of hot awl, and I have written it in the treatment of rectifying medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and live chalk, in equal amounts from each, and grind them together, and put them into a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Or, make a small hole with a sharp object so that the tip of it can enter; and place this pot into another well-sealed pot, and put alkali and chalk and hot awl on top, until there is twice as much powder at the bottom as you can hold in your hand; and leave it thus until the hot liquid has descended and become cold and viscous or solid within the sealed pot. Then take all of this liquid and pour it over chalk and alkali just as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And thus it will be very powerful and is effective in many medical operations and other cauteries, for it acts like fire, and if used with other medicines such as fomentation, honey, anacardium, and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together...
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Gallien tells us of a cure for a noble who suffered from the pain of sciatica and stiffness in the back, and he said that no other remedy was used, and that the patient was completely healed just once when this treatment was applied, and he recommended bathing as follows...
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And prepare it in this manner: you press the verbena root, both fresh and dry, and grind it well with a little fat, and apply it to the hip and thigh and leg where the pain resides, and wrap it; leave it for three hours or according to the amount so that the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him take a bath or a drink as long as the body is slightly warm, and make him lie down, and the pain will entirely disappear and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use fire cautery with such remedies, unless after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's hoof fire, it provides great relief; and the cautery should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take lint and grease it with old oil, and apply it to the fossa between the big toe and the one called the hallux.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After that, take dry goat hooves, set them on fire until they are charcoals, and place them on the cloth, leaving them until they are stained; and keep repeating this, ceasing only when you think by sensation that it has reached the hip, and the pain ceases; and this method of cauterization is called "goat hoof cautery.
de la dolor dou dos	Of the great pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When great pain comes to the back, whether from striking or pressure, or from excessive evacuation, or from some similar cold, expanding substance, none of these signs warrants cautery, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold material.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	Afterward, it is necessary that the patient be emptied of foul pills or other similar substances, and on the part where the pain resides, make three lines with a sign of a cross, and in each line perform five cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cauterizations should be done using a cautery called 'point'; and if you see fit, make three or four cauterizations at the medium cautery following this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This illness often comes to small children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a tight throat when they swallow, and fear; and you feel a sharp pain in the back's last spine and an appearance on the others that come from the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and observe it healing, cauterize it with the cautery iron according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	The cautery should mark each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, cauterize around the spine with the cautery iron, making two or three lines, and let the points be close to one another.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treatment, keep the limb as healthy as possible according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply heat to numb any nerve pain.
de la dolor des jointes	joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain is caused by moisture that spreads throughout a limb, and when the pain comes in waves, they call it "gout" properly speaking, and when it is due to a cold cause and cannot be cured by medicines, then cautery is used as follows: make several cauterizations around the affected joint of the foot, and let the cauterization be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary to prick on the face with a needle, make the cauterization all around with a claim of "no point.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, make cauterization on each knee with three or four cauteries from every side, all around olive-shaped; and if you need more, do so, but don't hold your hand too tightly until the heat of the heart is gone.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and back, apply the cautery as we have said in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the fingers with two lines; and if there is no pain at all, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the wrists or shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good care to the patient and take medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give good care and purge the flu, it will be healed by God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the pain
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When a rupture occurs in the intestines, and the bowels descend into the coils, it is important that when you attempt to cure it, you do not disturb them until they are healed. You should use things that leave the belly relaxed so that the intestines can descend from the belly; afterwards, make him lie on his back between your hands, and order him to keep his breath until the bowels are repaired, and arrange them in your hands, and sign with a pin the rupture on the bone of the forearm, and at any place it appears similar to half a circle above the body. Then heat the cautery as described:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as it is white and exudes scent.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bones to their proper places; and have the attendants hold his hand so that he does not pull back; and thoroughly open the patient's thighs, and place a cushion and a support under his thighs, and another on his penis, which keeps his hands still; then apply the cautery to the sign over your entire hand, holding it straight and firm until you reach the bone, and if you do not touch the bone the first time, repeat it again until you do; be careful that the joint does not escape when you perform the cautery; do not burn him; and ensure that the patient does not die, or suffer any other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is in vain.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And the cauterizer of children should be subtle according to their size, and for adults as large as them; after three days cure the wound with butter until the burning is healed; afterwards treat other wounds until they are clean, and lay the patient on his back for forty days until the wound is well sealed; and it is important that his movements be restricted for a long time so that the boils do not burst when he gets up to go to bed.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wishes to stand up, apply a well-made compress and repeat it for another forty days; and he should have good rest, engaging in light work and guarding against excessive drinking and eating, and also avoiding loud shouting; and following these instructions, he will be entirely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will now describe the treatment for cutting in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other abdomens and are known not to heal, you should perform cauterization with a hot iron according to its extent, either on the third day or later; then follow the treatment as we have described; and no one of the ancients has said that it should be cauterized with a three-angled iron in this manner.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the place of the hernia with a sign, and make a line across the width of the rupture; then another from above, and hold your hand steady over the entire area where the hot iron will be applied.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cautery is lighter and more manageable.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain arises in any member, whether from a fall or an injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and the cure of medicine is ineffective, then it should be cauterized with the cautery known as "point," and the cautery must be applied according to the length of the member and its smallness, and its weakness, and its strength, and its twist, and its location, and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If the patient is cured by the first cautery, that is good; if not, begin another cautery on the same part, for it often happens that the limb closest to it must move, so you should perform cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	It appears that the term "de meselerie" is
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	These ailments are never helped by cautery alone, especially the illness that arises from the putrefaction of fluids and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	You can cauterize it if the illness is in its beginning, and if it has been cured according to what we have said in the division, without delay or hesitation, and you doubt that the corruption does not spread throughout the patient, then do the following cautery: first on the head, starting from the new hair, and towards the front at the end of the beard; then on both horns, and behind on the nape; and leave your hand so that the cautery reaches the bone, and as far as the skin comes out, so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape; cauterize it on the neck according to what is necessary.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if the disease is widespread throughout, it appears clearly that you must cauterize these cauteries that we have mentioned above: first, cauterize in the armpit, then cauterize on the spine of the neck, and sixth on the spine of the back, and greatly on the cramp and another delicate one, and two on each shoulder; and two on the elbows, and two on the tender parts of the pis, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and in the pits of the hands; and beware of the nails that are on the last toe, so that you do not burn them; never make a cautery on the bone of the wrist, or another on the stomach bone, or another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more you perform cauterization, the greater the aid it provides and moves the patient; and know that the sick do not feel pain from cauterization as the healthy do, because the body is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauterization be great or small according to the members and joints, as you will find in the ways of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment, apply flour of grains with honey and other remedies until it is healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling appears in any member and is cured by medicines, oils, and bandages, but it is not completely healed, then do cautery on the member according to its size and the nature of the member; and let the cautery be slightly inside the hope of the heart; then cure with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And never should cautery be done on the hand, foot, or back, at the end of the nerve that controls the member, and thus if the swelling is removed; nevertheless, no one should intervene unless they are knowledgeable about the members and the passages of the moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	Of albaras (albaras could refer to a
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is ignited, and the medical arts are powerless against it, then cauterize with a hot iron according to the extent of the injury, until the white flesh is removed and its color changes; then apply a cure made of flour, peas, lentils, with rose oil, plantain leaves, and collic and alder sap, each in equal parts; mix them together, wrap it in a cloth, and keep it at the fire until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of a ulcer (chancre) by cauterization.
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a ulcer appears at the beginning, and you wish to stop it, cauterize it with the cautery that seems like a circle around the entire edge of the ulcer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	Yet wise men say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the ulcer; however, I do not find this good, as I fear it may become infected and corrupted, and I have never seen it work any better; and a more correct thing is to cauterize around it, with the cautery called 'circle', as we have said about many cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	from the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When anyone has a disease called "adubelati," and it does not kill them because of the excess it creates or due to old age, when they are debilitated (that is, too much) and have little blood, or because of time; and you see them hastening to die: then cauterize around with many small cauteries by pricking; after that leave them alone.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	Because it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing through all the cauterization, make the cautery so hot that this is its shape:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the midst of this ill-named 'adubelati' disease until the cauterizer has perceived the heart, and it is arranged as the cauterizer wishes, so that the patient feels freed in such a way that the course of the decay is halted.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure, until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	Heal the fire with iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another type of disease is called 'corrodens', which is nothing other than a corruption of the limbs, as it attacks the members just as fire does the dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a limb that can be treated with fire cautery, then heat the cautery knives very small and large, according to what is suitable for the limb or the illness; after cauterizing from all sides until you have eradicated all corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then leave it for three days, and apply oil to the cauterized limb suffering from broying until all the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of wounds that cause pain.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if after three days the wound does not heal, it is good; and if not, the cautery should be repeated on that which remains stuck in the corrupted joint.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	This mixture is sometimes cured with a sharp medicine instead of fire cautery; however, the fire cautery provides greater aid. I have already described the remedy for the sharp medicine in detail: take it as needed.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	from the vessels that come as pieces
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that a piece due to deficiency develops a disease called "close" according to our intention, and it is a great fault that damages the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the treatment for this illness is according to two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This refers to fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	In fire cautery, you heat the cautery (a tool similar to a pen with a sharp point) over a flame until it can pierce the skin from all sides, and it has subtle edges; then apply it to the affected area, turning your hand around the entire area of the wound until it reaches the bottom of the skin. Leave it for three days so that putrefaction begins; then make a poultice with crushed mugwort and leave it on overnight. The nail will fall off and be removed from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the shoulder with a healing ointment, making it clean and sound.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are turned by fire within the body, and often occur in hands and feet, it is necessary to apply hot water cautery; and this is done thus: take a rod of iron or steel, or a quill from a vulture's wing, and place the nail and the peg (that is, the splint) on it, for the treatment of warts; then place the rod over it so that it encloses everything around it, and pour some hot water upon it, holding your hand firm, and turn your hand so that the edge of the rod reaches to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water deep down to the root; and allow the patient to bear the bite of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will come out with all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	First, make one after another, until you straighten all those that are in the body, then treat the wounds that cause harm.
li cure dou trembler	It cures the shivering.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When anyone shivers from cold or quartan fever or another illness, it is necessary that you make four cauterizations or five on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each spine; and one cauterization on the buttocks, and one on the stomach with an olive cautery; if this stops the shivering and hastens the healing from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	from the pus-filled blisters
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Never is the body's health apparent through external baths or pus-filled blisters, which come from deeply corrupt materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	it is necessary at first to recognize when they appear that we perform cauterization on each head of the pustule: a delicate cauterization with a firestick of myrtle, from which the point is taken to the fire, or with long roots of aristologe, or with a lenticular cauterization.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And never should cauterization be performed at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, so that it cannot grow worse in advance, but it breaks down the excesses from which it comes, and becomes healthy; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut off
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many serious consequences arise from the blood of an artery that is cut in the wound, or in the case of a permanent opening, or incising an abscess, or cauterizing a limb, and similar things; it is a very grievous thing to become infected.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Nevertheless, if this happens to anyone, act quickly and place your index finger on the wound in the vein, and stretch it very gently until the pain subsides entirely under your touch; then take several small and large olive oil cauteries, as hot as possible, and apply them; then, according to the size of the wound and the position of the artery, place the cautery on the vein where you are holding your finger, and hold it there until the pain is completely gone.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if a sudden leap occurs while you are lying with your arm over the vein, and the cauterization is complete, then quickly take another cautery from the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And continue to apply one after the other until the wound is completely healed; be careful not to damage the nerve nearby, and ensure no further harm comes to the patient; and know that when the flow from an artery is cut off, it cannot be properly stopped, especially if the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have mentioned: cauterization, extraction when untreated, tying it tightly with thread, or applying medications that have the power to stop blood flow; and ensure it is securely bandaged.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers relief to a tight closure with cloths or places burning objects or similar things on it, will not be successful unless he does it carefully.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to someone and he has no suitable medicine at hand, he must apply his finger directly to the wound of the vein as we have said, pressing firmly until all pain subsides from the wound and the vein; and he should not move it, but often moisten it with cold water while it remains very cold until the blood becomes congealed and thickens and stops hurting. And make inquiries about what he needs for cauterization and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	We begin the second book of surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about every illness where it is necessary to use fire cautery or burning medicine, and we have explained the herbs, causes, instruments, and forms of cautery; I have placed this chapter immediately after the one on the head because it will be easier for those who wish to learn.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, before we begin, it is necessary for you to know that this chapter involves greater risk and fear than the first one on cautery, and therefore requires more careful attention.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many ways of people come for cure.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	if they come from such who have become so afflicted by their illness that they die quickly due to the severity of their condition and the magnitude of their suffering; of these one should be afraid.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And there are those who give you hope, saying, "Wait, I am whole"; but the illness is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	You should not consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put more great care in your honor than in your greed, and do not act rashly but wisely concerning those of whom you are certain, and from whom you can safely take and let go; and use divination and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health may be restored; and through this, you will help to gain good repute, glory, and lasting memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Most precious child, Our Lords give you good understanding and rectitude, and if you desire the holy inspiration from His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter for you, reflecting on chapters of surgery, according to the one that is before or at the end of the chapter on cautery, which I have devised from head to foot, so that you may find it easier to understand what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Dou chief plein d'aigue" translates to "a head full of blood
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	You know that this illness often comes to children at birth, and when the head of the child is too tightly compressed, it never happens for a reason that one can discern.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease but in children, and to all those that I have seen, death comes quickly; and for this reason, I think it is best to leave the work in parts for treatment.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw children whose joints were filled with water, and the head became swollen each day until it could not be supported; the moisture was so great that it caused death, and this moisture is collected under the bone next to the sinew, between the heart and the bone; and the work is such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, so you must make a wide cut in the head until the moisture flows out; and it should be as long as necessary, until the moisture has drained; and see the shape of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more severe, and the abscess larger, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is between the bones, and you see the openings of the sinuses on each side of the head wide open, and there is a sharp, strong flow when you press with your hand inside, and it does not return to its place, then you must make three cuts in the middle of the head in this way:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture completely.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After holding the cracks of drapes and powders, and applying wine and oil, leave it thus for up to five days; then loosen it, and dress the wound with bandages and plasters, and stretch the head equally, and give the patient dry meat from a bag of moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another method of incision is that you observe or measure the size of the abscess and the arrangement of the fluid; for it never appears in front, nor behind, nor on the right, nor on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	So measure the abscess and the amount of fluid, and cut according to your ability; be careful not to block the artery; then comes flux of blood, so that the patient dies slowly from the flow of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of the root
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When someone has a condition called "cataract" in one or both eyes, and the disease is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the final remedy is cauterization by sealing the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you have sealed their eyes, the patient should turn their head away; then rub the affected area with a rough cloth until the arteries open, and gently pull the skin away from the eye with all your cloth; then observe where the vein is located, and mark the positions of the limbs behind the ears, and make sure they are relaxed; then sign the areas to be cauterized, and use a sharp instrument to cut both arteries, reaching as deep as the bone, making incisions across the wide part of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, remove the spatule beneath the artery and cut through the covering above, cutting as it should go through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, it bleeds continuously from above.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open when pressed, it is necessary to measure the space with three fingers, then seal it with a string and make it extend to the bone; and this amount of blood, it is six parts, or perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear and the filling of the artery. Then attend to the wound: if there is no discharge from pus on the bone, cut open the wound and bind it, and treat with medication until it heals.
de emigrainne	from migraine headache
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migraine headache occurs, accompanied by catarrh, due to moisture in the eyes and sockets, and ancient fatigue and similar symptoms, it is treated with various medical cures, but often without success. Therefore, we drain the arteries of the eyes and apply cautery, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method for extracting them is that the patient pulls out the hairs from his temples and locates the artery that opens in the temple, as it opens clearly due to its pulsation, and is protected from being seen by anyone who is not an expert. If it is exposed, the patient gently squeezes some cloth around it, then rubs the area with a rough cloth, and soaks it in hot water until the artery becomes visible; then take the spatula with this shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	then scrape the skin gently until you reach the artery, then treat it with pincers, and carefully separate the threads that hold it in each part; and if the artery is thin, twist it to the tip of the hook, then cut off that part according to the quantity of two joints.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, it does not heal at all without pain.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And treat the blood from the sixth to the third; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you bind it with two strong silk threads so that no pus comes before the wound heals, and no further bleeding occurs; then cut off the excess between the two threads at the same time, and if you see fit, cauterize the wound with a hot iron until the bones are cut through; this is the moving part, if the patient does not have fever and has a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cautery is aid to finish off moisture: for this reason it is of greater aid against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary to extract arteries, one should fill the space with thick cotton and place several well-made bandages; and when they are loosened, take care to apply dry medicines that produce heat, and bandage again until healed; and if there is no delay in treating the artery, hasten to cover it with cautery, or use vitriole (a caustic substance) and press with your hand so that the wound is cleansed; and if you do not have this at hand, put snow on the wound until the bleeding stops, and gently press as needed; and in the extraction of arteries, it is better to cauterize the vein from both sides, but the cuts should be well-spaced to preserve their heat for a longer time.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too tight, they do not hold their heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have a sufficient space between the two blades, and then, when you have sealed the two joints, place the hot iron over until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and they should be far apart between the two joints, because this cautery is not properly joined in every way; and this is the shape of the cautery.
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes descend into the veins that are on the top of the head, and no medicine helps, you see the face of the patient contort, feeling as if from a cold, and the skin is tense and moist so that the hairs of the eyelids fall out, and the eyelids are scorched by the heat of the tears, then this cure is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called this the ancient "scab cure," and what you do for the patient suffering from this disease is to shave the hair on their forehead, then make three cuts on the forehead evenly according to its length; one of the cuts goes all the way across the front, down to the nose, and the other two cuts are made along the sides, above the eyelids, but beware of incising the arteries that are by the side. Keep your hand away from the continuity of the jawbones, and let each wound be as deep as three fingers across; then take a piece of sponge and cloth to wipe away the blood, and use the spatula (in the shape shown) for this purpose.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is made on the temple up to the second incision; then scrape all the flesh that is between the two cuts to the full satisfaction that is on the bone, then make another from the middle incision up to the other second, and then extract this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you insert the instrument called "cultellaire" (a type of scalpel) into the first cut, it should be very sharp on one side and soft on the other; this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	and place the sharp side of the instrument towards the opposite edge (of the bone) and the soft side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the joints, so that the incision is continuous until it opens towards the heart, and then make another narrow slit until it reaches the other side; and then extract the blood evenly, and press out the blood through a cloth; then place a piece of old cotton in each slit, and cover them with damp cloths dipped in wine, oil, and ash, and ensure that no abscesses form; and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and administer a strong infusion of water, then apply basilicon treatment with rose oil, and other remedies to heal wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	dou reume des eulz (in this context) translates to "until the
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	As for any sudden catarrh that is accustomed to coming, and you see the thick and small ones, weakening the sight, and burning the papers; and the hair falls out, and it feels as if a sharp pain is piercing in the head, and the patient sneezes; then know from these symptoms that this matter and this catarrh do not come from one but many veins, and the moving cure that is there, is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And instruct the patient to bend his forehead backward, then make a deep cut across the forehead, and another one quite wide.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begin from the cut in the left temple to the right temple, making the incision down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerve of the temples that move when you blink. When the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood out with a sponge, then separate the two edges of the cut and insert old cotton, and cover it with linen. Then wrap moistened cloth soaked in wine and oil over it and be careful to keep the area warm; when the bone has healed, rub the bone gently until it begins to feel strong again, then apply drying agents that help heal well.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of wheat flour and three parts of colophony, and make a paste; apply it to these wounds to promote healing everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	ear inflammation
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Anything that causes pain in the ears is one of four things: grains, animals, minerals or similar objects; seeds such as beans, peas; or fluid-like substances such as water and ice, and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	If anything, such as a stone or any other object that does not adjust to the ear or grow in the ear, is inserted into the ear, it should be removed and the ear exposed to sunlight.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see a stone, and it distills any little drop of purple oil or frankincense oil, then it is ready for extraction; and the act causes a sneeze from the condition, and it stops the nostrils when sneezing occurs, and places pieces of cloth or wool inside the ear, and stretches the ear towards the top.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times this treatment brings fever; and if it does not bring fever, then extraction is performed with delicate pincers, like this:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If the extraction with pincers brings fever, that is good; if not, perform extraction with an intricate, small instrument with a double edge; and if it still does not bring fever, make a chain of aram and close the top of the chain around the ear hole tightly, and stuff what's around the chain with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the chain; then treat it thoroughly, because fever often follows in this manner; and if it does not come about in this way, take great care to remove all debris, and insert a pointed instrument where necessary, and place a little cotton inside; then press the clot onto the stone or something similar, and treat it.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not follow all these things that we have said, then hasten to pierce the ear so that the abscess hardens and calms; and the manner of piercing is as follows: you must first cleanse the patient with the headache, extract the blood according to its strength, then place the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, making a small cut at the base of the ear where the fat or tissue is attached; let the cut be like a crescent moon until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck on it with your mouth; and the cure as long as it remains healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if there are grains present and they swell, then perform extraction; and if they cannot be extracted, then use a delicate knife according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not attempt this if you think the grain is moist from earwax, having made many attempts; then extract it with subtle tweezers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is light.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case that something has entered the ear, have the patient use a gentle sneeze, and open the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And lie down on that same ear, or the water is inside.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If she jumps through the fire, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If the fire is no longer hot, take many small twigs according to the length of your thumb and gently insert them into the flame; then put the patient's ear in a gap between two of these twigs, and from another side, stab it with a sharp object, and attach another twig to the one in the ear. Continue this process of applying twig after twig until all the blood is completely drained, and thus, she will jump out entirely; and if you see fit, take a thin wire, and insert one end into the ear canal, and twist the other end with fire until the thinner twig is burned through. Then repeat this process with other twigs until all the blood is completely drained.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	During the removal of an animal, if it is small like a bug or similar, treat it as we have said in the previous section; but if it is large and can be felt, use pincers for its removal, and this is the easiest thing to extract from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	When removing worms from the ears, if you treat it as we have said in the previous section and the cure does not help, you should examine the ear in sunlight: if no worms are visible, use fine pincers to remove them, and if they still cannot be seen, take care to notice their shape.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it should be tight from below and wide from above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And then insert the most subtle tube into the ear according to the amount of suffering of the patient, drawing out all the pus; do this often until all the infection is gone.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not come out, stop the canal with cotton as I mentioned in the previous treatment; and if they do not come out easily as we said, administer distillations that the ancients have tested in treating worms, and you will find them or learn about distillations in the ear using these instruments, forming a shape as you see.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And take a fine needle of silver or gold and pierce it through the small opening, and over it pour to distill; and to press within the distillation with a well-made brass instrument, and if you see fit, use a razor and wrap it closely around the tip carefully; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever you choose from your medicines in the candle, and place the candle in the ear; then insert the razor entirely wrapped in cotton, and press your hand firmly until the oil is distilled or the candle slightly cools; and let the patient feel the sensation within, and let the distillation be warm as if it were distilled in the ear; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	From ear trauma
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born with any perforation in their ears; and the same thing happens to adults due to a wound or something stuck inside the ear, and this obstruction never completely closes if it cannot be seen; and sometimes the perforation becomes closed, but no one can see it.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	When the obstruction completely closes, if it cannot be seen, it is due to poor healing in various dispositions, and in this case, you should place the patient's ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the inflation appearing, check for all these tiny openings from which the shape emerges.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And make cuts and incisions all around, but not through the ear; if the infection is from a foreign body or the cartilage of the ear, hold it with fine pincers and gently pry it out, until all the bones are removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	If the infection is completely within the ear, take a fine, sharp razor, heat it slightly over fire, and insert it into the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the infection in the ear where the patient feels great pain, make a slight perforation, and be careful not to injure the nerve of the ear; then insert into the ear a piece of cloth according to the width of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Keep the bandage on as long as the wound is fresh, or take a cloth and moisten it with rosewater, and sprinkle vitriol powder on top; and if you see the ear swollen, it is necessary to remove the bandage and apply another moistened cloth made of rosin oil and wax, until the swelling subsides; then treat it as long as it is clean.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and use other treatments to stop the bleeding, which include using distillation remedies.
de la char des papieres	concerning the use of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Gather all the papers that come from the eyes when they are moist and dry; it is necessary to extend them with pliers and pincers, and cut off the top of a spatula from its roots; then place it on vitriol powder.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if, after removing the outer layer, the cautery is performed with a delicate lenticular cautery, and the surgeon performs the incision afterward, it must be done repeatedly; for often nothing remains of their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned, and they do not return.
de la gresle	(without context it's difficult to provide an accurate translation, but based
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times come to paper certain things that seem grim in their form and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "frost," and it is a gathering of great moisture on the paper above and below; the work is as follows: be vigilant if the frost becomes silent from one side to the other, and this is a slight thing to know; then make them wide, and scrape each part lightly, and take them with pincers, and cut.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cover them without piercing the paper slightly, it causes no harm to the patient; and if the split is great, and the gathering has a stitch, treat it as long as it remains healthy; but if it is small, make no strong effort, for the adhesions will restore it soon enough and cause trouble.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the pain is descending inside the ear towards the top part, turn the paper against it, and the pain will grip with pinches, and the heat and pressure from both sides; and when the paper is removed by incision, it causes no harm; and once the pain is cut away, lift the salt water to wash out the wound until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	from the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	The condition is a fat that is embedded in the skin beneath the paper, and it occurs more often in children than adults, causing great pain to their eyes, and leading to cataracts in the mornings, preventing them from gazing the light of the sun because tears constantly flow from their eyes; and due to this, they rest their faces on their hands, sleeping on them, and the fat beneath their eyebrows becomes swollen and appears as if it has been opened by the exinac (presumably referring to a type of eye condition or inflammation).
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the joint with your fingers and feel the exit between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient places his head in a healthy position; then he takes a linen cloth and prepares a tent-like shape according to the quantity of the discharge from each part, and puts it on top; and presses with his fingers on both sides so that the discharge is gathered within the circle; then, using a sharp spatula, they make a groove not wider than the wound made in the vein; and they continue cutting until they reach the discharge; and in various dispositions, the discharge comes out from the groove in the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Take then a whole piece of cloth dipped in hot water between your fingers, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is spread; and be careful not to press into the wound, do not reach all the way to the oil, do not touch it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	If the wound does not open up immediately when pressing, gently widen the wound a little bit; then extract it as we have said, and apply damp cloth in hot water and place on the wound, and wrap tightly.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such people who grind and apply something to corrupt the moisture that is stuck.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it as long as it remains healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the hot abscess, treat it with external plasters soothing as long as it remains healthy.
des poilz des papieres	hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hair grows abnormally in papers (scalp) other than its natural state, it becomes irritated, causing harm and leading to conditions similar to scabs and mollifications of the papers (skin), and albugine (a type of skin condition), as long as it is caused by the destruction of the hairs; and the cure is according to four methods: either with fire cautery altogether, or with acute medicine according to what is mentioned in the preceding chapter on cautery, or through incision and stitching, or with bands, as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You should place the patient's head in your healthy hand, then turn the paper from the oil on your left hand; if it turns, that's good; if not, use an needle through all the threads above; and be careful around the edge of the paper where the hairs grow, pulling the thread above everything on the paper, and turn it against the razor. Then cut along the paper, beneath the hairs, adjusting them carefully, from the large tear to the small one. Then extract the thread, and place beneath the paper a thin piece of cotton and cloth, then sign on the paper a figure of an anchor, like the shape of myrtle, and ensure the figure is according to the amount you raise the paper, which is measured at all times.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if you take a piece of paper with plenty of ink according to how soft the paper is; then make incisions over all two lines that you have marked, and begin from the large tear down to a small one; and it should be one of the fissures close to the natural hairs, in the thickness of a root. Then cut the edge into one of the two angles towards the heart, and scrape off all of it. Then bring together the two edges with a single stitch with a thin piece of thread, and dry up the blood, and remove the excess threads from both sides onto any non-stick things; if you do this properly. And if not, don't worry about the stitching or the threads for three or four days. Then treat the wound without stitching with drying and constricting substances, because paper revives at the healing of the wound and its gathering together, but the stitch is moved (as the ancients say), and it is a job done without fear; and if in another way: and that is to mark the paper with a shape like the leaf of mirth, as we have said, three incisions according to the form below:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then take those who are weak and equalize their small forces according to this form:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the pincers and the thing is not even, take a needle with thread and tie it around the figure; then another thread through the large wound, and the third thread through the small one, and arrange them equally between your two fingers; then gently lower your hand equally, and relax all the skin where you have made a mark, as we have said, then close the two edges of the wound with stitches and treat it until it is healed; and if an abscess forms at your incision, soothe it with wax and other similar dressings that relieve; and sometimes the paper-like tissue grows back: it is necessary to use what we have said about the incision; but stitching in one way or another is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure for a broken bone is as follows: take paper and shape it inside according to what I said, then make two splints by art, thin and long like the paper and with ample width; wrap each part where you hold the bones; carefully assemble both parts on top of the paper from the oil, and stretch the two splints from the formed parts; leave it thus for several days, and the bone that is constrained will heal and stop aching and will grow back, as long as it adheres to itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays and the fracture involves powerful forces, then treat it as long as it is healthy; and when the wound is deep, and if lifting the paper does not cause pain anymore, and the bones no longer move; this is the shape you will make the splints according to this figure, and according to this quantity in length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work requires such skill that you pierce the skin with a very fine needle, and wrap it with soft and fine silk thread; then join the parts together and tie them subtly, making the length of the threads one palm's length; then arrange in the wound another very fine thread of silk briefly, and tie it around the edges; then place the patient's head on your healthy side; and let the sun warm it so that the work is revealed, for it is a subtle and delicate work. Then pull the needle all the way through the wound at the base of the hair, piercing the paper gently until you treat it over the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the wound in the paper with the natural hair. And withdraw your hand until the hairs come out entirely from the wound in the paper along with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the wound is treated and the hairs do not grow with it, you will pull the wound out from the root to all the thread you have ordered, until the wound is completely freed from above and you see it through the eye of the needle; then you will pull the wound and the thread, close the eye, and leave it for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and the scar tissue forms. If the hairs are small, accompany them with a long natural hair from the horse, and raise them with that, until they elongate and then let go.
de la porriture de l’oil	regarding the impurity of oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this illness called "aleacrati" or putrefaction appears in the body, it can occur in two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or cutting, or cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the method of treating this condition is that you split open the wound, loosen the edges, and insert linen strips inside, securing them until the wound heals; and it is not appropriate to use drying or constricting substances in the treatment.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the illness returns worse than before; but it uses softening substances, such as fenugreek; and rosewater of fresh or dried water and linseed meal, boiled together, and a mixture of garlic butter in one of the eyes, and it envelops a bandage, and treats it thus.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the secret of your cure lies in ensuring it does not harden according to its former shape; and these remedies that we have mentioned are only proper measures for this illness, so that it does not return in the same way as before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the grease that comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This illness which is dislocation, truly called "axacrati," is both natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Accidental dislocation arises from wounds, incisions, cauterization, and similar events; and the method of treatment in such cases is that if you insert an needle, it should have a double thread, and be driven into the flesh on the left side as if it were to the right, so that the thread passes through both sides of the skin; then the skin is pulled taut over the entire needle, and the wound covered with a large bandage.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the shape of the skin returns to its proper place, that is good; if not, take a razor and insert it into the gap, turn the skin, and make two cuts on either side of the incision you made, so that the edges of these cuts form two angles with the incision, creating a shape similar to the letter 'g' in Greek. Then remove the bandage, according to the extent of the displacement on both sides of the skin, from where we previously attached the paper, then adjust the two parts back into their proper positions and sew them together with a thread of wool. Finally, apply the treatments we have mentioned regarding mollifying medicines and poultices until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the illness arises from cutting, stitching, or cauterization, it is necessary to make a clean cut beneath the skin among the hairs, and according to what has been said before; then separate the two leaves of a blade, as I have explained; and one must perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it varies greatly in form, and skilled physicians devise various instruments to restore the natural shape, and the patients themselves, according to what is appropriate for the operation and the tools available.
dou soudement de la papiere	The phrase "dou soudement de la papiere" does not have a clear or straightforward
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this cauterization takes place in a familiar way that the paper on top is smooth with white oil, and it cannot move nor perform its natural functions, then you must insert the tip of a razor under the paper and lift it up; extend it as pincers, until you remove what is hard in the delicate spatula, neither too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient does not suffer from a spatula that is too sharp or bleeds oil; make your incision gently, so that the paper returns to its natural shape; and all of the attached paper heals, without ever leaving saltiness in the oil, or bringing up water from fresh wounds, and then place between the paper and the oil a thin cloth of linen, and on top of the oil lay moist wool in abundance; after the third day, use cologne and things that promote healing until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	from the nail of the finger
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	You know that the nail has two manners: one is nervous and resembles a hard and smooth surface, and another which is not nervous but appears as white, frozen moisture, which, when touched with iron and treated with pliers, no one can do; and both of them begin towards the great tear, growing little by little until they cover the whole sight, light, and movement of the finger.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	The method of incision is as follows: the patient places their head in a healthy position, then opens the joint; takes a piece of paper in their hand, then coils the nail with pliers, extending it upwards; takes an needle, threads a horsehair, or a sinew from a cow or bull onto it, and doubles the tip of the needle, piercing it through the nail entirely, and securing it with thread, stretching it upwards, and scraping all the hair alongside the nail root with a sharp blade, down to the tear duct, leaving the natural shape of the tear duct intact so that the incision does not cause tears; never stretch the nail directly against the clock, only using thread as we have said; then scrape off all the soft tissue around it, giving it this form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be sure that the scalpel does not touch and tear the soft flesh, and that the wound is not pierced; afterwards, after incising, pour a little of the ground silk into the oil, and make a bandage from it with lithargyrum, and leave it until the next day; then treat it as necessary until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot push the needle, and the hooks cannot enter, often this appearance of a nail requires treatment with medicines; as I have described in the previous section, if you see it covered, open the wound gently for the patient, and take the scalpel lightly according to this form.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And cut the nail from above gently, and if you see that it becomes weak and the reason is pressed, it distills from your mouth into a collar made of collyrium (eye drops) of litargire and with a red collar, and stop the oil until the next day; then repeat the other work according to this same procedure, until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing contradicts you about the oil, such as a hot abscess, then apply it, and treat first the hot abscess until it is healed, and then continue the work as before, until it is completely cured.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh causes pain in the eye by great damage, suspending it at the corner and cutting off a part but not all of it, so that tears do not come; then distill into the eye a red collyre made of lithargy.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	on the flesh that is born on the eyelid
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Some people are born without any red flesh on their eyelids, covering and restraining the pupil within the papilles, resembling a rosebud; and this is so effective that the patient can place his head in a healthy position. Then open the eyes and gently pull all the flesh as suitable with the proper force, and cut off the first piece, shaving it down to the bare surface until the end of the process, taking care not to hurt the eye during the procedure. After the incision is complete and all the flesh removed, apply oil of seal or any other medicine that we have mentioned for cutting a nail and similar small forces, shaping the area as demonstrated in this chapter; then soak a piece of cotton in hot oil and place it over the affected area to ensure warmth. If there is no improvement or if the condition worsens, leave the oil and treat the warm aposteme with soothing remedies. Then return to your work until it is healed. This is how all such cuts should be made on the eye by this method.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nevertheless, you must pay attention to the treatment of each weak oil in the natural path; and in the accidental path, in the work of iron; and do not push your hand into any of these works as long as you see that this member suffers from this work.
des voines des eulz	veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	These are the red veins that are covered over the eye, and they steal from the sight their work and weaken the eye every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Skillful is the first that you observe this eye, as it is red, swollen, and there is no other disease outside of the redness; then take these steps: instruct the patient to place their head on your healthy side, then suspend those veins throughout the entire circumference according to your wisdom, and make the incisions delicate in double layers following this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And there should be two incisions according to degrees in the body following this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then, gently coil the veins and wipe off the blood hour after hour until you remove the veins from the flesh; be careful not to damage the oil with the edges of the spatulas, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very diligent in your task so that you do not stop until the veins are removed; and when you have done this, distil green and red collyre into the oil to corrupt what remains from the sebum.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot collect all of them in that hour, make a poultice over the oil with soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and leave it for no more than a day until the pain is eased and the hot abscess is assured, then continue according to this manner as before until it is healed; and this is the form of the veins:
de la fistule de l’oil	from the fistula of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	He observes if they call it "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and acute medicine as I have previously mentioned, and it does not heal, there is a force within it that you must cut into the abscess, where it is destined to die, and remove all the moisture until the bone becomes exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone becomes exposed and you see the corruption and blackness, take all the instruments mentioned here and shape them; it is called "sharp point", and it should be made from iron from head to tip, and pointed like a file as shown in the current form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place the corrupt bone back in its position, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand slightly until you know that corruption is gone; do this several times, then return the joint to its medicinal state.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the joints are fused and it appears that the bowel is also fused, leave it in that state for 40 days, and it will heal and there will be no abscess; be aware that no bad accidents will occur, knowing that it is healthy. If not, there is another way to bring the fistula back to the opening with a knife according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron or medicine, and when it is uncovered, take a forge as shown here, and make three angles in the iron, and narrow it from the top as you can see.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then place it on the delicate bone of the arm, and move your hand away from the wound, then continue all the way around until it pierces the bone and causes the patient pain because they hold their hand close to their body; and then return to using dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the charring and hardening of the bones has occurred, then examine the matter at the joint; if it is a lighter task for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the wound
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the wound is completely open and does not disturb or narrow the passageway, it is necessary to keep the patient still; then apply a healthy dressing, followed by leeching cups or a plaster without causing injury, then cover it with oil made from aloe, myrrh, and incense, and bind it tightly. After allowing the oil to draw out for some time, wrap bandages and cloth around it; and make sure these are soft enough, doubled up in layers of four, and arranged one on top of the other according to the needs of the wound. Then reapply the leeching cups without causing injury, and continue with the poultices, bandages, and bindings tightly for a whole day and night, and check if it becomes easier; if so, remove the bindings during the day and night, and if you see the oil being absorbed, that is good. If not, repeat the poultices, bandages, and bindings until the wound heals.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	loss of fabric integrity
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When there is a tear in the fabric, it opens and allows threads to protrude like resin grains, which is encouraging to observe. If you see this, take a needle and pierce it through the root of the affected part down to the layer above, then insert another needle where the thread forms a double loop, and pierce it. Leave the first needle in place, cut off the thread with the double loop, and tie a piece of the fabric around it, pulling it tightly, then remove the needle and apply fresh, moist lint to the wound until the thread is fully absorbed, and treat the wound with soothing remedies until the injury heals; at no time should the wound be restricted by the fabric in any circular pattern until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the joint appears well-formed, use a fine spatula to pierce it, and drain the white, cloudy moisture, and then reduce it, and extract it as soon as it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the fat of the oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called "alcunnati" is not caused by any fluid gathered in the oil, resembling clear water, but it is not clear; and the manner of its appearance in the work is that you place the patient in a sitting position with their back straight, then take the head between your hands from two sides, and move it until you see the fat rise up to their joints; then insert a needle, and do not let any light escape, and have the patient look at things as they normally would; if the fluid does not drain out, know that it is acute, and the movement of the fat downward is not arranged as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you make the patient rest between your hands, then take the delicate instrument and make incisions on the corneal membrane along the continuation of the conjunctive with the corneal membrane and cornea, until the bowel is released; and when it has been discharged, it distills into clear hot oil mixed with honey, or boiling fennel seed and honey, then apply another remedy until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	The phrase "des aigues de l’oil" translates directly to "of the waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have similar waters in the division, and what is necessary to pierce; doing so according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	You should let the patient rest with their sore hand between your crossed hands, away from direct sunlight, and apply pure oil and hold it tightly; then place the paper of the oil in your left hand if the joints are on the left side, or in your right hand if they're on the right; then take the instrument called 'almagda' in your right hand if the joints are on the left, or your left hand if they're on the right; then insert the tip of the instrument into the thickest part of the blenchor (skin) of the oil, at the outer corner of the eye, and press it firmly until you feel the almagda reach the empty space; and the length of the almagda should be equal to the measurement of the distance from the prunelet (small fruit) to the end of the night (blackness); that is the blenchor of the oil. You will see the bone on the paper due to the clarity of the corneal skin, then place the instrument up to its base or where the water is, and express it through one channel after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he lowers himself now, let him see the patient before him and the instrument in his hand.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting a little, lower yourself again along the second path, insert the instrument, and when it is firmly wedged and does not move upwards, slowly extract it by turning your hand back and forth; then lift it up again with a little force, removing the oil inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then apply hot oil or any other moist oil (roses) and an abundance of heat, and wrap it with healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, place a fine, new bandage with abundance of egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the foreign body cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, as there are many people with very hard eyelids, it is necessary that you press the instrument called "alberit", which has this shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And then pierce only the conjunctiva gently, and do not cut too deeply, but make a slight opening, then insert the foreign body as we have said; and after the work is complete, prepare the patient for sleep with a comfortable position on his back in a dark place; and be careful of all movements, press lightly on soft flesh, and do not move his head to the right or left, and bind him according to his condition for three days. Then release him in the same dark room, test his vision, and make him see no objects, and then re-bind him for seven days; and it is not appropriate that you perform this at the time of treatment or after incision now, but it is appropriate to ease him, because the sharp pain rises suddenly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When an abscess forms, you should loosen the skin in front of the seventh day and apply the remedies that soothe the abscess; and once it is soothed, unfasten the view and place a corner of cloth on its face to cover for some time, and then return it to that dark room.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then he should leave the house little by little and recover from his illness; and know that no disciples should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And then one came to us from Iraq, who told us that in his land they use a certain tool to suck out water, but I have never seen anyone use it in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of almagda, so that he who does not know them will see them as different; and they must be of gold precisely.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the front of this same subtlety be sharp, and the rear in three acute angles.
de la char sor le neis	of the charm on the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	No charm should be born or made with diverse arrangements, for there is none that seems like a scorpion in its movement; and if there are such where a charm is adorned with bright colors, or one that has a smooth charm of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In this case where the wound is fresh and not yet healed, you must place the patient between your hands facing the sun; open their nostrils, and apply the ointment to those parts, and treat them fiercely; but hold what you can sustain with a delicate knife on one side, until you know that part is entirely healed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains anything that cannot be covered, open it with all delicate and light instruments until nothing is left; and without delay, perform the operation as necessary; and if they are malignant abscesses, hurry and cauterize them until the blood is drained and all parts are healed, then apply heat or cold and wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If you open it and moisture appears in the wound, knowing that it is clean; and if the moisture does not drain as it should, knowing there is something stuck in the bone above, preventing the tools from cutting: then you must insert a piece of linen thread, thick enough, and tie it with our hands, leaving some space between each knot, and put the patient's foot in the thread to their ability, drawing it out while smelling until it comes out through the wound inside the mouth; and often children are so taught, and it is an easy task for whoever wishes to do it. Then hold the part that comes through the wound with one hand, and the other part coming from the mouth with the other hand, feeling them alternately as we who are in thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do as you know, purify the affected area, then treat the wound, dry it with an Egyptian ointment, and put the bandage back in place; do this for three days or more, until the ointment has corroded all that remains of the impurities. Then, for a few days, keep the wound covered with a clean poultice, and if any dried medicine needs to be applied, do so; this is the form of the instrument used to purge the head, through which oils and medicines are distilled into the wound.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be of silver or gold, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and use it thus; if you see, make a closed cane, and let the instruments be full for purging the head; have many around the head to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	Of the pain near the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times there appears near the nose a disease called "telul," which swells and becomes very large, so much so that it is a sight to behold; and for this reason, it is necessary that you remove it at the beginning, clean it thoroughly, then apply hot cautery or burning medicine; and if you delay removing it until it becomes large, be wary if it has a hard, dark color, poor sensation: do not touch it with iron, because it is an abscessed joint, for whenever you remove it, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is sensitive, not dark colored, and you are able to completely remove it without pain, then empty the patient and remove it carefully, using dry things and restraining movements.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and closed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when the continuation of one of these powerful cartilages is broken, it benefits no one.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	If this happens to no one, then consider that if the wound is fresh, you should stitch both lips together, and treat it until it heals; and if the lips have already separated on both sides, it is necessary to scrape all parts of their heart while they are healing, then stitch them together again, and tighten them, and apply dragon's blood powder and incense powder; and place a piece of strong or other adhesive plaster over the powders, and leave it until it sticks by itself, then treat with ointment until it heals.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of stitching is such that you bring the wound together: either with needles, as we have said in sewing the stomach; or with thread, as I have made known to you.
des apostemes des levres	abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At home, the abscesses on the lips become hard, resembling small grains of various sizes, then you must turn the lips and make incisions in each one, taking them as pincers and pressing each part; then apply the medicine afterward with a piece of glass ground into powder, until the wound is stained; then use a dry leaf, and treat the wound with things to remove dryness until it heals.
de la char des gencives	from the work of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often, a growth appears on the gums, which the old call "albulus"; it is necessary that you hold it with pliers and cut it at its root, allowing the bowel or the blood to flow; then apply powder of vitriol or other astringent and desiccating powders; if the growth returns after the incision, this happens often, especially if the piece is cut again, and cauterize it: if it does not return after cauterization; these are the shapes of the instruments for cutting.
des sordens	from disorders
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	No teeth are ever aligned at the root within the mouth between the gums, which are ugly and rough; and no teeth are black and yellow and rotten, as long as the corruption reaches the gums, and they stink; it is necessary that you hold the patient's teeth in your hands, and their roots in a clean place, and pull out the teeth or gums that appear, until nothing remains; and do this with the black ones and green ones, and jaundice and others until they are completely extracted; and if something is left at the first attempt, it is good; if not, continue to try again on the second day and third, until everything is pulled out; and know that teeth require various tools to pull them out, according to what the work shows, because the cutter used to remove them from between the teeth has different shapes than that used to pull them out. These shapes and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	You should take care when treating a toothache and do not delay in drawing it out as much as you can, for no one should excuse themselves from doing so; for it is a very precious substance indeed.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then, when the patient is constrained from drawing out the tooth, it is necessary that you be certain about which tooth is painful.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the patient complains of pain, believing it to be from a tooth that is healthy, and has the good tooth drawn out; however, the pain does not cease because of this, as we have seen with these saints; and when you are certain about which tooth is painful, it is necessary to scrape around the tooth with a strong spatula to protect the gums on all sides; then move the pliers to the first slight movement, as much as possible, until they are well positioned, and then tighten the pliers; place the patient's head between your knees, holding the tooth firmly so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, if it does not come out, take none of these instruments and press it gently from every side, and move it as you have done before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	If the tooth is broken and scattered, it is necessary that you fill the space between or around the missing tooth with cloth; if you pull it out gently with tweezers, so as not to break it while pulling; and it must be done very carefully around the gums to remove the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	Take good care so as not to break it, and if a piece remains, return it to the patient; by the evil of its root, he will suffer greater pain than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And be sure you do not act like the ignorant healers who, in their haste and arrogance, break the patient's body, and do not take heed of what we have said, but bring about the death of a great sickness through their carelessness, or by breaking the bones they should leave whole; when the bone is dislocated, wash it with wine or aloe and silk. And the flow of blood often comes, which frequently happens if you apply vitriol; if not, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shape of the instruments used to extract teeth should be long and sharply pointed, with thick handles that do not bend when pulling a tooth; these are their shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be large members so that they do not bend when pulled, and made of iron well-forged, and toothed for proper movement.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains stuck when pulled, it is necessary to place cotton moistened with butter on it for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the eyes are moistened, then apply pliers called 'algefri', which make the joint look like it is being cared for; they should be made inside like a file and this is their shape.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out of these grips, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh all around the root, and place the instrument called "altali," that is, a plier, which has this form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And if it is strong and thick so that it does not break, and the root jumps out through this, that is good. If not, use all the instruments, whose forms are as follows:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses this instrument with two prongs, its form is:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are used in the treatment of teeth, and this tool that resembles large pincers, whose form is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	This tool should be of such sturdy construction that it cannot break, and you must know that many tools for teeth exist; likewise, there are other tools, not mentioned here. The most skilled surgeons invent their own instruments, according to what their work and the patient's condition show them, because there are certain diseases for which no instrument was taught by the ancients due to the diversity of symptoms. If a fragment breaks off or becomes stuck in another bone, or if it splinters, and the patient seeks the appropriate tools I have described, using gestures, then this is their form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And they should be thick and well-holding to hold the bone, that it does not escape but can be held and removed; and then return the limb to suitable medicine for this, and if there is decay in the bone, even small, use all these instruments.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth does not appear according to the body's natural form, and its shape is ugly, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know if the tooth has grown after the normal teeth and is not in the right place, and it cannot be cut or filed. Then extract it; and if it grows with another tooth, take this instrument whose form is like a small beak, and made of sharp steel.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the dentist should work slowly and carefully with his hands for the pain of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that it can be filed, then file it from one side as the shape allows.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like filing the metal from which they make needles; file the tooth slowly and carefully with your hands until it does not move any more, then plane it at the end with no rasp, and if the tooth is too sharp, it cuts the tongue, it is necessary to file its roughness so that it is even, so as not to cut or impair speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth aches
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth aches intensely, either by impact or pulling, and the patient cannot bear pressure on it, they suffer greatly, and medications do not help. They should be restrained with an oro-dental device; gold wire is better than silver as it does not tarnish or rot. The wire should neither be too thin nor too thick, according to the space between the teeth. If you align the teeth, take a length of wire longer than the distance between two healthy teeth, then place the roots of the painful teeth into the wire gap, one by one, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side. Continue covering in this manner, gently and carefully applying pressure until the tooth stops moving. Ensure your pliers are at the root of the tooth to prevent it from escaping.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then cut the tendons with pliers, assemble them, and reconnect them between the healthy tooth and place it so that the tongue does not bleed; and then leave it as tight as possible for as long as it can stay, and if it becomes loose, the threads will unravel, if it is held by another thread; it should hold firm and serve for all its time, and this is the shape of the teeth and the correct arrangement of the two healthy molars, and the two incisors, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth is dislodged, put it back in its place, freshly broken, as we have said; and let no one intervene unless they are wise and patient, and never make a shape of an ossified tooth from veal bone, and place it where there is a defect, and hold it as we have said, keeping it firm and serving for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	from cutting the tongue's ligament
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Never does this ligament come from below the tongue, naturally, but it is cut either by a deep wound or accidentally; and the work consists of opening the mouth of the patient with great care, and holding his head so that it remains in your hands, then lifting the tongue and cutting the nervous ligament with a large knife, as far as the tongue is detached from its place, and if there is any hardness or resistance, and this is due to a sudden wound, then use the hook and cut through the ligament; be careful that the incision does not go too deep, for the artery below. And once you have done this, raise the affected area with rosewater or icy water, and place a linen bandage under the tongue; apply this bandage to the patient each night so that the ligaments do not adhere.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the blood flow occurs, place a hot, crushed glass over it; and if the wound bleeds profusely, apply a slow-burning cauterizing tool, which is good for this; then treat with another remedy until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you see it is red or black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, as it is a cancer; and if it turns pale and there is moisture, drain it with a fine needle, and make an incision with a small spatula, and deliver it from both sides; and if the wound bleeds profusely during your work, apply hot, crushed glass until it stops bleeding, then return to your work until you have treated everything thoroughly. Then lift the limb gently and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	from the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	No sign of abscesses should appear inside the throat, which are called "godath," and we properly call them "II amandres." When treating them, as we have discussed in the previous section, be careful: if they are small and of a deep red color, do not touch them with metal.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if they are red and the root is thick, do not touch them with metal, also to prevent the spread of infection; but leave it until it dies, and then you will remove it, or it may break on its own. If they are white in color and the root is thin, prepare an instrument to extract it, but first ensure that the abscess is calm and at ease.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then make the patient sit before the sun, and keep his feet in a healthy position, and open the mouth, and press the tongue down with the instrument between his hands, pressing it from side to side, so that this is the shape; and use silver or fine gold as if it were a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	You cannot press the tongue with all of this instrument and observe the abscess, so take the chisel and drill into it, pulling it upward as much as you can; do not touch any parts of the threads with it, then cut it off with the instrument, forming a shape that resembles teeth; however, the head is bent in one place and another, very sharp, and made of hard iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument at hand, if it is like pincers, thus is its form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	It should be cut on one side and named; and when you have extracted one of the mandibles, extract the other in the same manner, and after the incision, rinse the patient's mouth with hot water and water mixed with salt and some herbs, such as pomegranate peels, myrrh, or similar substances, until the blood is stopped. Then apply the cure while it is still fresh; and no other abscesses will form in the throat except for these two mandibles, if they are extracted in this way as with the two mandibles.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was located inside her throat, namely a small abscess; and the whole throat was tightly closed so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passage, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained that way for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so swollen that it had pushed two ribs through the two openings in the throat where it entered.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I then quickly inserted a knife into one of the openings, and pulled it through, taking out a large portion of the abscess; I then did the same in the other opening, opening the mouth and pressing the tongue; after inserting the knife into the abscesses and removing some of the pus, only a little blood came out, and thus the passageway in the throat was cleared for her to begin drinking water and then wine. I continued cutting into the abscess for a long time, and the abscess refilled again, filling up the space that I had emptied out, becoming quite large; then I cauterized it inside the throat, and it stopped growing. Thus, she recovered; and I parted from these tasks, and only God knows what came afterward.
de l’uve	from the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the eye swells and turns red, and it is distant from its socket, it is called "perpendicular"; but if it is thin and round, it is called "eye.
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have stated in the previous section, but the cure does not help, and you see that the abscess is calm, and it is subtle, then you should drain it; the round one that is not distant. It is bloody or of a deep red or black color, so be careful with incising it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the sick person.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	So it is necessary, when you see this, according to the manner I have said, to lay the sick person before the sun and press the tongue with the instrument of which we spoke earlier; then insert the pin in the wound, pull it out from the inside, and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned for incising the mandrils.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cut off more than the surplus beyond the natural limit; for if you cut too much, it grieves the voice and speech. After the incision, use what we said regarding incising the mandrils, and treat it as long as it remains healthy.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient suffers from great pain, it is necessary that you use an instrument for cauterization to alleviate the sensitive pain.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The method of cauterization must be sharp and quick.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient should place his head in a healthy position and then press his tongue against the instrument mentioned in this chapter (cauterization), using it with sharp, hot iron, so that it is not too thick or too thin; and by using this instrument, as follows:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the chief physician have a cheveure (a kind of instrument), as if holding the handle of a spoon, and place the tool over all the medicine on the eye; and have the patient lie on their side, so that saliva and mucus from their mouth flow down into the medicine without reaching the throat or causing harm; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour, until you see it stop bubbling and the stings of the medicine are soothed; and if necessary, take cotton and wrap it around a tool, soak it in the medicine, and press the tool into the cotton against the eye socket until the cotton sticks to the eye; repeat this often until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry, and after three or four days, or five, if you need to reapply the cautery, do so, and afterwards wipe around the eye with cotton soaked in burped butter, and clean what's around the medicine; rise with cold water, and make gargles until it heals.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is safer than cautery or incision; if it is performed through fumigation in this manner, take calamint, hyssop, oregano, rue, chamomile, and similar herbs, and combine them all or any of them in a pot, and place it there, and make it boil; the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and have a cheveit (a type of instrument) placed inside it according to this manner.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be either of silver or gold, and one of the joints should be squeezed in the mouth of the patient as the vapor rises to the eye through the nostril, until the eye becomes numb; afterward, it often recurs as long as the eye is dry. Be careful not to perform this at the onset of a hot abscess, as many complications can arise; only do this when the hot abscess declines.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not available, take a cane and insert within the mouth a piece of cold iron, so that it does not burn too hot for the patient; for the piece of cold iron does not allow the steam to weigh down the mouth, and it is a good cure altogether beneficial.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times a sore throat is caused by bone or a splinter of fish, or some other object. Therefore, you should treat what you can see and press the tongue against the sun with all the instrument so that you may observe the thing; and if it does not open and is withdrawn from the throat, you should make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps the thing will come out through vomiting. Or the patients might swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread, and then suck on it; and when it comes to the throat, it will become sore, and then you can extract it forcefully. And if it does not come out as we have said, take an instrument made of plunk according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And take the sharp instrument to the throat so that it can enter more easily, and lift the head high; be careful not to touch the epiglottis, so that all of it does not come down, and do not push the bone inside; let the patient push the instrument, for then it will move where the thing is stuck; if it goes down, pull it out evenly throughout the instrument until it comes out.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Never is the throat treated with medicine, as I said in the previous section, except through medicinal treatment; and if that does not help, then look at the throat of the sick person against the light, press the tongue with the instrument I told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the vein, draw it out with all its tiny hooks, or subtle pincers that are fit for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that does not work, take a horsehair rope and tie it around the throat of the patient, then slowly tighten or loosen the rope until the vein heats up and this is done often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient is filled with water all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it in until they swallow it, moving their hand often; and as soon as the vein feels the water, it will close.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not fall as we have said, and infuses the patient with bad smell from the instrument used in the fumigation of the eye, do this many times, for it will eventually fall without resistance.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	The method of fumigation is as follows: you light a pot with hot coals, place a perforated cover over it, and put the instrument for fumigation in the hole. Then pour your fumigant, and make the patient put the cane in his mouth and close his mouth, so that the smoke does not escape, but goes directly to his lungs; and the coughing will now begin, and if it does not, repeat the fumigation many times. Let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty and bitter things, and do not let him drink water; then it will be necessary for him to cough up phlegm through this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the wound, if it is visible, resembles a curved pliers designed to enter the throat; and it looks like a bird's beak, and has the hardness of lime, so that whatever it catches, it cannot let go; and see this shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Various forms of abscesses are, as memory recalls from one and the other in this book, and they differ in perforation and incision; and there are two manners, one being in its own likeness, and those that retain moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method is for the joints where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscess of the upper part is different from that of the lower, and the abscess of the fleshy part of the shoulder is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if, for an abscess, one should not pierce the skin until the bowel is completely healed, according to its completion; but for such as require piercing when they are hardened, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses that are in the joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come from damaged joints, and they are left as they are until the pus is drained, perhaps the ligaments and nerves of the joint become corrupted, leading to contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	If the abscess is in the main member and you delay draining it while it is still fresh, it will harm the principal member; or if it is from the foundation, you must pierce it in such a way that it does not spread further, so as not to cause fistulas and prevent healing completely.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you should know the time of perforating an abscess that is killed according to completion, and this is when the pain is soothed, and the fever departs, and the pain and redness diminish, and the swelling and sharpening of the abscess's head, and other signs; and you must make the perforation depend more on the abscess, and where it opens moves; and the perforation should be long in the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and muscles, and arteries, and everywhere equally without any swelling.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	When these swellings occur, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when there are abscesses in soft flesh, it is better to let the incision heal completely before moving it, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before the wound has healed, the body will fill with harmful pus, and the lips may harden and become attached to it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if an abscess is pierced according to the thickness of the flesh and the part that the member needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary to treat small abscesses with small incisions; and for large abscesses, large incisions, and many slits according to the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses that require a heart-shaped incision, do so; and when they have become as wide as the cloth and are softened, proceed as with boils: and if there are such that are split into three angles, or such that are treated like the fleece of myrtle, like the abscesses of enemies; and if there are such where a round cut is made, other cuts, and similar shapes.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	He who has no head, if the abscess is painful on the surface, it is necessary that you pierce it deeply; and when the abscess is large and has a great curvature, and you pierce it, do not extract all the pus at once in that moment, but only part of it; then bandage the abscess until the next day, and afterward take nothing from above; repeat this many times little by little until all the pus comes out; especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or old, decrepit people.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For often the patient will jump with the release of the pus, and by chance might die, and you will not notice.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived your abscess, if the wound has drained, and observe whether the abscess is small; and if it is a deep wound, apply linement or old cotton thread; but if it is a large abscess with many openings, you should put a tent in each so that they come together. And if you have reached into the abscess a piece of hard skin, and sealed it around, you should fill it with old cotton or linen rags without moisture, and bind it until the third day; then open it, and treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if the progression of blood occurs in your work, apply cold water and ice, wet the cloth, and repeatedly place it on the affected area.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the flow of blood persists, provide proper management and treatment, and use the powders I mentioned in this book, and apply them to the wound or abscess, especially when they are very sensitive; then place moist cloths of wine and hot oil on top. And if it is in a state where the flesh is still fresh, lay moist cloths of cold water and oil, or fresh wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said; then remove the abscess and clean and treat it, as appropriate, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: I have already told you how you should proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and now here is this chapter.
des soros	From the sources
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Or consider how small boils come, which are like our skin's threads, just as the joiner of a woman's garment, and there are many of these appearances.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are large and such, containing moisture as well as pulsation; and if it is of the kind that is hard and resistant to cutting, then there is no doubt that the arteries do not oppose it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of size is such that you must try all instruments called "entromissory", from which the form comes as follows, something it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, and they open it from above down, it causes pain.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is evacuated, if scraping leaves no trace on the skin containing the moisture, it will repeatedly return unless something is left there; then apply cotton with Egyptian ointment if it is available; if not, use water and silk, and dress the wound, leaving it until the next day; and this corrects what has been delayed by night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then recommence the cotton, as before, on the second day, and on the third, as long as you are certain it does not remain during the night; then dress the wound with suitable ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess is firm and holds tightly, following this form, then press it longwise; pour on the ointments, scrape from all sides, and do your best to draw out the pus from the wound where it lies; and if the artery reacts against you, then do as I have told you.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do the same for an abscess that is deep, and cut and cure it as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut into the deep and moist abscess, which is lighter because they have less blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if none of these abscesses or sores has any moisture, and it was one of these future abscesses that I treated on the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess as hard, sharp, and white as a stone, and unbreakable; and if anyone had tried to break it, they would have caused just as much harm as a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other cases of abscesses on the head, those that appear at the top of the head and at the roots of the ears, they should be left open for as long as possible near their base to allow the pus to drain; and the cure should be performed as necessary.
des scrophules	Of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times this abscess appears in the neck, and dissolves the adhesions, and engenders anger, and never comes elsewhere in the body, and is painful, and severely entangled with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly within its bone, as we have said, both the new and the abscess from the head, and there are many appearances of these scrofulas.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	Some of these contain moisture, and some are malicious and do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In that which you see of good disposition for the touch, resembling the color of healthy flesh, and silent from every side, not open as a wound in the collar or artery or vessel, and not too deep; it is necessary that you cover it from above, and peel from each part, and the two lips of the heart are thus, if it is needed, as we have said in the chapters on the head; and treat it little by little, and be sure not to cut the nerve or vein, nor let your tools slip, and do not look too far ahead, lest you cover something that you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cover the vein or artery and it does not allow you to work, apply vitriole (a corrosive substance) ground into powder, or any powders that stop blood flow, and tighten the wound; leave it until the inflammation is calmed and the wound softened, and then begin to heal.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound is stained with blood, it returns to your work until you complete it; then pay close attention to your signs if there are no small scabs, clean and dry them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein in the root of the abscess, it is not enough that you clean this abscess at its root, but tie it with a double thread strong and leave it hanging without harm; then apply the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment and treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you clean the entire abscess, it is necessary that you close the two edges of the wound and sew them now, so that there is no unnecessary delay due to the size of the abscess.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If it is necessary for you to understand how to treat the root of the dislocation, pull it firmly, and dress it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For those scrofulas that have an excess, drain it where it appears to be closing in; and drain it thus as mentioned before, depending on the condition, then apply these treatments with dressings and similar things, so that it does not corrupt what is left from the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, continue the healing treatment with care, until it is healed.
de squinance	squinance (Old French) translates to "dislocation
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	They old ones spoke and discussed about the surgery of the throat; but I have never seen anyone do it in our land, and it is their scriptures that record their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those with squint, it is necessary to avoid the fold in the throat called "epiglote"; and one should not attempt to help them, because all the veins and the pores of the sick person are close to each other in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the tongue, it is necessary to cover the epiglote to prevent the damage that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is necessary, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it in three circles or four small incisions across, between the two circles or according to the depth of the incision, not into the cartilage; and these cuts are very suitable for cutting through the epiglottis as there is no fat, and the vessel is long.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat to the whole circle, then cuts through the heart as it reaches the chain, and avoids the blood vessels, if you see anything, and then cuts through the fat, as we have said; and it is proven by cutting the flow of the chain that comes out from the place that is broken, and by the loss of voice; and leaves the wound open in a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed and there is doubt about strangulation, gather the two edges of the wound together where the heart is, and cut through until you reach the cartilage; then administer medications that promote healing, as long as it is healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albuscasim (a surgical tool) should not be used unless the throat is completely sealed, and the patient is judged to be near death, as it lacks the necessary strength.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then they should cut the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, so that death is averted; and for this reason, the ancients commanded to keep the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, either in three days or four. And then they ordered the wound to be sutured and treated, as long as it was healing; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a young woman took a knife and stabbed it into her throat, cutting through part of the glands in the neck; and I was called to cure her, but I found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had issued from it, and realized that it had no power to reach the veins or flow into the throat; the only outlet was through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I acted quickly and sewed up the wound, treating it until it was healed; then she recovered her voice, and returned to her normal state; for this reason I say that in the operation of the epiglottis one should have no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the great throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Cysts in the throat are called "throat hernias," and they are large abscesses with a color similar to a arrow, and they occur mostly in women; and there are two types: natural and accidental; or naturally, it has no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental type is according to two manners: one seems like fat, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from an artery; and there is fear, and it is not advisable to make any cuts unless it is a small one, and test and examine all access points: if you find it just like fat and it cannot be moved in any way, treat it as you would treat a nose, and remove it completely if necessary, and wrap it well, and cure it properly until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	From us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways in which we can suffer, and I will describe all their similarities; now it is necessary for me to explain the entire distinction between health and disease.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that disease is characterized by heat and fever, as long as the ebullition (boiling) has not passed and the putrefaction (decomposition) is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With no disease, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains satisfaction (comfort), which is its own cure, and according to the state of the body, and begins like a mass, and becomes enlarged; and they are similar in two ways, either greasy or moist, and have a great deal of color as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	You should, when you come to treat someone with a new injury, test and inquire about all the tools called "instrument" according to their form, as described in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	The method of questioning abscesses is to press more or less moistly on the abscess you find, and gradually move your fingers in and out, until you know that the instrument has reached the core; then, according to the size of the abscess, extract the instrument, but be careful not to cause further harm.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If moisture is running from the cut, what color it has, then do as I said for other abscesses; and if the instrument does not bring out moisture, know that it is filled with pus, so make a cross over it, and hold it as pincers, gently peeling it from each side until you expose the core where you treat it with new care; and if you cannot clean it, then remove it in pieces so nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if it remains in place, the pain returns many times over; and if it stays for a little while without causing great distress, the wound uses some corrosive powders or hot water, constricts the wound, applies cool things to relieve it, and treats it with other remedies until it heals; but if we cut both sides of the wound, then we cure the cause that generates it.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the pain beats against you or causes any other hindrance, act quickly and apply the powder of vitriol, leave it for two or three days until the wound purifies itself and the inflammation of blood subsides; then return to covering what has been affected by the new.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See here the shapes of the instruments that enter, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are three quarters called 'albaret', and one called 'breb', and they too are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, to enclose fistula abscesses; and they are also like needles with which sorcerers sew, and are made of golden or silver steel, but those that are yellow are more suitable for enclosing the fistulas' cores; and they are likewise of three sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the extent of the opening.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of the hooks are very similar, as you can see: large, medium, and small; and if there are hooks with two prongs, they also have three types; and if there are hooks with three prongs, they too are of three kinds; and there are also hooks with one prong, and these are also of three sizes; all of these are necessary for their use.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The tip of these instruments is sharp, and there are some that do not cut well from both sides, which tear the skin, so as not to sever the vein or nerve; and these inserments are knives with edges in multiples, so that the patient does not feel them when opening the abscesses; and they are of three types: large, small, and medium, as you can see; and they should only be used on fleshy parts like legs, arms, breasts, wounds, and similar places; and never make a smaller instrument resembling the cuts of fists, according to this form, with which one stops the blood flow.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it should never be placed in a place that heals the cutting of veins, and arteries, and never according to this great form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Never inflame the breasts of any man when they begin to be corrupted, until they seem like a woman's breasts; they remain ugly and swollen, and anyone who wants to cure them should do so according to this form from this line b to g.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape off the fat and apply medicinal herbs with charcoal to the wound, then sew together the two lips of the wound, and treat it until it is healthy; and if the breast turns downward and becomes soft because of its size, just as it does in women, making them appear as if they have two ribs above, through these similar openings; so that one rib holds the other at the end of each, so that the largest line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line b to g. Then scrape off the leather between the two lips, remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and anything necessary for the cure, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not complete because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the flow of blood, then you should fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive poultice and leave it until it absorbs the fat and moisture, then treat it until it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	Of abscesses under the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Abscesses under the armpits that present as hard scrofulous nodules or with scales, and if they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line B to line G.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess has been drained, apply clean cotton to the wound and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and continue with appropriate treatment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scrofula, they should treat it as we have said in the treatment of scrofula, and if the wound gapes, apply cautery as we have mentioned before.
de la routure de l’artere	from the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When an artery ruptures and the flesh above it severs, it often leads to abscesses, and likewise occurs in a swollen vein with an abscess; and if one recognizes this as due to an arterial rupture, the abscess is long and deep; and when you feel it at your extremities, you feel a strange sensation; and in the case of a vein, there is a sudden, bright appearance; and it is foolish to try to treat this abscess, especially when it is detached from the muscle, under the skin, with arrows or any other limb, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	You should seek iron cautery, and he who is in charge should also beware, and on him who has an artery flare up, cut through the skin from above; then make an incision as you've done before, and carefully remove the artery, leaving a double thread of two leagues, just as I've taught you for the removal of the two arteries in the temples; then mark with a probe the area between the two threads until nothing is left there, and release the abscess; then administer the treatment that seems best while the wound is bleeding; then tend to any further dressing needed until it's healed; and if an abscess forms again due to the size of the vein, hold your hand over it, and insert the needle from below into the area you're holding in your hand, piercing it, and leaving a double thread so that you can pull it from the other side; then secure the abscess as I've instructed, or tie it off with one of the threads to either side of the abscess; and if you doubt that the threads have left, insert another needle through all the abscess below the first incision, and tighten the threads in four leagues; then cut away the excess, cut away the excess skin around the wound, and leave what is firmly attached; then place a moist cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, and continue treatments with bandages and dressings until it's healed.
des apostemes des ners	from the abscess of the nail bed
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As abscesses come from arteries and veins, so too do they occur in the nail bed when it is injured or subjected to excessive strain, and similar conditions.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And these conditions occur more frequently in joints and limbs where there are many articulations, which is a great cause of abscesses, and their appearance resembles the color of the flesh, and they take various shapes with much pain; and when they are squeezed, the patient feels pain, and it is not perfectly whole like the heart, but beneath the heart; and it moves well from all sides, neither going forward nor backward, nor above or below, and a joint that is affected should not be bound up with iron, for fear of causing contraction; and the one located at the head or forehead causes the skin to puss.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, and it can be gripped with tweezers, cut it at its base; and if it is large, hang it on a hook, peel off the skin, then remove the flesh, and sew up the wound, and apply the cure until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	Des grosses boces pendans" translates to "hanging large mouths" in
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	It never appears in the stomachs and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" due to its outward appearance, and it has subtle roots, large droppings; and there are both small and very large ones; and I have seen people who had two or more funguses in their bellies that were more similar to fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, they were white, had a thin root, were constantly moist.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I collected them and found one weighing XVIII ounces and the other VI Z., and the work of incision is such that if you watch the patient, their moisture is visible, and the color of the articulus is white and moist with a delicate root; if it sticks to the spatula, have the fire cautery in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For when cutting occurs, many serious consequences from blood loss can result, and if you are without help, then hurry to cauterize; and if you see the patient fearful and anxious about the incision, take a well-made plug of silk thread, and bind the articulus as we have said, leaving it for two days; then restrain it, and do not cease to pull the plug of silk thread until it detaches the articulus without effort; and if the roots are thick, be cautious especially when cutting near the belly, but you can still cut half of it, then cauterize so that it does not recur; then treat the wound, and be careful not to cut the tissue which is dark in color and poor in quality and full of pus.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an enlarged abscess, and I will come to the treatment of this ulcer later.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the wound is closed.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the wound is due to cauterization from a wound or cut from a stone, and it is located on the belly and not in any of the bowels, as it happens with other ruptures, or ulcer that cuts veins or arteries according to what is above, or intestinal gas; and if it is through the rupture of the stone and through the emission of the bowel, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the flesh, and it is a slight thing without pain, and has various openings.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the intestines, then it is more diverse, and when you press it with your fingers, it recovers and then returns, and perhaps it becomes squeezed, greatly constricting the entrance to the bath or through hard work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing and opens well when you press it with your hand, not constricting; and if it is due to blood, it appears through these signs: large and hard abscesses, and are inserted according to quantity; and if it is due to wind, it feels soft to the touch, and the pains appear as if it were blood from an artery, or a vein, or wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it is necessary, you must leave the cure.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, both for the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if there is a sign of it in the intestine or bowels, you must instruct the patient to keep still and stretch out straight; then make an incision around the entire edge of the abscess; then command them to wiggle their body slowly between your hands; then extend half of the abscess over the ligament that you have tied; then tie it firmly with a strong thread or piece of strong silk; and open the other half of the abscess which is stretched on the ligament, and insert your finger and extract the intestine; if you find it caught in the ligament, untie it and bring out the intestine towards the outside of the abdomen; and if you find the bowels, cut them at the hilt, and remove the excess; and if the artery or vein is against you, go gently around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert them where you made the incision; then stretch the abscess three times over the needles, and if you see it heal, remove the needles, and leave the ligament until it heals; and cut off the dead flesh by yourself when it becomes soft and ready, and finish the abscess as we have said; then drain the blood or moisture that you find, and treat the wound accordingly, and close up the abscess.
dou chancre	A cancerous wound
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have discussed in the previous section the signs of cancer, and how it should be treated with medicines, and how to avoid iron treatment; we say that cancer begins in the marris (groin area) and requires great caution in its cure, and advise the ancients that when a cancer is located where it can be cut out, as in the breast, or the thigh, or similar areas, it should all be removed at the beginning; but when it is large and old, one must not even approach it, for I never was able to heal any, nor has anyone ever been healed from it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And for the work, when the cancer is located where it can be removed, as we have said, do not at any time remove the patient's dark blood; then make the patient well if there is a clear repletion, and operate on the cancer in the best location to perform the operation; then wash all around the tumor or ulcer, and cut from all sides without leaving anything, and let the blood flow out completely, and examine the wound with your hand or any tool, and if the bleeding continues after cauterizing, be careful not to incise the artery or vein, and treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
de ydropisie	Of hydropsis
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already discussed the signs of hydrops and in what way the accumulation of water is formed, as well as the symptoms of each condition, and the treatment using medicines, and that which is treated with iron; these should be understood separately. And one must not use iron on these two conditions: namely, tympanitis and yposcare, for they are fatal. Therefore, when treating this hydrops condition, which is called 'eclites' from medications, and the cure does not benefit the patient, consider if the patient is weak or has another illness in addition to hydrops, such as a stomach ulcer or similar; in that case, do not use iron, for there is doubt. And if you see the patient has strong vitality and suffers only from hydrops without any other illnesses, and is neither too young nor too old, then proceed thus: lay the patient gently on your hands, and the minister should press the abdomen while directing the water to the lowest part of the illness, then take the sharp spatula according to this form.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And make incisions from both sides.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Push it in deeply, but do not go so far that it reaches the intestines when inserted, and do not break it. Then observe if there is a drop of blood flowing towards the intestines. You should make your incision three fingers' width directly beneath the armpit, on the left side if the hydrops is from the liver, and on the right if it's from the kidneys; but if it's from the bladder, make the incision wherever it is. Cut through all the skin with your instrument, then squeeze and lift your hand to clear away all the mucus between the skin and the affected area, just as you would when peeling an apple. Then cut the hydrops until the mucus comes out in small drops, which is a sign of the water's root; after that, pull it out and remove this instrument, shaping it as shown:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it resembles a fine silver chain, and is made of thin gold or silver, and has a small opening in the middle; on one side, three openings; and two on the other, and one on the other side; and the bone is cut as if with a feather, which is the shape of the incision that scribes make when cutting feathers.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top of it, there is a hole, so that when the instrument comes into contact with water, it immediately sinks onto the instrument; then you empty half or a third of it, for if you empty more than is necessary at this time, by chance the patient might die due to the resolution of their spirit from the weapon, or they may lose their palm, or approach death; but you should empty according to the quantity of its virtue and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient suggest, and their pulses. Then remove the instrument and retain the water, which is now held by the core that stops up the hole I mentioned, which you pierce in this manner; then repeat the process with the other side a day later, if you see the patient suffering, and take out a small amount of water; do this every day, and be careful not to force it until only a little water remains.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the patient, and leave them with much water, whether through the cure of a burial or hot sand, or by sweating or a bath or in the sun, and they turn color; and apply drying medicines until they are healed, and cauterize the stomach and liver and spleen after draining the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	from the obstruction of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born without an opening in the penis, or if the opening is small, or it is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary to pierce through all the subtle spatules according to this form.
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then take the subtle opening in the bladder and close it and keep it closed for three or four days, and when the patient wants to urinate, open the closure, allow him to urinate, and then close it again; however, sometimes it is not necessary, because the force of the urine that comes out will not leave the closure.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the opening is small, it is a gentle closure of the bladder, as we have said, and it will enlarge.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the opening in their place are blighted, because no one is born with an opening at the top of the shaft, so they cannot urinate until they raise their shaft high; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot reach up to the bladder, and this is a bad illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method for performing this procedure is that the patient lies on their back, then the head of the shaft and the opening are also as thick as a feather, so that the opening can be made in the right place; and beware of the discharge of blood which comes many times, and if it happens, stop the bleeding with what stops the bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	from the pus of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often, this illness appears on the penis, and it can be either malicious or benign; you must press them gently with a subtle probe, then cut and clean them all, after which apply a moist cotton in an Egyptian poultice; then continue the healing treatment with a fine linen bandage until they are healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the illness is malicious, with a putrid and foul appearance, it requires cautery treatment.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have it, and if the splint is in a curved state, part of it inside the wound and part outside, then you must first remove the splint that is inside; and when it is hardened, treat the outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it together, unless the position of the splint is thoroughly secured, blackness and corruption will appear in the splint and bone; then you must remove all that is black and corrupt, then apply a paste made from honey and flour, prepared from red apple bark and leaves, and continue treating with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if a blood flow occurs, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery should be performed as follows: if there is a blood flow or corruption, and the part of the member that is corrupt and withdrawn needs to be pushed or guided with a plug, allowing the patient to urinate; when the hair at the top of the member is dry, which happens in those who have not been circumcised, and it develops into a wound or abscess, then you should scrape it with a sharp instrument until the ties are released and the part attached to the member is freed from all sides; if devising this is difficult, you should scrape it gently with a spatula at the top of the member and the stone, then carefully separate them and cover it immediately with a fine cloth dampened with cold water so that it does not dry out.
de la circoncision	from circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a dislocation of continuity like other wounds; however, when we perform this operation of our own will, especially on children, it is necessary that we make the best and lightest work for healing.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision for their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen most of the masters and elders who performed circumcision around that time, and they did it with force, and all in a hurry; it was the custom because there were two layers, and by chance if one is cut off above, the other below remains intact.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	He returns the cover, and the pain is doubled, and the point of the member is not assured during washing, and sometimes the nail washes away the iron, and it corrupts the work, and often they heal like that without needing washing.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the washing done with force on all the links of thread, I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut precisely from above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because when you press your hand, if the thread cuts evenly in all directions; but the thread should be tightly twisted around the skin; and it is the first task to make the child understand, if he listens, that you are not doing anything but twisting the thread around the stick as gently as possible, then making him squirm in every way you can. Then twist it between your hands straight, and press the forces between your hands or at the bottom of your feet so the infant does not see, nor any of the tools; then bring your hand back to the stick and blow on its heart, and pull it up as high as the thread on the stick is; then thoroughly wash it from the dirt that has collected on it, then tie the place with a double thread, and attach it between two other threads; and hold it in the second place at the index finger and thumb, and cut through the two threads, then lift the heart up gently. Leave the blood to flow little by little, because this is healing; and apply powder on top and cover it with a piece of gluey dough made from a half-boiled egg mixed with rose water, good oil, and fresh herbs, and leave it until the next day, and treat it with other remedies as needed until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of cleansing is thus: both shoulders should be held taut and cut, and the bones should also be as long as the rest equally.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in cleansing occurs when the veins are cut and bleed; then you should hold it with your thumb, so that the blood does not run; and do the same for both sides, and if you cannot hold it with your thumb, use tweezers and then finish the procedure.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it persists for three days, and the skin under the arrowhead is swollen, leave it until the abscess is calmed down, and gently peel away the scabs; continue to treat it as best as you can, and avoid the shaft's area, which will do no harm.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat therefore the wound suddenly caused by a powder, which we have spoken of in treating powders, and if one takes too much heart, it will go above, so it will not harm; treat it, therefore, as we have said, while it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is caused by stone, or frozen blood, or bowels, or a stillborn child, or similar conditions, as we have said in the previous division. If the urine cannot be released and you see that the retention is due to a stone in the bladder or neck, then the patient should be made to bend over his knees; he should lie with pressure on his back and his belly extended upwards from the lower part of his back. This constricts the neck of the bladder towards the stone above, allowing the urine to flow out. If, however, as we have said, the urine does not come out and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction to all instruments called 'syringes', which have this shape: they should be made of fine, light silver, like a bird's feather; their length should be about three and a half palm spans, and they should be thin at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the method of urination is as follows: take a double thread and tie it to the top of a wool or cotton ball, then insert the thread into the urethra; cut off the excess wool and insert it just below the urethra's opening, then anoint the urethra with oil or butter and egg white, and place the patient on a seat. Elevate the bladder and the urethra with moist oil and olive oil and still water; then gently insert the syringe into the urethra until it reaches the root of the organ, then double the urethra over itself towards the opening. Insert the syringe again before the bladder, and have the patient feel the urine flowing until the empty thing is reached; this should not be done haphazardly because the direction in which the thread is placed determines its outcome. Then cut the thread through all the wool bits, and the urine will follow the thread out, then pull it out gently and let the urine flow; repeat the process with the syringe until the bladder is empty, and comfort the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	From the diseases of the bladder.
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When ulcerations or abscesses come to the bladder, and putrefaction is gathered there, you should draw off water and medicines through a device called a "clepsydra", and it is made in this form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if it has three openings: two on one side and one on the other, as you can see; and the cheved (noisy) level of the medicine should be such that it numbs the penis without addition, if one can drain the moisture and push when necessary. And when you pour your medicines into the bladder, place the head of the syringe in the moisture and draw out what is inside; then turn the syringe upside down and squeeze firmly until the moisture enters the syringe. Now pour it immediately into the bladder so that the patient feels it; this is the form of a delicate enema by which one enemas the bladder: thus.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or gold, and the joint is higher; then open the chest from the side where the ribs split; take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the moisture you intend to use for enema; wrap it between the two breasts with a good double thread, and heat the moisture over fire. Then insert the head of the enema into the opening, and squeeze your hand around the bladder until all the moisture has reached the bladder; and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle of it, and perforate it roundly; then thread a strong string through these holes, and assemble the circle like a doll, and put inside what you intend to use of oil and moisture and water, and secure it with the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	from the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already discussed the methods for dealing with stones and their extraction, along with various medicines; I have explained the distinction between stones that cause rain and all the signs, and which types of stones require surgical intervention; and concerning the bladder and urethra, I will now clearly and concisely tell you.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is trapped in the bladder occurs more frequently in children, and this is a sign of acute bladder infection, similar to water in its subtlety; it opens the way for the patient to urinate, greatly relieving them, often many times, and then it becomes difficult; and much of this discharge comes from the foundations. The treatment for children up to four years old is light, but it is much more challenging for the elderly, those between youth and old age; the cure is lighter for those with large stones than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with a enema, to draw out all the impurities from the bowels.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it often becomes trapped, seeking to pass the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and straighten them, and move them downwards so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, without moving back up; then place the patient's hands between his legs, with his hands on his thighs, so that the bladder inclines downwards; then press and touch inside. If you feel the stone in a particular spot, hurry now to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not come out at the touch from anywhere, moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand, and if the patient is older, use your middle finger; press it deeply into its foundation, grasp the stone, and when you feel it on your right side, close the bladder's neck; then press down on your right side, and push the stone out towards the opening where you see it cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the practitioner to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to stretch his right hand upwards with the fingers, and with his left hand, remove the skin covering the stones in the area where the cutting is done; then use the forceps, which take on this shape.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And they make an incision between what is between the buttocks and the fundament, not too deep but on the side of the left thigh; and it should be straight on the stone, and both legs should be placed as if on a foundation, and the scar should be wide on one side and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large; so that the pressure from the leg which is on the fundament, makes it come out without effort; and know that there are stones with angles and margins: then it is easy to extract; and if it is below, like a gland, round, and smooth, whose passage is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	If there are angles and margins, make the incision larger; and if it does not come out, you need to extract it with pliers which are also like a file at the top, so that you can extract the stone without it escaping; or you insert a very thin curved instrument at the top; and if you cannot do this, you enlarge the opening slightly, and if it is covered, extract it with vitriol; and if there are more than one stones, first pull out the largest one from the neck of the bladder, then cut, then pull it out, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, they must cut it out carefully, making a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things can happen to the patient: he dies, or his urine flows again through the wound that the limbs cannot heal; but nevertheless, strive hard to extract it with pincers, as you remove it piece by piece, and when you have completed your work, dress the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and tighten it, and place a damp cloth of oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then wrap the patient in a woolen bandage for three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you dislocate it, if a lot of oil and water arises from the place, then apply the treatment with ointment of dye and basil ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses and corrosion come to the wound, and collections of blood in the bladder, and it retains urine, which is known in this manner as if there were no urination: then press your finger into the wound, extract the pus, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and cause illness; then cleanse the wound with water and leach and salt, and aid it in every way that you know, until it is healed; and it is necessary that at all times when you treat it, you bind both thighs together, and apply medicines to the place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small and it is passed through the urethra, stuck together, and urine cannot pass; then if you treat this as I say, cutting many times, one may excuse the cutting because of this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have tested it this way.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take the iron at the beginning according to this form, and place it at three angles into the fire:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the urethra away from the stone so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then gently pull the iron towards the stone until it reaches it; and return the iron to your hand in and out of the stone, as much as you can pierce the stone from another side; soon enough, urine will come out, then press your hand on the part remaining of the stone inside the urethra.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is often broken and jumps out with urine, and scratches the patient; and if you cannot do this for any reason that defends it, then pull the stone from below and another from above, then make a stick to pierce the stone between the two edges, then pull it out forcefully, loosen the knot, and cleanse the frozen blood in the wound; and cure it as long as it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of the woman's stone" (referring to kidney stones)
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It is rare for a stone to occur in women, and if it does, the cure is difficult, and it is hindered by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; the second is that it is not possible to find a woman well-versed who knows how to uncover herself, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman well-versed in this art of healing; and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman's body is harder than that of a man, so it needs to be cut deeper, and great fear exists. And if necessary, it is fitting to command a mistress well-knowing in this matter, and seek her out diligently, and if you do not find one, there is no need for excessive subtlety; present her with a simple task in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and instruct her to perform what you command regarding the examination of the stone; and take great care that this woman is chaste: then she must push down her index finger into the base and seek for the stone. And if she finds it, she should press it down firmly on the patient's left hand over the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she has a stone, it is necessary to move it little by little from the entrance of the bladder down to the thigh, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then cut into the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle part, where it moves, and feel the stone in that area; and do not move her leg either above or below the stone, and make the first incision on her hip small. Then bend her right to the hip, if you feel the stone so deeply in the wound that the stone can come out, and know that there are many types of stones: namely, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those with edges.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know these things to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood does not cease to flow, put vitriol on the wound and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your work while the stone is still hard, and have tools that I told you for removing stones from men to aid you in your task; and if the blood continues to flow, and it is an artery cut, place powder on the wound and strain it with cloth and bandages, and do not repeat this, leaving the stone and not pulling it out unless by chance the patient dies; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed and the eyes open, return to your work while the stone is still hard.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carneous
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Rameous aqueous is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white soft tissue, which is detached from the heart of the animals, containing the egg; and it is called "soft tissue," and never properly part of the egg's membrane if one believes it to be another organ; and this is the smooth skin of the testicle between the white soft tissue that we have mentioned; and this does not happen spontaneously.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this rameous is due to weakness that affects the testicles, and this material expands.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And never does it come from a percussion on the joints, and this moisture takes many forms: either a jaundice, or without red, or black, or white water, and so forth; and these are the signs to recognize this gathering, for if it is white as we have said, the abscesses are bright, long in shape like an arrow, and do not open the joints, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the membrane itself, the abscesses are bright with a part of the arrow's tip, and for this reason one thinks it is another arrow; and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white as we have said, it smells well; then when you want to know the color of the moisture, test all the affected area as mentioned above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after, judge of what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healed according to his strength and the fulfillment of his body; then lay him on his back, on something slightly elevated, and place several sheets under him; then sit him up on his left side, and command the minister to sit on his right, and extend the staff to one of the two ribs near the heart of the chest; then take the scalpel, and cut the skin of the chest from the long end to the elbow, and make the incision completely straight by cutting the skin of the chest up to the satisfaction of the white flesh, and carefully scrape it according to the tom strength; then pierce the flesh with water in a wide opening, and extract all the water, and then put your stitches, and pull the flesh upwards; do not touch the heart of the ribs, but only the flesh; cut it as carefully as possible, or else the water will return; and if the wound is successfully closed, bring him back to his original position when you have finished with the flesh. Then sew together the two books of the chest ribs with a stitch, and treat it like other wounds until he is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the heart corrupted by another illness, it is necessary that you bind the vessels that are suspended, in doubt about the discharge of blood; then cut the vein from the entire suspension, and extract the heart, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the blood is gathered in two parts together, knowing that these are two branches; cut off the other part just as you did with the first one equally, then wipe away the blood, and apply a clean moistened cloth with rose oil to the wound; and place another moistened cloth with wine and oil on top, and put two bandages over it, and secure it with all the bindings according to this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths, and make them of shredded wool according to this form, and join them together with stitching at the gusset of the breeches; one of them should be sewed close to the root as far as the back, and the other on the side near the elbow; and the third across both shoulders, and tighten it in the loop of the braies. Never use this cautery with a metal blade, but rather a small, sharp one, cut through the skin, and expose the white substance that contains water; if you take the cautery in this way, pierce the syph (supposedly a type of growth or lesion) as before, and burn it with this hot cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the cup should be used in all ways that you can, as long as it is completely drained; and beware that the fire does not touch the wound; and know that this work is safer; and move gently to avoid blood clots, and take care with the operations of cutting; and if anything goes against you, whether it is a complication from an abscess or another issue, then treat what goes against you, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this operation because of its horror, then apply perforation as I have told you, and make sure that when you are certain by the signs that we have mentioned that the inflammation has subsided, place the patient in a high position; then incise the abscess at the base, into the deep part of the wound, and open it widely so that all the pus can flow out. Then cover it with cotton and bandage it, allowing the remaining pus to drain. Then dress the wound until the infection is healed; and if a white cloth does not allow the pus to escape from the wound, you should insert a quill or the instrument used to draw off the water from dropsical patients, as has been described before. Open the wound wider, and know that the pus will return and collect again after six months or so, and when it collects as before, the patient's condition will improve.
de l’aposteme des coions	from the abscess of the hair follicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Knowing that in this branch there are many more dangers, I seem to think it is better to leave it; and I will tell you about the work and the appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I therefore say that many abscesses come where there are hair follicles; and most often they occur in the skin; this is due to many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is due to excessive acidity and bitterness that spreads to the hair follicles, or from a blow; and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the skin; it does not cause pain, and it is a deep abscess; sometimes there are several painful and black abscesses, or with a greenish hue, and they never come from a new artery, or from swelling in a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from an artery, if it is known by the hot condition of an abscess at its top, when you press it with your fingers; and it is not proper that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	What is made from vein inflation is known by its disposition to the sensitive expression of the fingers, and it can be well cut along this model, and along other parts; and it is that you remove the heart of the lumps, then the heat is above, and the trail is strong and white, and releases the suspension from all parts of the heat.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the heat is already hard with these cuts, then it is necessary that you remove the heat and cut it; and if it is too hot, or in those who are inside the vessels, it is necessary that you release all that tension, and cut it properly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the source of the pain is behind, it is necessary that you remove it entirely, and extract the foreign body, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, immediately apply a moist woolen compress with rose oil and wine to the wound, then use other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess surrounded by a covering similar to a boil, with the testicles becoming swollen and painful; it causes the patient great distress. The treatment for this disease is just as delicate as the one mentioned before, and we will tell you about its procedure according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	You should let the patient rest on a clean bed, then hang the suspending bands of the veins below your hands, to all the vessels close to the wound, and draw them taut; then cut with a sharp spatula across the vessels while they are exposed, and strip away from each side, as we have said in extracting arteries within temples. Then insert a needle where there is a double thread, and tie it to the first joint where the vein appeared, and tie it again to the other end; then cut them straight through, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture. Treat the wound as you would others, so that no vessel leaks, because if they do not bleed, all vessels will gain strength, and it is necessary to draw the veins from all vessels, so that the eye does not lose its nourishment due to vein incision, and dries up and cannot help itself.
de la routure dou syfac	From the rupture of the sinew.
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The symptoms of this condition occur through the rupture either from the section (surgery) that causes it, or from an extension in the abdomen in the region of the angles, which makes the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the openings; and this rupture is either due to the surgery itself, or from the extension of the sinew, and these two ways have similar causes: a blow, a fall, straining, lifting a heavy weight, and similar actions; and the signs when it's due to an extension of the sinew are that it occurs gradually over time and not suddenly, and the abscess is even until near its end, because the rupture (surgery) pushes on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the sign is when it is from the incision that a sudden pain arises at the beginning, and various abscesses appear under the skin close to it, due to the discharge of the intestine and the flow of blood from the syphilis.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never remove the pus with the intestine, as it becomes stuck and causes great pain for the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these poor treatments with iron, for which one must be wary.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the method for this procedure is that you command the patient to straighten the intestine in his hand inside the wound if it can be done; then remember on his collarbone between your hands and ease the hips; then spread the heart on top, and shave all the flesh from the bones until the white flesh becomes exposed from all sides. Then insert your index finger after the bone, between the white flesh that is under the skin of the thigh, and between the second flesh, and remove what is behind the bone, and between the second flesh; then move your right hand inside the heart of the flesh, and place the white flesh on top with your left hand, and ease the bone towards the tailbone; and command the assistant to stretch the bone upwards and loosen what is attached behind the membrane. And be careful if there is no intestine wrapped or hard white flesh, and if you find anything, insert it into the belly below the skin. Then take a needle with a thick thread of four threads, and insert it in the back part of the white flesh after the skin of the thigh; then cut the testicles that appear from the threads until there are three threads remaining; then intertwine them one on top of the other like a cross, and tie the white flesh which we mentioned is under the skin of the thigh with a strong thread of two parts. Then wrap the testicles with the thread, and tie them together so that no vessels that nourish them can enter, and the abscess does not form again; then attach the first long thread of two parts to this one, and after these two threads, leave the white flesh under the heart of the thigh a finger's length; then do the rest according to the roundness of the bone. Then cut the part that is under the skin of the thigh as we mentioned before; then apply moist wool to the wound, and attach the thread as we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never cauterize the white flesh we have mentioned, after incision, out of fear of bloodletting.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, leaving the wound open until it heals on its own; and if it takes time to heal, then apply hot water as we have mentioned, until it heals completely; then treat the wound with other remedies, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of flesh herniation
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, never has anyone dared to treat it with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients say that it is made like the root of a tree which is assembled with a joint, in such a way as you bind vessels after cutting them slightly from below; then cut through it and treat the abscess of him who opens, until the vessels stop bleeding; and cure it as we have said, until he is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	No rupture should occur without the opening of the vessels, as we have said, and it should not drain any intestines; if it does, it is a little thing, and one should watch every hour. Nevertheless, if it persists too long at this point, one believes it to be a wound or a abscess, as long as the intestines are drained; and this occurs due to the expansion of the abscess at the angle, as we have said, because it expands then becomes soft and swollen, opening the vessels; and its cure is through cautery, as we have previously mentioned; and never should it be cured in this way with iron. And so, the patient lies on his back, with his hands under him, then cut the vessel of the rupture with a sharp knife according to the quantity of three fingers; and then extract the abscess located beneath the skin, take the blade, and place it onto the exposed part of the abscess; press firmly into the abdomen, cut the two exposed parts of the abscess on top of the blade, and pull one way, then the other. Then remove the blade, and do not cover or extend the wound in any way, as I have told you in the cure for the vessel of intestines; and then treat it with a cure for wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you treat the wounds, if they are dirty and the injury is clean, then do so until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The treatment is difficult, and it has no appearance in the rupture, but the cauterization moves in this place, and is closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the thick skin of the testicles
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	The skin of the testicles is often softened in many men because the substances inside are mollified, and it becomes visible. When one wishes to treat it, they must lay the patient on his back and cut the softened skin close to the natural skin; then bring the two edges together with a single stitch or, if necessary, several firm stitches; subsequently, cut between the stitches and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, ensuring not to let any thread remain.
dou chastrement	1. This treatise, a guide for medical practices, offers
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Although castration is prohibited by our laws, I would not mention it in this book; however, it is necessary to discuss it in two ways: one is that you respond wisely when asked about it and provide a wise cure; the other is because we often need to perform castration on certain animals to help us, such as goats, sheep, cats, and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say, therefore, that castration is performed in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the one we perform by attraction, make the animal sit in hot water until the joints are softened and relaxed; then press them with your hand until they are healed and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	On castration of the penis: it is necessary that you tie up the animal and press the skin of the joints with your left hand, then fasten the suspensory, and make cuts on each side at the base of the penis, as much as to thoroughly cut; and leave no drop of blood, nor any subtle blood which lies on the veins; and this method of castration is superior to that which is done by attraction, because in attraction there may remain something from the joints, which causes the animal to desire lust; then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	A hermaphrodite is in two ways like men: one is when between the two sexes, it appears as the figure of a woman's nature, with hair and never cuts urine short.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is in women, who have a penis on their hand, as if it were a phallus, and two vulvas.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for both men and women is to clean the affected parts carefully and treat them like other wounds; in the second manner, for those whose urine flows through the skin of the penis, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	Of the tendon
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tendons are a tight tissue attached to the natural part [of the body], as long as it is too ugly to see; and no woman has ever had one so strong as a hand, and that is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	You should remove the excess of tendons from your hand or fingers, and cut them lightly; do not cut too deeply, lest complications from blood loss occur, then treat it with another cure until it is healed; and for another condition that appears at the mouth of the wound, and spreads, and perhaps jumps, and resembles a cow, and for this reason the ancients called it "cow disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary to take care of it, as we have said before, with the tweezers and cure as long as it is healthy.
de erratique	erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic is when the nature of a woman is not properly understood, or the opening (vagina) is small; it is either by birth or an accident that occurs due to illness, or it is because of improper adjustment, or some subtle and specific condition, and it affects childbirth or, sometimes, the flowers (breast milk), and one must consider all these things carefully.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the dislocation is recently apparent, whether by your own hand or by chance.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a subtle dislocation, and it is recently apparent near the joints, act quickly: place your two index fingers together, and have the patient lie on their back with their legs spread; then form both joints into a rounded shape until the subtle dislocation is corrected and the joint is stable. Then take wool, moisten it in oil, and apply it to the affected area, having the patient lie on their stomach each day so they cannot move.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the dislocation is hard and deep, then you should use a spatula-like instrument resembling a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the swelling is from heat, suspend it with a splint and compress; have the medicines that stop blood flow, such as witch hazel, dragon's blood, incense, in abundance; then apply a broad poultice so that the wound cannot close; and thus keep it for a long time, and then apply a dry linen bandage; and continue other treatments until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when the swelling comes from heat, if it needs to be covered, do so according to this manner; if it is not an abscess, apply compresses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an abscess swollen from heat, do not apply any treatment with the hand.
des emorroides	From hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that, without usual care, become enlarged and hardened; in the discussion I have previously mentioned the appearance and signs of old hemorrhoids, and I will now describe those that receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and their complications, when they are completely in the rectum, and do not appear to be felt, can only be effectively treated with iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the opening of the rectum can be felt, and these are those that can be treated.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is necessary that you place the woman in a cold house, then stretch her limbs with pincers, and compress them at their roots, then sprinkle medicinal powders to stop blood, such as lime and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then bind her feet to the wall for an hour, then immerse her in cold water; and when blood comes, let it stand in a decoction of sumac and bark from pomegranates and gall and similar things, and then take flour from barley, and mix it with honey and wax, and make an emplaster on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it becomes moist, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If no, then make suction cups rise on the back and on the breasts without hurting; then take cloth, and dampen it in plantain juice or in holly juice with old wine, and apply to the place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has healed, continue the treatment with the wound dressing as long as it remains clean; and that which is called "albathir" is red and resembles a raw head, so it should be covered as I have said in the previous text; then cure the wound as long as it is clean.
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses in women
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many different types of abscesses occur in the body, such as chancre, previous abscesses, herbs, boils, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the section.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore, it is necessary for me to discuss in this treatment the hot abscess that occurs in the body, which is not like other abscesses that discharge pus; and if you are skilled in the work of fire, pay attention to whether the abscesses become red in their initial stage, filled with heat and fever, and turn red as you can see.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Do not hurry to pierce, but let the patient suffer the pain until it is eased; then place the patient in a reclined position with two small pillows under his legs, and have him rest on his back with his feet extended away from the leg that is being treated. Spread the patient's knees apart, place his arms below his knees, and secure them tightly with a good bandage; then suck air from the patient's right side and insert the tool used to open the abscess, which will determine the shape of the opening afterward. Ensure when you insert the tool that it goes as deep as necessary so that no part of the tool enters beyond the required depth, potentially harming the patient; if the tool is too large, cover the deepest part of the abscess with cloth to prevent the tool from causing discomfort. Place the end of the tool above the opening and secure the tool.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess opens and they make an incision with a gentle hand, if it is necessary to cover the opening, take a spatula; and when the bowel is emptied, it is necessary to put moist tents in rose oil or in dry green oil into the wound, all around the margin, and put outside on the margin and on the lateral finger clean moistened water with cooked alder leaves or mullein; then cure after two days of treatment until it is healed; and never raise the margin and the wound by a water enema and honey, and then water or cooked lily roots and long aristology; then return to treatment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is healed in the margin, it is necessary to be careful not to use fire, but treat it as we have said in the previous section.
de l’enfantement	from childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Skill is first in the dance, that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and its signs are when you see the woman straining down, and desiring to push: then hasten the child to emerge; then know that these children are according to nature's figure, and follow their chief, and second him with them; and when you see these signs, gently press her belly, so that the child comes out quickly; for when it descends onto his head, he follows him with it, and the mother gives birth to her excesses through good purification; and this one who does not come otherwise, does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it never comes upon its own feet, but rather affects the body where it touches, whether on the hands or the feet, or on the belly, or sometimes turns around by chance onto its neck, and assumes other bad shapes; so it is necessary for the physician to be wise and subtle in these matters, to ward off errors and misunderstandings, and I will show you all the forms of how to aid them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the fever comes upon the head from a natural cause, and the woman is giving birth painfully, and her strength is weak, then she should be placed on a bed or held by other women; and one should prepare an oil or fennel mixture, as described below, and then apply the ball between her two fingers, of which the shape is like this:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and cut open the second [area], and dig into his fingernail as deep as the moisture that is inside; and press the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to clean the woman with fennel seed musk with sesame oil; then make her sneeze and blow her nose from a cold condition, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now the child will come out.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	If both hands are unable to insert, it is necessary that you gently re-align them little by little; and if they still cannot enter, place the woman on a seat, and lift her feet upwards; then remove the seat to the ground, and turn off the woman so she does not try to stand up; and if her hands cannot enter, and the child is dead, cut through the hand that is placed in front, extract the child, and realign it equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the birth of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child is born on its feet, it needs to be pushed up; then it returns little by little until it is even; then press on the feet and extend them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it can jump up to its hocks, with the command to press, and it makes a sneeze of relief; if it jumps further, God wills it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not happen as we have said, if it returns little by little, according to the natural form.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it becomes slightly easier.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come as we have said, take a little musk, and oil of rose, and gum resin, and grind them all in a mortar; then apply this remedy to the female nature both inside and outside, and let her lie in warm water down to the ribs; when she is moistened, make a collar of myrrh and place it around her, leaving it for an hour. Then have her sit, then make her sneeze, press her mouth and nose, and gently massage her belly, for the child is now ready to be born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the emergence of the child onto its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child presents in this position, he should gently move his hands; then place himself on his collarbone, and let his feet hang down, lying on his side; and gradually move his hands, first pressing them onto his stomach, then lifting them up, and moving his feet; and when the child does not struggle, take hold of his feet and move them, then his stomach upwards, and finally turn his hands; and gently rock the child; and instruct the woman to press herself down as long as the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the birth of the child who comes with a large hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I know how to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, then make the woman get up and walk; if she cannot walk, lay her down on a bed and straighten her legs; then apply the musclyg (a term of unknown modern equivalent) that I have mentioned; and if she does not give birth, sit her in a position to bring back the hand; and carefully deliver the child according to its natural form, make her sneeze, and instruct her to press as the baby is delivered.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the birth of the child on its mother's womb, let it spread its hands and turn its face away from its mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I know that the hand has its own motion, turning little by little and gently; and when it is steady, apply a light, muscly, oily compress from above, as we have said, then command it to move little by little; and once you have done this, place it on a warm seat and order it to press; and make the patient sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same manner for all the rest
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to this manner of treatment, do the following at once: if the moistors (swelling) is still present, press it with your thumb until it's emptied; then place the affected part on its face and neck, ensuring it's not restrained, and let the child breathe until you've positioned him correctly, as is appropriate, and instruct the woman to lie down at times.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	You know that twins are born many times, and never more than three or four at a time; this is not strange, and it often happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	These are strange things, and they do not live long, nor do they have a name; I know that they multiply, and are caused by the pleasure which devises them, which is tied to desire; and they never appear as naturally as others, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they appear badly, if the cure is as we have said, and there are subtle pains, making it suddenly and lightly do what it does, and act thus as it should be moved for healing.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	No joints are formed in the body I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, or more up to XV, and they are all shaped like a child according to the measure of his glorious wisdom, and it is necessary that the skilled surgeon knows this well, for sometimes a similar thing happens; he must act accordingly.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat a woman who has lost her child in the womb, as I mentioned in the previous division, and there is no sign of delivery, and you are forced to use manual assistance; it is necessary that you know if the woman's health is good and does not have any fear or worry about death. The woman should be placed on her back, and her legs should be inclined downward and raised; the midwife should assist in this process from two sides, so she is not disturbed by removing the child. Then, wet your fingers with moist oil mixed with althae and fenugreek powder and flaxseed, and apply this to the woman's hands and between her fingers. Gently massage it inside the vagina, then insert a finger (or a tool) at a slight angle where the cervix should be, and check if the baby is positioned correctly for delivery. If so, gently but firmly push on the abdomen below the belly button towards the lower back, and apply pressure to the sides of the pelvis; this will help guide the baby down. Be careful not to insert the finger or instrument too far, and ensure it is comfortable for the woman. The shape of the cervix is like a ring.
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then find another joint, where you need it most, so that the extraction is even; and then continue to move it equally from one side to the other to help it pop out, and the dislocation will be healed just like this:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part remains stuck, apply no oil to any of its joints, but press it into that part and pull the other part; and if nothing comes out, then place this dislocation higher up on the limb and continue until it pops out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes forward before the other and cannot return due to tightness, it is necessary that you wrap it with a cloth until it pops out completely; then cut at the joint of the finger or the thumb, and do the same for the other hand, and for the feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the child's head is large and stuck in the birth canal, and has a sharp point assembled, you should insert the spiny spatula between your fingers, and press and extract the head; or use the instrument called "almidach" to shape it with the tools of this chapter that follow; and thus also perform on infants with a large natural head. Then pull the bones out with pincers, and if the head gets stuck, cut it in pieces as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, pierce it until the moisture runs out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the infant is on its feet, there is a slight attraction, and the direction towards the mouth of the womb is gentle.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is twisted in the belly or the bowels, it is necessary to pull it out from under the wrapping on the hand; and making an incision in the belly or bowels, until the moisture that is there is corrected; and if another member is broken and remains stuck, and the pain comes back, he should press his hand into the opening of the wound; then he should make an incision or two, and pull it out; and if the opening of the wound has narrowed due to heat from an abscess that formed there, it is not appropriate to work on it, but rather it is necessary to apply moist and greasy things; and administer poultices, and use water that softens and moistens.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the hernia is on his side, and you can make it even, apply what we have said for a live child; and if there is no possibility of removing it in one piece, then leave nothing from the second part.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, then apply what we have said concerning the abscesses that come from the vein; and if bleeding occurs, place it in strong restraint, and apply other remedies.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose belly had been bitten by a child; then I examined another on that same spot, and removed the other bite.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, a painful abscess formed in her cheek, swelling so much that it opened, and began to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat it, and I thought for a long time, but could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied strong plaster, and an egg came out, and after some days, others.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very surprised because that stomach has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I examined the wound, and handled the bone as best I could, until the woman was in a better state; and she remained in that position for a long time, and then took a little bow of light; and I have never remembered this chapter to be useful except when a master encounters something strange and knows how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	return the woman to her place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	After this comes the form of the press, with which books are bound; and at its turn to the other side, it goes back to the two limbs of the binding.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle in their tightening, and made of ebony or box; and the mouth opening should be wide enough, with a margin measuring one palm and a half in length; and both sides of this same wood should have a fitting adjustment, either half a palm long or slightly more; and this fitting is placed within the mare's mouth to open it when the two horns are turned.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or box wood, resembling pliers; it should have two adjustments, each one palm long and two fingers wide; when you open the mare's mouth with the entire instrument, make the woman lie down on her back, keep her legs apart, and close the two adjustments together into the mare's mouth. Then, apply pressure to the entire instrument as you did with the pliers, opening the mare's mouth until it reaches its desired width.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	The surgical instruments are all equipped and have many similar appearances; and when the surgeon has arranged them properly, the work is done faster, and it benefits people more due to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not disregard the instrument even if you have not arranged it properly, for its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the secondine (a tool used during childbirth) is withdrawn from the mother, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to retain her breath, and then have her exhale strongly while holding her hands over her mouth and nose; and if she does not suffocate, all is well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If it is not possible, take I a needle and make I an opening or cover, and insert herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, such as calament, rue, anis, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or any of them, should be cooked or put in water over the fire. Then place one end of the needle or opening in the mouth of the wound, and hold it there until the vapors enter the wound; then make the patient sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the patient experiences a second complication.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if, after this treatment, the patient still feels pain, instruct them to moisten their left hand with sesame oil or deer musk and then apply it to the wound. They should hold it there until they feel a second tug; when they do, they should gently press and pull on both sides at once, allowing the wound to heal.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the mare (uterine contraction) is tightly closed, we have said the cure to sneeze and fumigate with herbs; and if it does not respond to all that we have said, be careful not to follow; but whoever is at the mouth of the mare, tie him to the woman's calf, then wash him with a four-ingredient ointment; he will release and return, and leave. However, when she sneezes, a bad odor arises in the stomach and head, and the sick person becomes pale.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore, it is appropriate to use suitable fumigations: no one of the ancients has tried fumigation with parsley and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one cauterizes a woman to stop the flow of blood and milk is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is made of glass resembling a snake, and the tip is placed finely in the middle, and the base is wide over the fire; and the fumes are on the coals, and the smoke until it is completely consumed, and then another one is started.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who have not had their foundation pierced, but they have a subtle syphilis: therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to pierce this syphilis with her finger, and do not use a sharp instrument, and hold the clamp so that she does not touch it; then place a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil, and apply the dressing until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it does not return, insert or open a plug of flesh, and leave it for a long time, and it becomes rigid when the child wants to move into its chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And suddenly this stopping of the wound or abscess occurs; then it is necessary to cover this stoppage: whether it is cured, as we have said about the plug of flesh.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from its foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that originate from beneath the foundation are larger than those that come from above, or there can be more than one fistula; and when this nodulation is old, it opens up, and still emits a white or subtle discharge, and these fistulas do not heal; they are recognized by the fact that there is an emission of pus or air when the patient evacuates, and sometimes they burst.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if the ulcers pierce through to the bladder, and through to half of the penis; and they reach the joint of the thigh, and through the root of the cock.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus, one recognizes the fissure in the fundament, and it is not present; and it is you who inserts your index finger into the fundament and pushes a fine needle of iron or steel into the fissure when there is no curvature.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is curvature, and you insert a thin probe or a horsehair as fine as you can feel it with your finger; and if you do not feel it, and it does not cause any expulsion or vomiting, as we have said, know that it will not pierce; be haste in treating it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula persists up to the bladder or up to the urethra, if it lets go of the urine, and cannot be healed by medications.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced up to the joint of the thigh, then the veins nearby are affected; if there is no twisting or change in the pain around it, and it remains bent, and no medicine or dressing helps, then there is no cure for these persistent fistulas other than hard work and the futile attempts of foolish practitioners.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the case where it is neither persistent nor old, there is hope for healing by fire, as I have experienced, and the patient lies on their back between your hands; they bend their legs up to their thighs, and their knees are bent towards their belly. Then insert a thin strip of iron, or a plunger if there is twisting, as long as you know where the vein is located.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain in the base, it is necessary that you place your index finger on it, and then feel if there is a hard spot; uncover wherever you feel satisfaction or hardness between your thumb and forefinger, then know that it persists; work not otherwise, otherwise it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	Nevertheless, no one can be completely healed of this, but it does happen rarely; and the help that is done is to apply a gentle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said above; and burn hot all around the fistula until it comes from the base; and do this two or three times, until you know that these charred marks are completely healed, which resemble the quill of an eye; then cure with moist ointments, until the char is completely gone, then apply a healing treatment that soothes and consolidates.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he/she is in such a state, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it is infected in any other way, it cannot be healed; and if a thread enters, but does not pierce to the muscle that is at its base, and there is a thick covering of cloth or something similar between your finger and the thread, you will see an abscess forming under the covering where the thread enters; if you cut through the abscess at its beginning, and then pull out the thread before it reaches the covering, and then cauterize it, as soon as it reaches the tip of the thread; and the tent (abscess) will be released, and it will heal. Then banish those evil-looking threads that resemble a bird's feather, and do not leave anything.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the pain attacks you and cuts between you and the work, cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For fire cautery combines two good things: that is to say, the burning of these adjusted parts, and the inflammation of blood and the drying of moisture; then treat the wound with moist bandages or in crushed things, as long as the bones are bowed, and push the burned parts into the bow; then cure the wound with sudden hot applications and dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it becomes healthy and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula appears all the way to the bottom of its origin, and it is distant from the body, if you press on its root or origin, it will hurt.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the urge to pass stool, and between them is the membrane or the mucus or the faeces, and it is about to pierce through, if there is no other way out with confidence and hope, through one of the three means: you cauterize it as we have said, or you dig it out to the bottom, or if you can gently apply pressure and heal it as before; but be careful not to go too deep that you do not remove the covering that holds the origin, and cause emissions against your will; then heal it as we have said. Perhaps it will heal, or you remove that abnormal growth and clean it after it has been dug out from the origin, either with a probe or another appropriately pointed instrument. Then disinfect the infected wound as best as you can, and try to stop the fistula in the area beyond the origin; if this is a lighter issue for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And never are fistulas formed in this way: and it is when you press the tent into the fistula, and it is on one side near the foundation of the skin above, then take a tent-shaped tool at the top according to this form.
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And press the thread wrong in two, and press the tent along the entire thread into the fistula as far as it goes to the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is persistent at the edge of the foundation within, then extract the thread from that perforation, so that you press your two fingers or foundation; and handle the top of the thread, and join the two parts together, and tighten them to each other, and leave it for one or two days; and do not loosen it, until the threads have healed that are between them, and stopped aching; then treat the wound until it is sealed and clean.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If you cannot puncture the fistula, no matter what method you use, it will not be too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not appropriate to make the wound too deep, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The sharp, spiky form in which the fistula is made if it is deep and one-sided, cutting in and not out; on the other hand, do not puncture what you should not puncture, as you see here:
des emorroydes	Of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: those that are inside the anus, resembling grains of resin, and ranging from small to large, and causing bleeding; and those that protrude outside, one or more in number, extending from the anus, and also containing blood, having a flesh-like color; and the cure for hemorrhoids within the anus is to command the patient to rest in bed until the anus heals completely and the child is delivered. If urgent, using forceps or your finger, remove them at their base; otherwise, wrap them in cloth or cotton or a piece of chamois, and extract them gently. Cut them off, then apply a powder made from hot spices over the cauterized area; or, as mentioned in the cautery chapter, cauterize them, treating other ailments as well until they heal. If the anus cannot be extracted, administer enema with strong and bitter solutions to wash out what is inside, so that it can come out easily. As for treatment, if the patient experiences pain and their child has already been delivered, the cure is light; press them gently with your finger or forceps, then treat as we have said until they heal, avoiding incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary, you must administer the stitch in this manner: take a twisted thread, and wrap it around an needle, then draw the thread from above and pierce the needle from the other side, and pass both ends of the thread under the needle, and if it is too wide, tighten the forming thread, then tie the thread, and extract the needle, and do thus with all the rest, leaving one for draining the blood; then place a moist cloth or wax on the base, and put it in place, and instruct the patient to rest; and then leave it until the wound heals, and when it has fallen, apply treatment and other remedies until it is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	The phrase "dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement" translates roughly to "the careful handling of the
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is drying up of feces in the intestine, due to nature's constraints, and when the illness is old and no medicine helps.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary that you scrape with the point of a spatula or your fingernail the dry skin which will not let it moisten; then treat it as it should be until it is moist; and if it cannot become moist, repeat the scraping stronger than before, until it becomes moist and is cut; then treat it as long as it heals.
dou fremit	Douloure" is the Old French word
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Mice are a small, hairy creature that burrows into the body, and they do so very thoroughly; the wound never freezes, and one feels them as if dead from trembling, spreading throughout the whole body, especially in the hands.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a needle from an goose feather or a strong vulture feather, and place this needle on the trembling until it turns red all around; then turn your hand over the whole needle until you cover all around the trembling, and set it in place, and pull out the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see that it is a needle of steel or iron made according to this form, and it is sharp from below and cuts through from above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	I do not feel any pain, so that I can hold the hand steady, and press it. And if you see, if cauterizing the tremor, as it is before or in the chapter of cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of a cloth enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never should an enema be made with silver or gold, or with melted lead or iron; and never should these small and large instruments be used according to those to whom they are entrusted.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those are therefore small, used in the treatment of children who are weak and suffering.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	He must prepare a small and wide enema if it is too narrow above; thus, the abdomen is tied according to this manner.
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and if there is a desire for defecation, as you see, the abdomen should be bound and the excrement should come out; it has two openings on one side and one on the other; the abdomen can be filled with medications from a bladder of an animal or parchment, all around with small openings, with one space between each opening, then thread a strong thread made of twisted crisscrossed fiber through these openings, and gather the abdomen like a goat; when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then enema; and this shape is circular.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and apply a warm compress of oil or egg white or something similar to the head, then gently squeeze it; then the attendant should massage the patient's two hands together, until they are completely relaxed, then remove the compress, and have the patient rest his legs against the wall, and let the medicine flow out as much as possible; and if he sleeps soundly through the night, it is a greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you use the compress for a stomach disorder and the medicine flows out quickly, have the patient rest until it is completely healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoid is at the fundament, or abscess, it should be as subtle as for a child; and this is the form of the very subtle clamp on which the skin is held tight.
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already spoken of the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments of hands and medicine, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the parts where the wounds are made, and from what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by the use of stone, and sword and knife, or lance or spear or arrow, or similar objects; or they are made according to the laws of the body, such as a wound that breaks through the neck, or head, or leg, or belly, or liver, and similar limbs; and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and the bone is not broken, be careful if it is due to stone or similar objects, and the skin is nevertheless torn and the wound deep, and you doubt an abscess forming: do this as soon as possible for the sake of the head itself, especially if there is little blood loss from the wound, and treat it conversely in the affected part; and remove the patient's fullness of wine and heavy meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to be healed, let his flesh be reduced and he should not drink wine or eat char; and apply a poultice of rose oil only or of astringent wine; and if there is a hot abscess, apply it to the wound while it is fresh with all its blood, and do not let air, powder, which I will mention later, touch it; and if fire has moved it, apply some ointment as long as it is clean.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like the size of a sword or similar, and the edges cannot come together, they should be brought together by stitching, as I will explain for wounds in the belly from the stitches.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to the bone, it bleeds and only lasts for a short time if not treated; then treat the wound with medicine and replace the skin with hard wood, and instruct the patient to eat substantial foods such as roast meat, bread, cooked grain, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find putrid flesh or rotting leather that does not reach the bone and eats away at it all, drain it thoroughly, then treat it; and if there is an artery in the wound or a vein from which, without cutting, it cannot be stopped with medicine, cut the artery, but if cutting it does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: it is that you place this powder that sticks so that the fire moves away.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	The method of the powder is as follows: take one part frankincense, two parts dragon's blood, and three parts of the live charcoal, mix it finely, apply it to the wound, and tighten it until it spreads well and joins all the blood; then bind it tightly and leave it unbound unless it swells, for the medicine should not be removed as long as it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never should one use charcoal only, unless you have frankincense or dragon's blood, but the fire must have moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the fire has moved the wound, especially if there is no powder applied; but place on it some well-prepared ointments, or a paste made from water and honey and oats flour, until it becomes soft; then apply other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if a bone fracture occurs with the wound and it is small, then extract it with delicate pincers; and I will tell you below about the treatment of these fractures.
de la plaie dou col	of the deep wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound occurs on the neck and it is simple, then it has no distinction from that in the head, but if there is damage to the nerves of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerves, then there is no other remedy but to let them heal without applying anything restrictive, as that would harm the nerves and cause them to retreat; do not put any sharp objects on the wound, as the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member. But apply medicine under, such as washed chalk in sweet water mixed with rose oil, and clean bandages also in sweet water, and other stones according to this method, and moist compresses.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is great, if it cuts through the tendons and ligaments, then treat it until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	If the wounds are deep and extensive, with pus and bowels present, then pierce them or cut them deeper; if an artery is severed, and bleeding occurs, disregard it and apply cauterization; if there is a thorn in the throat or the heart, and the flow of blood must be stopped, carefully remove the thorn without touching the throat, and then bandage it according to its natural shape; subsequently, tighten the bandage and do not change it for several days, and treat with remedies until healing occurs; if the wound has pressed into the bone, dig out any pieces of bone you can reach, leaving those you cannot; if the wound is fresh, apply the poultice as mentioned above.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones or a fistula in the wound, treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	wound from a lance or sword
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a lance or sword, and deep, then consider the direction of the air in the wound as the patient alone knows: then know that the wound is mortal; but if it is not so deep and still has all its blood, do not put powder on it in the first hour, nor bind it for the blood to stop flowing back into the body and causing further harm to the sick person; instead, apply an attractive dressing and change it twice a day. And if you have no dressing, put old cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture, and make the sick person sleep on the wound for three, four, or more days; if there is no spasm, no shaking of the body, or any strange feeling, then know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure the wound with various remedies and others, as long as it is healthy; and if it cannot heal, know that there is a fistula; then treat it accordingly.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is shallow or deep, front or back, treat it as follows; if it is large, sew it up; and if small, use powder; and if it affects the bone and has splintered pieces, clean the wound thoroughly if they are unclean, and remove foreign bodies if necessary; and for other wounds in other limbs, judge them as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	disruption of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The disruption of the belly is great and medium and small; from a large wound, no time does the intestine, or the nerve of the intestines, protrude; and stitching is more difficult, and never worth less than the small wound compared to the large one, because one must handle the intestines with more care, not pushing them in too much; for they tend to swell quickly, causing pain, if pushed in too far, and it is better to move the middle wounds, because one must first reset the intestine to its original place before attending to the others. And know that the rupture of the belly has four types of stitches: common stitches in the stomach stitch, and stitches for other wounds on the body, and other specific stitches are common to other wounds; yet they are more suitable with the stomach stitch, and I will explain each one separately.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small and nothing from the intestine sticks out, and it is a difficult thing to reset, then this is one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to injury.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: moisten a sponge or a soft cloth with hot water only, or cook in water with squinant (a type of spice), and cipre (possibly a herb), and spice; then remove the intestine as soon as the swelling is gone; and never use this as a constricting wine, but let it be moved so that it deflates.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, if the intestines are filled with hot or cold water and the veins are closed, for this eases the entry of a few things; and if it cannot enter, make a small cut in the wound with the instrument used to treat hemorrhoids; and the first care is to move the limb, that we should not cut without great need; and this is the instrument to split: cut inside the cavity and pull outward, see the shape.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines burst forth, if you can return them to their natural place in their proper position, do so if you have the power, for it is beneficial.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large and located below the stomach, it is necessary to have the patient lie on their back and elevate their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly, place the head and breast higher than the lower parts, and pay attention so that the wounded area is higher than the other; thus, you must apply what I said for both large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, prepare what you need; then take in your hands a gentle, warm remedy to cover the entire wound and gather the edges together; this is the common method of stitching, using one or more needles, according to the size of the wound, leaving two spaces at the head of the wound, and threading a needle with strong, fine thread; pierce the two layers of skin with the two points of the scalpel, which are beneath the skin, until you have pierced it from that part, and gather the two points of the scalpels together four times; then wrap double thread around the needle on both sides, and gather the two edges of the wound neatly together, leaving two spaces, and thread another needle; secure it with thread like the first one, and continue to do this as needed until the entire wound is closed; the needles should be medium-sized, neither too thin nor too thick, for they can pierce all the flesh, but if they are too thick, they cannot enter properly. Therefore, they should be medium; do not pull the needles too far beyond the flesh and skin or they will open up the wound before the stitching is complete; then trim off the ends of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient while sleeping, and place tenting or cloth over the ends of the needles to keep them in place, leaving them until the wound is healed; this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, as only one or two stitches are required, and it involves gathering together the two layers of skin and the two points of the scalpel together at a single needle; when you have finished stitching, return to where you began, stitching like one sews a cloth; leave spaces between each stitch about the size of a finger; this method is used for men, and I once stitched a wound on a man who had been stabbed in the belly; it was more than a palm-length wide and extended two palms below his intestines; it was a deep wound.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned the intestine to its original position after it had been out for twenty-four hours, and the wound healed completely within fifteen days, and he was cured.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And they marveled that he did not die, which was a miracle; and I did not cure him with any treatment, for I was in a place where none could be found, neither any medicine; and I put clean cotton on the wound twice a day and washed it with honey-water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching: take the needle, and hold it to the wrong side of the fabric, puncturing it straight through to the right side; once it has pierced the fabric, bring the needle back up on the wrong side near where you started, and continue stitching in the same way as a leatherworker sews fur, leaving the thread on one side and picking it up on the other until the stitch is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second stitching method, which Galen calls "so as to form," is like a way that nature itself sews together the two parts, applying one of the heads with satisfaction to the other head in this manner: insert a needle or a satisfying head close by, and pierce it only into the flesh, leaving the two heads of the satisfying thing; then turn the needle and pierce it from the opposite part towards this inside, as well as the other two heads of the satisfying thing; and then pierce both from the opposite part to this inside, in the other two heads of the mirach on the other side. This is the moving method of stitching and the most common one.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen calls this method "the two-needle stitching," and no one testifies to it other than the fact that one must sew the stomach with two needles, each having thread; and you should pass one needle from one side and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew corsets; and be aware that when the rupture is inside the stomach, the stitching is more difficult than for other parts of the stomach.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is like the judgment of other wounds: and it is that when you probe the fresh wound, and all its blood, in such a way that the armpit has moved, then rearrange the internal organs and the flesh; then apply a poultice with char-burning powder, and if the armpit has moved, apply any present dressing, as long as the wound is open; and bind the thread, and make sure the healing is sealed with mirach; then treat the wound like other wounds until it is healed; and if you have no medicines, then use a piece of old cotton and move it in the wound twice a day until it heals.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you need no other medicine in addition to these arrangements for simple wounds; and if you doubt that the wound is affecting vital members, it is necessary to moisten with light linen cloth dipped in warm or rose oil, and place it around the wound, and under the armpits; and if there is pain or putrefaction, which often happens, clisterize with black wine, especially if the putrefaction reaches the intestines. Puncture them inside, and know that when they are the large intestines, healing is easier than for the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestinal organ, called "young" (or perhaps "innard"), cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is due to the frailty of its vessels, the subtlety of the entire body, and the similarity of its nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	If the seed (or "zirbe") jumps out of the wound while it is still fresh, similar to how an intestine does, you must reset it immediately; if it has become old and turned white or black, then it's important to tie down the black part to prevent blood loss, as it contains vessels and arteries. Then cut through what's between the ties and hang the two seeds from the bottom of the wound until the seed pops out, facilitating its extraction.
de la routure dou boueil	from the rupture of the bowels
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, it cannot be restored in any man, as I have seen one nobleman struck by a lance through his belly; the wound was on the right side of the stomach, it became inflamed and developed into a fistula, from which emerged excretion and flatulence; I treated it according to my ability, and did not cease subtilizing until he was healed, and the wound made whole.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it healed, I doubted that the patient would not suffer pain in his belly; but he felt no pain, only improved condition, food, and drink; and certain healers say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be treated in this manner: take large plasters, then bring together the edges of the wound, and when the plaster has opened its mouth, place it over both lips, so that it sticks to them; then cut off the head of the plaster, and hold it in such a way that he cannot untie it, and put another plaster in the same manner as before until the wound is completely healed.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	That chief is attached to the intestine, and causes no harm to the patient, and it can be tied with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal, in this way: take the head of this intestinal thread, which is much stripped, and then tie it to the head of this thin flaxen thread twisted, then wind the thread into the needle, and stitch the intestine, and rearrange it in the rupture; and this method of stitching foreign bodies is not stronger than according to reason and hope; and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the large intestines, no one can heal it with subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula, whether it be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Every wound or abscess, when it becomes infected, is generally called a "fistula", especially when it is covered with pus and feels warm.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	A fistula is according to the true nodation, hard and white, where no pain is felt, and is just as covered with pus as the feathers of a bird; and it never clears up clearly, sometimes being thin and other times thick; sometimes moist, and other times dry; and I have spoken about this in the division of wounds, that every wound which is not clean, and has no discharge, is solely due to one of nine causes: namely, too much blood or pus; or because of its evil nature; or because there is hard matter inside, preventing it from discharging; or because there is excessive moisture; or because the flesh is rotten and the material of poor quality; or if the medicine is not good for healing; or because the corruption has the manner of a plague; or because the property of the region causes late digestion, slow health, and flatulence by nature; or it has veins or bones. And I have already explained all these causes, their signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary that I tell you about the treatment of a fistula which is performed by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	You know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that affect large veins, arteries, and nerves, or the small intestine, bladder, or any of the ribs, or the spine in the back, or any joints of the hands or feet, and they can also affect the primary member and its associated parts.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all fistulas of this kind are difficult to heal, and there is no cure but labor and ignorance; if there is a fistula that does not come to the place I mentioned above, and you have confidence in the treatment and understand it, take a piece of steel or iron, if the fistula is straight, cut it as desired; and if it is crooked, seek a delicate tool for plugging, because the plug bends itself around the curvature. Then wash it thoroughly with water to remove moisture and impurities; afterward, cut it precisely at your ability, that you may know if there are bones or nerves, and if it is completely healed, and ask the patient in pain where they feel it when you press your hand, and the location where they feel it; once you truly know the place where it is, and whether it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or any of the places I mentioned, then cut it as I told you, and remove all the harmful tissue and corrupted flesh inside; and then treat it as long as it is clean, and if the fistula is deep and straight, cut it completely, as much as you can, then apply moistened medical herbs over it, and cover it with a bottle up to the top of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom; then apply clean, healthy bandages, as long as it heals; and if it does not heal by this method, cauterize it as we said before, and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, cut it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerve does not affect the principal member, as we have said, and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, treat it until the corruption is completely removed, then apply curative remedies so long as it remains sound; but if it is not sound and bends back as before, know that you are not yet safe. Expose it and keep it until you reach the depths, and remove all the corruption, then restore it to its place; and if it is thus sound, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If no, know that the corruption is too deep, and you cannot cure it; if there is no other cause than to let nature take its course; and if there is a small corrupted bone that you can extract with pincers, using an appropriate instrument, and if there are many bones, break them not, but remove every bit of them; and if moisture makes things worse and there is doubt or fear, dry it and bind it up, and heat and massage the bone.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, apply something corruptible to the wound, and let it fester until the bones are rotten within, and then they will be more easily removed; and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, scrape away the corruption until all the blackness is gone, then close the wound; and if there is a great part corrupted, extending almost to the bone, you must cover it completely until the corruption is healed, and then treat it until it is sound; and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example from it and use aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	He was a young man around thirty years old who had a pain in his leg due to something that came from within the body, causing matters to accumulate in the leg, and he was afflicted with a large abscess, for which there was no reason to open; but through their folly, they worked so much on the abscess that it opened, and many substances corroded, becoming a fistula, and numerous ruptures that caused bowing and moisture from the body. Many tried to cure him for two years, and none of them were skilled in manual arts, until I was called to see his leg and the medications they used, and what was wrong through the ruptures affecting the whole body; and the young man's skin turned red, with a citrine-like hue.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I set up a tent in one of these openings, and then I examined all the openings, and found that some came against each other from every part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I then quickly entered one of the openings and cut as deep as I discovered a piece of bone, which was corrupted and perforated, and the corruption extended to the bone itself; I understood what appeared to be the corrupt bone, and thought that there was no other corruption besides that which I left; and I began to treat the wound with medicines for a long time, but they could not heal it; then I re-examined it and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, so I treated it and then closed it, and focused on binding the place; but I could not do so until I had removed a palm-sized piece of the bone, and brought it back to its original shape. Then I treated it with medicines again, and it healed steadily and was bound securely, and did not want to start over again except for the weakness of the patient who could not bear it, and for the fear of death that I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For in the evacuation of blood, it often happens completely, and a hard callus is formed in its place on the bone, which is well arranged and causes no harm or damage to anything at all, neither coming nor going.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if a bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this manner: take a ligature, and stretch it over the end of the bone that opens, and instruct anyone to pull it upwards; and attach another thicker woolen ligature to the first one, and bind it over the char (fragment) where the bone is, so that you pull the char from below, and uncover the char on the bone where you observe it to be, so that the bone does not become infected with the charred part; and place a small piece of charcoal or a table under the bone to cover the infected char; and it should be treated as much as possible to be seen and felt, and then in this way once more.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then uncover the entire limb; then apply heat from below, and then move the affected part to the other side of the corruption, as we have said; and if the corruption is in the joint, cut off the corrupt joint, and remove the bone from the other side; and if the corruption is in the connection between two joints, there is no other way but to cut it off; and if the corruption is in the wrist of the hand or at the ankle of the foot, this matter is very difficult, but nevertheless you must inquire about this corruption how it opens, and cleanse it in every way that you can, as long as the vein or nerve do not oppose; and know that there are many instruments for cutting and binding these bones, according to the position of the bone and its appearance, and their thickness and thinness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason, it is necessary to match each instrument with the shape of each wound; and know that the work will show you the instrument you need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; therefore choose the instrument that is right for the job.
dou feu	with fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The joint becomes dislocated either internally or externally; and when you have treated that corruption with medicinal remedies but they do not help, then it is necessary to cover that limb until the corruption reaches the joint where it originates, so that the patient escapes from death or evil, which is greater, due to the fault in the limb; and the signs of this are that the limb turns black, seeming to be burned by fire, and after the blackening, because these corrosions spread from one limb to another and take over the whole body; therefore, hurry to cover it, and if it is caused by the bite of some poisonous creature, such as a sea scorpion or serpent or similar, then if the corruption is at the top of the two joints, treat it immediately and do not allow any space for it to come up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes up to the hand, it should cup the joint so that corrosion does not reach the arm; and if it comes up to the arm, it should cup the shoulder; and if it passes the shoulder, it is death, and there is no cure outside of its quantity of virtue; and thus it acts when corrosion comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, it cups after the other joint; and if it comes to the foot, it cups the entire foot; and if it goes up the leg, it cups at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy than to leave the patient to die; and the manner of cupping or binding the member is that you tie it above and below, and stretch one assistant with the lower string, and another assistant with the upper string, and you remove the skin that is between the two strings with a wide spatula, until the bone is exposed; then cup or bind, and place a strip of linen on each side so that the linen does not touch the healthy part, and it brings the patient further injury and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if the discharge of pus occurs when you open it, and you cauterize the wound too aggressively, or apply any restraining powders; then return to your medicine as soon as it is complete, tie the afflicted limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you that it happened to a man in great pain: he had a blackening which seemed to be a burn from fire, and this corrosion first appeared on his right foot, discoloring it entirely; and when he saw the corrosion, he covered his foot, and it healed; but long after, the corrosion returned on his left hand, and he came to me, and I applied reflective things after purification of the body, and the corrosion would not cease. And he begged me to amputate his hand, but I did not want to do so, as I had hope of reflecting the material. And I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die, since the strength of the man was weak; and he became completely desperate, returned to his land, covered his hand, and it healed; and I have only heard this tale told about anyone else who does otherwise, when necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	No abscess ever forms in a fleshy joint, and it stays there so long that it causes great tension; then it ruptures and pierces the flesh, leaving the bones visible, just like a vessel; and the skin covering it is as thin as delicate cloth, and does not extend to the bone or nerve, and such an illness is called 'sain' (healthy), and not 'fistule' (abscess); but if it extends so far that it reaches the bone completely, it is called a 'fistule'; and the skin should be cut all around, especially when it is thin like cloth; and its corruption is not known.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	If you believe the skin is infected and the corruption is not completely healed, and the skin is dry and hard, treat it with a cleansing enema as follows: examine if the breast is swollen and emits a foul odor; then administer an Egyptian medicine made of equal parts of salt, oil, litargire (a type of mercury), and heat them in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and thick like honey. Then, according to need, dilute it with water and honey and apply it to the affected area, constricting the aperture; leave the medicine for two hours, then remove it by squeezing; repeat this several times until the breast is cleansed and any pus is drained. If the infected person cannot tolerate either the Egyptian medicine or hot water, use a mixture of hot water and ground charcoal from vine wood, pour it over the affected area, let it flow, and apply the enema; continue this until you are certain the breast is thoroughly cleansed. Alternatively, use an enema made with honey and fermented wine, allowing the honey to purify and wash away the infection, while the wine promotes healing. If the aperture of the breast is too small for the enema tube, enlarge it slightly with a hot iron, then apply a thin layer of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is wide enough for the enema to pass through. If the wound is excessively large and cannot be sufficiently widened for the enema, and the discharge from the affected area flows downwards, ensure that the enema tube is positioned higher than the infected site.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bowel is in perfect condition, it does not allow gas to form; and if you cannot cover the opening of the anus as you see fit, arrange it in such a way that the bowel moves down to its lowest point, for when the bowel is perfect, it does not allow gas to form, and if you cannot cover the opening of the anus as you see fit, arrange it so the bowel moves slightly downwards, and leave nothing of the bowels; take consolidative medicines to place over the wound, and put a linen cloth that covers the entire wound; then, stitch as strongly around the perforation in the side of the anus, making it wider than before, for often, to remove the bowels, they remove the anus; and know what runs from the bowel, whether it is venom or pus or enough or digested or undigested; be careful if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or no, and when you see how your medicine has spread in such a way over the perforation in the side of the anus, then know that the bowels are already healing, and bring back health; and then unbind it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you unbind the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the dressing.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast feels bowed and indigest after many days, knowing that it will not open.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons manifest after a long time, do not despair of your health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are some whose symptoms worsen when they speak about their wounds, and others who do the opposite; and if the breast feels bowed and closed after many days, knowing that it will not open; and if the breast is slow to open and remains shut, then use moist medicines with a subtle effect, as an ointment prepared with vitriol, which is the last medicine; take this delicate ointment and mix it with rose oil, adding equal parts of good wine; then conserve it and apply it. The same method can be used for making honey thickened with cooked grain, when a delicate ointment is not available; you may take mirra, aloes, and incense, crush them, and sprinkle the powder over honey while it is still warm; then spread it on a cloth and place it on the breast; never apply it directly or use roots of lotus, which is similar to flour or chalk; and use simple or composite remedies: grind them into a powder and mix them with the honey I mentioned, and apply it. If the cure prolongs, and this treatment does not help, then know that corruption has taken hold, and it exerts pressure on bones, limbs, or joints; just as we said earlier about treating fistulas.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	from the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Gangrene is an abscess that arises from the nail, either in the hand or the foot, or occasionally elsewhere; and when it becomes old and one does not take care, it leads to a gangrenous infection, causing pain and swelling until it reaches the root of the nail, and possibly even destroys the entire nail. It results in putrid odor, the affected area becomes red and swollen, and the limb feels cold.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When treating it as we have described in the previous section, if the treatment is not effective, then you must remove all the dead tissue from around the nail, and after that, cauterize the wound.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauterization is very helpful if the bone is healthy, and the nail is sound; if the nail pierces the flesh, and begins to poke, and the wound bleeds, it is necessary that you place the right edge under the nail where it pricks, and pull it up high, and gently and softly sever that flesh, and apply hot and corrosive medicines to remove all of it; then treat the wound with ointments until it heals.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it, and dig out the rot, for as much as the bone decays, it cannot heal; and if you see both bones decaying, remove them immediately as mentioned above, then treat it until it heals; and if it is frozen, and swollen, and causes great pain, it is necessary that you treat it first; then cut the nail with a sharp spatumile across from above, and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if it happens, apply something to soothe it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain so sharp and intense strikes the hand.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	He who is born into the hands of no one, perhaps quite fleshy, and by chance has a part with bones, but never a nail, and none are born in the root of the joint, where birth is against nature.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	He who is born in no joint shall not move, and he who is born in the joint of a joint may be immobile; the size of the fleshy one is so slight, in such a manner: cut him at his root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born in the root of the jointure is difficult to cure; if it keeps you awake.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In those who are born with or develop a deformity, it is necessary that you first hold the round shape of the joint firmly towards the bone, then dislocate the bone to a suitable position, and finally cure it as long as it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The deformities that come together in a joint may be due to birth, or the healing of a wound, or burns from fire, or similar conditions.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If you need to secure that joint, so it must be repaired according to their natural forms; then place between two moistened linen or cloth in rose oil, so they do not adhere; or you place between two pieces of fine leather, as long as the limbs are joined, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If dislocation occurs in any of its fingers with the palm, secure that joint as appropriate.
des vils	venoms
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	These veins are thickly wrapped, filled with excessive melancholic substances that affect various members of the body; and they occur more frequently in the legs of those who walk, work, and carry heavy loads, compared to others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary for you to administer purgative once and then cleanse the bowels.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cure of fire is according to two manners: one is with the use of cups and extraction of black blood; and the other manner is that you open the vein and drain it entirely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The operation is performed in this manner: first, immerse the leg in hot water as much as possible without causing pain, then extract the affected limb from the knee to the ankle; then cut the vein in one or two or three places with a large incision, drain and squeeze out the black blood into your hand from one end to the other, until such time as the patient can bear it; then bind it, and order him to eat food causing black vomit; and repeat the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, and harm the patient not.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	They should raise the affected leg, if there are many hairs, then immerse it in hot water, and raise it with warm water until the veins turn red and swell; and if you do not have a bath, heat it over fire, and then compress it against the vein close to the knee, or on the inside of the ankle. Then open the skin near the vein, scraping it from both sides until it is exposed, and you see it red and black, resembling a white cord; then pull from below until it is lifted from the skin, and then gently press it at the other end, as you did before; then cut another piece, if necessary, and lift it, and compress it against the vein again, moving to another hook, as you did previously; then cut another piece, and lift it, and compress and cut the vein at the second hook, until it is completely extracted, then clean it. And if you cannot extract it, insert a very strong needle through the entire thread, bind and pull it, and pull from below, turning your hand back and forth, until it comes out; beware that it does not cut off, for if it does, you will not be able to extract or lift it, and harm will come to the patient. And once extracted, place a moist, soft cloth over the wound, steeped in wine and rose oil, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the limb is contracted and twisted and bent together, not in a straight position as we have said, then it must be torn apart forcibly, but not covered; treat it as we have mentioned above.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape to use when closing the eye is very curved, and it does not cut through, only closing the eyelid; it is of great curvature, because if it were thin, it would cut the eyelid, but since it must be thick as we have said, this is its form.
de la voinne civile	of the natural vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is located in the legs, in warm regions where no plants or trees grow, and on land where there is no moisture; and sometimes it appears elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens due to putrefaction that arises from beneath the skin, as it comes from within the body coiled and twisted.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein appear, it is that there is a very great inflammation in the leg, then the color changes, and the vein begins to emerge forcefully, just like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the vein opens, it is necessary to wrap around a piece of cloth from one and a half to two finger widths, leaving the cloth on the leg, and whenever it retracts, re-wrap around the cloth, and do not cover its root until it has completely emerged; for if you cut it, it will recede into the flesh, causing abscesses, putrefaction, or other illness. Therefore, it is important to treat it little by little until it is fully healed, leaving no cloth in the body; and this vein appears when it is treated with five or ten long finger-widths of cloth, as has come to me personally, where it emerged from ten finger-widths long, and when you cut it, it draws back one or two holes, and pierces to the bottom so that all can see; and it should be emptied of the matter inside, and treated with medicines that prevent putrefaction for several days, then cure it as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never again touch this vein, especially when it opens in the joint of the foot, or of the hand, and a great deal of blood flows out; from which it often jumps and spouts; treat it then as we have said above.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	vers that are born between skin and bone.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called "bull disease" in our land because it often affects bulls, and it is a small worm that is born between skin and bone. It spreads throughout the body, moving from one member to another, causing great pain as it bursts through the skin where it resides, and sometimes it goes into the eye, perhaps entering and damaging it; this happens repeatedly. It is caused by putrefaction of certain humors, just like worms, serpents, or lice in the belly, and its malice is uncertain, for when it moves through the body and reaches the head, it can affect the eye, and if it enters, it may destroy it. This occurs frequently.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it healing and draining, it cannot be done unless the pus has formed: therefore, it is necessary that you hold the limb above and below with a strong, tight bandage, then cut and drain it thoroughly, and if the pus is thick in the wound, cauterize it with fire until it dries up; and the greater harm it causes, the more it will discharge oil, as we have said; and if you see the swelling coming near the oil gland, stretch it below the eyebrow, then cut and drain it thoroughly; and it is advisable for the patient to use purification of the body with solvents and medicines to dispel bad humors, and to avoid foods that cause putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from flatulence
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes in no particular member, but moves from one member to another; and I have seen this as I have told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and after that, I saw something rise up on her shoulder, as quickly as anything, like bright silver when it cuts through flesh; the pain left that place and moved to the shoulder, and then, a little later, spread throughout her body, until it reached the other arm; then she told me that she felt it move around inside her body, as I had seen.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled much at how it moved from one limb to another, for I had never seen this disease in such a way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I had observed that everyone wanted to move the pain from one place to another, but I hadn't seen it like this before, as I did with the woman; and I thought it was because she had a dry body, her veins exposed, and this constricted movement; and I didn't see it apply to those who are delighted, with moist bodies and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see this disease heal, and the patient feels that pain as we have said, if it opens from top to bottom and then closes until that constricted movement in the place subsides; and cauterize the place; and if you do not have these remedies, cure it with those who dispel stiffness, such as foul pills, serpentary pills, and similar ones.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows vary, according to their appearance and the parts of the body they pierce.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	Their diversity lies in that they have large and small tips, some are smooth, others are sealed; and there are those with two points, and those with lengths, and some with pieces; and some pierce any member in two ways: either in a primary member, such as the head, body, liver, kidney, intestines, bladder, or similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it comes out in any part of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, appears: it is necessary that you fight for the extraction of this arrow, because death comes after in various ways; and if this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not fully extracted, remove it, and heal the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when the arrow comes out and pierces the bone, and if there is satisfaction in the area above the brain, it is when the sight, side vision, and eye movements are impaired and red, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and clouding of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps without feeling from the nostrils or ears; and possibly losing speech and voice; and also coming out as white pus-like fluid from the wound, and sometimes like a burning sensation in the chest; and if these signs appear to you, since you are in charge of the cure, remove the arrow even if it is not completely embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of an arrow when it breaks or withdraws, is that it is close to the left breast and feels as if it were fixed in something hard, not empty; and sometimes the arrow remains silent like a pulse, and brings black blood, cold and sweating, and fainting: know therefore without doubt that death approaches.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow that the patient never sweats is that no foam comes from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's face turns pale, and he breathes heavily and stops moving.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow comes out in the night, it leaves small holes; and causes great pain and sorrow and heavy breathing; and all the muscles of the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrow pierces through the stomach, perhaps something from the undigested meat will jump out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow pierces through the belly, and there is no sign of healing through the intestines, then there is little hope for a cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow pierces the bladder, and the urine jumps out and overflows, and the patient feels intense pain, know that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, as they are formed and their joints and neck and shoulder and helper (muscles) and the sharp pain in the back and the forceful and stiffening (of muscles), and the foot and legs, and the appearance of the limb, differ according to various dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because you must do the same.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	There once happened to me at home an arrow that penetrated my eye or cheek: I tried to pull it out, and pushed it from the other side through the fat of the ear, and it was healed without injury.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And at another time, he pulled out an arrow that had penetrated the fat under the skin without damaging the papilla, and the arrow was completely extracted, leaving only the tip in the flesh, and it was a large arrow with a blue arc, surprisingly light without any damage to the ear; he was healed, and no further harm came to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And extract an arrow from the throat of a Christian, which was an arrow with ears [perhaps referring to barbs or a specific type of arrowhead]: I trimmed the barb and drew it out gently, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And I extracted an arrow that was stuck in a man's home, which had penetrated his gut, and I thought he was dying; but after thirty days, he showed no change in condition; so I cut around the arrow, and freed it, and pulled it out without any ill effect.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you wish to help a man who has an arrow stuck in his back or chest, and the wound is deep; and the arrow remains trapped within him, and he shows no change in his natural condition, nor does he experience any harm from any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And see another man to whom an arrow struck his face and deeply wounded him; he endured much without suffering great pain; and many others like him.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And I treated a prince, the king himself, who had an arrow in his neck that was deeply embedded and slightly tilted to the right side; the arrow was completely lodged, and I was called to treat it after three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I carefully probed it, and I felt nothing; however, he experienced sharp pain and discomfort underneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the tip of the arrow I placed a soothing, digestive plaster on the shoulder because the muscles were not tightening; and then I saw the arrowhead.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I left the plaster on for several days, then healed the wound and thus the patient endured great pain for a long time, until he felt the arrow inside his neck; and he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied a corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it opened and I felt the tip of the arrow sticking in the flesh; then I adjusted the opening of the wound with that medicine until the head of the arrow became visible; and it healed after about three months, but then the wound opened up again, so I used tweezers to pull on both sides without success. Then I did not stop trying to find subtle and ingenious tools, until I finally got hold of well-made tweezers, as described at the end of this chapter, and I pulled it out and healed the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And they consider that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: so I restored it, and the wound healed, and the patient was completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	I have also told you about the quality of removing certain arrows, so that you place your care on what I do not say, for books cannot contain everything; but wise masters compare well enough small things and those present and deficient, true new works and new instruments, for the descent of strange things that occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not come out of the members where they are embedded, except in two ways: either through the vein where they enter, or from another part; and that which comes out from the side where it enters is an arrow embedded in the flesh, and it never comes out now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not come out now, let it stay until the flesh around it becomes rotten and open; and if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it for several days and each day move it a little; and then it will come out, and if it does not, pierce through everything with a thin knife until the bones around it are widened.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone at the top and goes all the way to one of the belly cavities near the brain, and none of the things I have mentioned earlier help the patient: do not pull it out, but let it stay even for several days, for if it comes close to the center, it will be fatal.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is embedded only in the bone and does not come out satisfactorily, it leaves the patient no rest for days without further harm, if the skill of pulling it out is lacking.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply embedded and cannot come out, then apply heat around it, as I have told you; then cure the joint while it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is withdrawn into the flesh of the body and cannot be seen, one should attempt to pull it with all strength; and if you feel it, use any suitable instrument; and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound or the depth of the arrow, or there are no bones, muscles, or nerves nearby, leave it until the wound is severe; and if possible, pull the arrow, and if there are any pieces of bone attached on either side that you can remove, dislocate the arrowhead from its position as much as you can, then break or bend the arrow's tail, so you can pull it out more easily.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, so that the limb is entirely relaxed around the joint, then continue to treat it, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	If the signs of blood poisoning appear to you, then follow what we have said about treatment in its chapter; and be careful with the incision on the nerve and the vein, and find a way to extract the arrow without danger, as soon or as late, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the position it was in when the arrow left, for that is the greatest help, and if you cannot, then do what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	He knows the arrow that comes from another place, where it opens something within, and the skin is swollen in that area as one can see or feel apparently: then cut there, until the pliers can grasp it, and then extract it: if it jumps out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	If it is stuck in the bone, turn your hand round, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then extract it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot be extracted, leave it for now, and then try to extract it again until it comes out; and if there is an arrowhead in the bone, it should be pushed into the center of the instrument, and then forced out, and if the arrow is removed with the instrument, the extraction will be easier.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is embedded, it is necessary that you clean all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, and then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow has pierced through to the abdomen or bladder or ribcage, and it is close to the surface, and you can reach it, then take care to remove it; avoid cutting into the vein or nerve, then extract the arrow, and clean the wound as best you can, and treat it until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The instrument used to extract arrows resembles a bird's beak; here is its shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrowhead.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrowhead is like a feather, to point the tip of the arrow, just as if it were the form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of pincers, to pierce and hold if it is thus:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are 31 veins from which one can gain health, of which there are 16 main ones: 2 battan veins behind the ears, called "herbech"; and 2 arteries appearing in the two temples, and 2 veins in the two arm pits, called "aspires"; and the vein across the forehead; and the vein at the top of the head near the nose; and the 2 glands at the collarbone; and 2 veins in the upper lip above the mouth, called "augeherich"; and 2 veins beneath the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins from which one commonly draws health are 5 in each arm: one is the cephalic vein, located on the left side, and common people call it "vein of the head"; and the median is called "fast" and is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins; and common people call it "vein of the body" and is on the right side. The basilic is situated at the bottom, and common people call it "vein of the belly", and it lies above the femoral vein, and that's the one from which health is drawn, which opens clearly onto the palm.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the saving vein is the one between the little finger and the ring finger, and if it rains; and in the leg, there are three veins: one below the knee on the left side, and the second is the thin one at the ankle on the right side; and the vein called 'nesse' is in the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg, there are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The veins behind the ears aid in the discharge of old catarrh and migraine; and the quality of the vein, as I have said, is that you raise the patient's head and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then squeeze the patient's collar tightly until the two veins beneath the ears extend in two parts from the head: hold them there, and wherever you feel the pulse beneath your hand, it signifies improvement; then take the lance and bore through the vein just below the bone, and lift your hand up the entire vein upstream, and cut and the skin and flesh and the vein well away from the bone, and let out the blood until you see; then strain and bind it, as long as it remains healthy; and I have already spoken of incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	He heals the two arteries that are in the temples, as it were, an old and smooth process, and accustomed to sight, and the body of sharp tears with them; and the quality of healing is such as I say: and it is that the patient pulls his collar tight, as long as the two veins remain open; he feels the pulse under his finger, then signs with a cross; then lightly presses on the vein higher down on his little finger, and withdraws the needle from under, and releases the vein higher up, and the clot, just as you did with the other veins, and makes the blood flow according to your need; then unties the patient, and puts his finger on the vein for an hour, then puts cotton; then forms a bandage and leaves it until it is healed; and we have spoken much of their cleansing and extraction, at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The surgeon of the vein on the forehead is just as valuable as the surgeon of the skull for ancient face diseases and migraine and redness; and its quality is such that the patient tightens his neck by twisting, until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called "borer", which has this form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand or another tool, allowing the blood to flow according to the amount you see; then loosen the patient's neck, and tie the vein as long as it remains healthy without opening a wide wound.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Nevertheless, the flames should not be too strong; and do not cut across the healthy flesh, for the bone is close by, and by chance might break the flame when it is thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The health of the two veins located in the arms is beneficial for wounds, itching, redness, and eye conditions, as well as facial diseases; its quality lies in that the patient's condition does not worsen due to any strain or twisting of the veins, as would happen otherwise. Then, regarding the vein, it should be neither too thin nor too thick with fire, for there is no middle ground.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the fire is subtle, it may burn; then draw out the blood slowly, as much as needed, and then bind it with cloth, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The health of the vein near the nose is very valuable for colds, sudden fever, and facial ailments such as migraines and redness that appear on the face, especially when it is old. The quality of this health is that the patient tightens his neck and pulls his nose to his left hand; he then inserts a subtle long flame into the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well enough for the blood to flow, and the healing begins now. Do not dig too deep, and draw out the blood slowly according to your need, then bandage it for a night, as it is quickly restored; this is the shape of the flame.
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The holy oil of the two guindges is helpful for the narrowing of the eye, and the onset of illness, and many diseases, and fever, and corrosion, and herpes, and boils; and its quality is such that it extracts the patient's pain from both sides, as we have said; and the skilled one who treats the patient's head, and the patient lies on a seat, then cleans the vein with long and slightly wide strokes, then applies blood-letting in a temperate manner, or as needed; then repeat this process in the other vein, then loosen the bandage, and gently tighten the veins so that the patient is not strangled; and leave it until morning, for the wound to heal.
de la sainie des leivres	from the health of the veins
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the veins in the mouth helps to prevent colds, and the corruption of gums, splits in the lips, and pain and swelling.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the health is to have the patient sit in front of you, holding his chin as I said; then turn the lip, and look at the veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, which you recognize by their black color and small veins around them: so cut both, and if you do not know them and are in doubt, cut the thicker one from each side, and do the same with the two veins above and below, for it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	From the cleansing of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The cleansing of the tongue is most beneficial after the cleansing of the head, and it helps with conditions in the throat, and eye diseases, and mouth ailments; and the quality of the cleansing is such that the patient should hold the tongue between their hands towards the sun, and gently pull it, examining each side for a black vein: cleanse both, but do not force too hard, as they are arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins in the neck that are commonly cleansed are done in two ways: either by pressing with a hot flame immediately, or using a delicate knife, like a scalpel, and this is called "aneisling"; and they are large and small according to the width and tightness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the fevered area turns red and is very renowned, and it is large as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the veins with smooth and flat openings full of obvious thick blood, which contain thick blood and mucus; and this is the shape of the olive-colored fever.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more delicately pointed, and is for healing the delicate veins where there is subtle citrus-colored blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The healing of the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, is very helpful for diseases that are below the throat, and the collarbone, and the chest, and the belly; and it is important for the healer to heal gently and wash out the artery below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it cuts the artery, and blood flow stops, as is necessary, as I said; and the flame should not be gripping, but cutting like a knife.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the vein does not open clearly, it is necessary that you extract it and change it for another; or you want none of its blood, and heal the wound to the vein in the arm: it opens clearly; and cut it with a knife, as we said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you come to know the place of the wound, it is necessary that you extract the arm, touch the wound until you feel the pulse; then mark the place with a sign, and bind the arm, and cut the vein with a knife, as we said; and be careful not to harm the artery when you see it swell, for that is the artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it bubbling up from above like a child's urine, and the eyes are red and thin, know that it is a sign of an artery: so hurry, and place your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger when the bleeding has stopped, which often happens; if the arm is bound, leave it alone, and do not move the patient until it heals.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the eye is not stained and it bleeds, and no remedy comes to mind, if the artery opens up, especially near its root; stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Take a piece of fig bark, cut it, and take one half and bind it firmly to the other side; if it stays in place, that's good. If not, treat it as we have said, with powders that stop blood flow; binding is not too tight or loose for the size of the wound, and it should be done with skill.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	If the vein is infected, help by treating the blood flow from the top and the bottom, because it is composed of basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said; the healer should wash for the nerve below, and if it is not too deep, and he finds the nerve, it swells and the healing is hindered, and perhaps it cannot heal; this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any person due to its subtlety, then it must be treated with an antiseptic instrument beforehand, and be careful with the nerve.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if a vein is between the two bones, it makes it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The treatment for the headache is to draw blood from the forehead, which helps the limbs; and it is beneficial to apply olive or myrtle flame, as it is the safest of all veins, as it does not affect any nerve or artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Nevertheless, it is advisable to seek the lightest vein, and do not be concerned if it hurts the first time, just try again; and sometimes the veins swell up in some men when they are punctured for the first time, but it should not hurt.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the wound healing depends on your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about healing is that healing is not only achieved by maintaining health and preventing future ailments; it involves one of the three main veins: cephalics, femoral, or basilic. One should begin healing in the early stages of illness, during autumn and winter after eating, when signs of satiety appear. One should heal on the first day or third day, after 2-3 hours or the second day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	Healing that is administered for ailments does not have a fixed time, but rather when there is a need for it, at any hour and in all seasons; however, one should not heal children until they are 12-13 years old, nor pregnant women after just four weeks until the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	One should not treat the old who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when anyone wishes to be healed in any way, it is necessary for him to cleanse the intestines with a light enema if he has a lot of feces retained, so that the veins do not draw out the harmful excesses from the primary members; nor should one heal someone who is too salt from meat, or raw, as long as they are thus, nor those who are waterlogged, after colic, vomiting, belly pain, frequent defecation, much sexual activity, hard work, watching, fasting, and this, whether due to a weapon or bodily weakness; then carefully remove the humors, if they are thick, through food and drinks and medicines, if you have cause to do so; then enter the bath, if nothing prevents it, in order to purify the blood, and heal the vein from below towards the third, as we have said; and guard yourself on that day against work, fatigue, luxury, and similar things; and be calm and joyful, and let the healing be more thorough than that of others; then rub the arm twice or three times, then tighten the ligature slightly, for when it is too tight, it cannot heal; and then rub it with your hands until the veins swell up and you feel them. Then moisten the compress with a little old oil, then place your left hand's finger on the vein under the skin slightly where you want to heal, so that the vein does not burst or injure itself.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flow as if tied to the body, and if they are of such a kind that they are afflicted with pus, so that when fire is applied, it draws back from the fire, and cannot open the vein, then one suffers from this; and if he opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, for which reason the surgeon must be skilled in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens on the first attempt, it is good; but if not, one must try again a little further from the previous point, if the limb is not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the limb is inflamed and the patient fears, let it be for one or two days without binding it; perhaps it will form an abscess later. Do not put him in a bath, but continue treatment as it pleases the surgeon; and if the perforation is small, pierce it subtly and gently so as not to draw out too much blood, as you see fit; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the vein engorged, do not immediately recommence bleeding, but apply a little oil, for it lightens the body of blood, and the oil moves in this vein the substance that the oil itself; and thus administer the oil in each wound that you treat veins, to stop the flow of blood; and the same is done trially and gently when it is applied to the shoulder; it thins the blood and disperses it when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if a large abscess occurs, which happens frequently, especially when the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and apply a moist sponge with hot water and silk, and hold it for an hour; and you must do this after the blood flow from the vein has stopped, and if it stays in place for several days without turning black or green, it will not harm; and if you see, apply any aloe or myrrh prepared in calament juice, a poultice, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often an abscess and swelling appear in the holy basil: then place your hand above, and if you feel the soft joint under the pressure of your hand, it is this appearance that is harmful.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, be careful not to place anything on it that we have mentioned, for it may dry out and become hard without the flow of blood; but make an ointment to harden the joint, then apply other remedies until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each case of pain according to the quantity of its strength and the color of the pain.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	Because if the wound is infected, let it drain as long as it remains red; and if you see a large amount of pus, let it continue to drain until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for one who is strong and robust, and has the skill to extract pus, to make a larger wound, with wider flaps; and for one who is weak, do the opposite, making smaller and more frequent wounds, and always cutting across, not piercing. This method of dressing saves from infection and damage to nerves, and is better than long and wide dressings.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And to him whose body requires cleansing, it is necessary to apply a mild mixture of pomegranate juice; if he is overheated, he should take bloodletting three or four times. And if he has a cold constitution, he should eat before cleansing a mild mixture of syrup, either mused syrup or aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chives, and a very fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints during cleansing, after the release of much blood, it is necessary that he inhale a brew of charcoal and subtle fragrant syrup, and use other things as we have mentioned in the section or chapter on syncope for vein evacuation.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to straighten his arm and heal it later, if it is weakened by much blood loss, he should pull it little by little, according to the amount of its strength continues.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wants to straighten his arm after the first dressing and has a strong contraction, he should heal it seven hours after the first dressing, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to heal from another side, he should be healed on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is much blood within the body, which has already been heated, and causes fever; it needs to be drained in large quantities, and the opening widened until it takes possession of the entire limb; then you must apply all the conditions of health, and place your hand upon its pulse when it's healing, so that death does not come in the absence of warmth, which happens often when healthcare is neglected; and you should never, when freeing the arm, cause blood to flow out again or reopen the wound, but press firmly upon it; nor if it's twisted, should you force it straight, for that would be harmful; but let it heal fully a second time; or if there's a point at the tip of the flame, until the blood which is congealed within the vein leaves and puts itself back into water, and press gently upon it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is inflated, leave it alone and do not squeeze it until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to drain blood a second time due to the abscess recurring in the same place or in another vein or arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthier in place of the vein from the head because it is composed differently.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the method for healing is that the patient should hold his hand in hot water until the veins are red, then tie it slightly so that the vein appears well, and then heal it from now on across, not too wide or too long; and make the punctures wide, and heal close to the joint of the hand, without letting any blood escape, and return the hand to hot water and let the blood flow in the water until you have enough; and if it is in this state, do not stop holding the hand in hot water because it is put into greater heat than necessary; and the healing of this vein is safer than all other veins, as there are no arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The surgeon of salvation of the right hand is worthy of all diseases that affect the flesh; and this is the manner: stretch out the hand and immerse it in hot water until the vein is engorged, if you see it; and if the wound is diagonal, and if you touch it with your whole hand, nothing should hurt; but do not press too hard, for the nerve is entirely devoid of flesh, and then dip the hand back into hot water, if it feels numb in the wound, and it cannot issue forth.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as best you can, then apply oil and string to seal the wound tightly, and do so for every person.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The healthy person holds the eye with their left hand to cure the disease of the mouse, and does everything as I have told you towards the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The healer of the soul holds itself to all diseases that afflict the body, such as illnesses of the heart, and retention of flowers (possibly referring to a condition related to flora or a metaphorical 'blooming' issue), and diseases of rain (potentially meteor-related or a metaphor for humidity-linked ailments), and old joints and legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of his health is such that patients experience great relief in hot water, rubbing their veins until they subside, and binding them over the joints of the foot. The vein is located at the ankle, and above the foot, it goes up to the knee; this method is therefore useful for either a heavy downpour (of fluid) or at the ankle, wherever it is most needed.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you bind it on the foot, be careful not to constrict the toes, and apply the bandage as if you were tying a knot; and the pain will subside.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	If the pain cannot be relieved, immerse the foot in water and allow the vein to drain completely.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the bandaging is done for the first time, repeat the process slightly above the previous one, as the toes are stiff; do not doubt and constrict the nerve, as we have said, and do the same for the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein's lion is at the foot's ankle, and its health corresponds to the pain of the back when it is hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its health is such that the patient feels better in the bath, straining from the ankle with three or four stretches, otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, the health in all ways as you can, and crossing; and should be moved as you cover it, for the lion is safe, and it is greatly relieved by manual manipulation.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not succeed, there is no flow of health from the vein that opens on the back or side of the foot, and towards the little toe, and be careful of the nails; and make sure with blood as much as possible, and then loosen the bandage, and put cotton on it and tighten it; it is now healthy.
des sainies de ventouse	from the suction of the cupping glass
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping glasses are made of horns, or iron, or glass; and the suction is created in two ways: either by striking and attracting blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	This suction, performed without striking, is carried out in two ways: either entirely with heat or without heat; and the suction, when blood is struck and extracted, is done in twelve parts of the body, one over the forehead, another across the nape of the neck, two on each shoulder, one under the chin, two on each arm, and two on each leg, also two on each ankle. The suction does not involve drawing blood from veins but rather from small vessels scattered throughout the skin; it does not weaken anyone as is done with vein-cutting treatments, and it should never be carried out on a patient suffering from congestion due to recent overeating, while the body is still full.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if by necessity of illness or habits it needs to be ventosed, in the beginning and at the end of each month, and every day, for there are such who when they need to be ventosed, their head becomes heavy; and others who experience swelling and redness on their face, and their head, and neck, and darkness; and such who have a drop of blood in their mouth, and their tongue is swollen, and they bleed; and others who think, see blackness, nausea, and die, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially in the middle of the month, we order it to be ventosed after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The surgeon of the muscle is aided by the heat in the great pain ... that comes from the dislocation, and it does not suit that this be after the evacuation of all the body; and this application is for the health of the head, and it does not suit those of cold complexion who use it, or who have scabs, because they cause them much harm; and for this reason the elderly should not use it, nor those who have cold headaches.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who recover from it often become obstructed, and for this reason a suction cup should be placed slightly lower in doubt of obstruction.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation of the chest is beneficial for the health of the heart and lungs, and because of this, it causes tightness in the chest, constriction of the channel of the lung, and sometimes, swelling and bloating; and it should be relieved quickly, because if it holds too firmly, it can cause harm to the stomach and body.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventilation of the chest as it affects the ribs can cause headaches, eye pain, constriction, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and is beneficial for the health of the heart and lungs; therefore, you should instruct the patient to gently press their hand against the chest, avoiding pressure on the artery, to prevent bleeding or other complications.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The inflammation of the gums is valuable in mouth diseases, and in the decay of teeth, and similar ailments in the mouth, and it affects the health of both lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The inflammation of the shoulders is associated with disease that arises from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The inflammation of the veins is as significant as three veins in the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins; and instruct the patient not to press too hard, for the skin over the veins is bare, and it can damage the veins and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup that is on the croup is as harmful as bruises from the bottom, and it causes diseases below, and it is necessary that the suction cup be large, and made of iron, so that it needs to be carefully pulled; and if it is too delicate, it will break and cause great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups on the legs close tightly as they draw blood from all over the body and cause severe pain in the old rains, and joints, and bladder, and result in scars; they are located on the two knees and two ankles, but they weaken the body after long use and lead to more stiffness.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying a suction cup is as follows: you apply it at first while it is empty, and suck gently, then place it firmly and move it evenly without stopping until you see the skin turn red and swollen, and open the veins; then remove them, and be careful with the position of the cups, for there are some with thick skin and narrow pores: it is only necessary to apply them once, making large wounds and deep ones slightly; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the vein is thick, it is necessary to pierce twice: first to open the way for the thick vein.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the pain is very sharp, it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we want to draw out blood little by little, we suffice with only one blow.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want much blood, we must often strike; and if the pain is sharp, let us make sure to pierce the end suddenly; it is suitable for those who have thick and hard skin, and who are covered with hair, to apply oil from suction cups that both opens and closes: this can be violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if it is in ivy, watercress oil, or lilies, or chamomile, or another similar plant.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, take amaranth oil, or balm of Gilead, or donkey oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if anyone has a skin that is too sensitive and has narrow pores, it is not advisable to apply oil, but instead, after cleansing with rosewater, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or water of calabash, or water of porcelain, or any similar thing, they should wash it.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And for those with excessive moisture, they should rise from it using myrrh water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have excessive superfluities should rise from old wine, or sage water, or nettles or chamomile decoction, or other similar things; and it is not suitable to use a cupping glass before a bath or after a bath for an hour or two; and one should not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that he washes himself when he needs to be cupped and when he has been cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And beware that the one who is healthy has a temperamental constitution and if he is too hot and inflamed; it is necessary for him to press cold things, such as pomegranates, endives, lettuces in moderation, and similar things; and eat little, and light meals of chickpeas, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And he who has a cold complexion, should sip syrup of honey and medium scented wine, which is between old and new, and eat little, and eat few seeds and small birds and pigeons; and on the day that he takes fresh air, he must drink more than he eats; and it is fitting to give any man at any time triacle or nutmeg before or after ventilation, to strengthen the principal members; but he who is hot should not drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction cups that are applied without causing harm are those placed on the liver, and the spleen, and podagra, and the belly and the bowels and the kidneys and the hip joint, for these members do not tolerate injury at once, and they are only done to draw blood from one member to another, as we place suction cups on the mammary glands when the nipples are healthy; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we put suction cups on the belly and bowels to reduce the member's size; and it removes pain when there is congestion or a stone, so it may possibly draw the congestion away, or leave the stone from its place; and thus does it act when placed on the liver and spleen where there is retained wind, and these suction cups are left empty to suck only; and they are never at once very hot, nor filled with cold water, as in cases of pleurisy, and in such a way we fill the cup with hot water mixed with suitable herbs.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup administered by fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	It should have a width of two and a half palm lengths, and on one side, near the center, it should have a small hole, as wide as to fit an needle, and be made of iron or steel, so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb; and in its middle, there should be a crossbar also of iron or steel, to hold a cloth for suction, and their sizes vary according to the illness and age of those who use them, for the suction cups for children are different from those for adults, and for thin people compared to fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And thus one should place this suction cup over the member: take the wax cloth or linen, and place it through the hole in the suction cup, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the suction cup, preventing it from burning the patient; then place it on the member, and your fingers should be on the opening we have mentioned, so that when you wish, the vapor goes out, and you remove the suction cup; and use the linen as before, and repeat often if needed.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the suction cup that is applied to treat pleurisy, or any acute condition, there should be no hole or opening, and it is only effective when completely filled with water, then placed on the member; its shape is as follows:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Without wounds that are so small that they cannot be bound with cupping glasses, such as lips and gums, and similar parts; and in places where the skin is stripped of hair, like a doe or a hare, and other similar areas; and if the quality of the wound is such that when you touch the wounds that are in clean, sweet water without putrefaction, they take it; and place them in clean, sweet water until they become familiar and have nothing in their stomachs; then clean with a vein and cupping glass, rub the limb until it turns red, and apply the cups; and when they are painful and scream, if it is a part where a cup can be applied, apply it, for this helps greatly afterward.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If the lion does not leave its den, take a large quantity of water and mix it with some good earth, then expect (the lion's recovery); and if the lion's wounds are too deep after the operation, moisten a linen cloth with cold water, place it on top, until the wounds are healed; and if the wounds multiply, put vitriol or gall or similar substances, until they are healed; or you can put half-peeled fava beans on the wound and leave them until they adhere to the lion; then it will heal. If more is needed, take other lions.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the lions refuse to be taken, rub fresh lion's blood on them or insert an arrow into their wound until they bleed, then place them back; and soon as they smell the blood, they will adhere (to each other); and when you see that they are chewing, sprinkle a little aloe and silk powder or ash, and they will stop.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	We begin the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it restores fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know this, dear reader, that the folly of the eyes often deceives one from this chapter, for they have never seen or read it in any ancient book; and because of this, the knowledge is strange to our land, for I have found no good books on it, save through the study of ancient texts, over which I have labored much, and by experience, and from the habits of my life. And so I have described to you, in this chapter, what it contains, and abridged it at the end, and made clear the shapes of the instruments that are employed, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we explain in this prologue of this book the essence of the words and the chapters where the wise apply their understanding, focusing on truth, so that those who are tested know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a fracture, dislocation or twist occurs, it is necessary that you promptly tend to the patient on both sides, if nothing helps, such as weakness of the body, illness, or old age; or if he has a fever, or too much cold, and consumes cold things like ice, and does not eat any fatty food, and does not overfill himself with meat that fills the veins, until you have no doubt of an abscess or spreading of material in the limb; then the patient returns to his former state as if nothing had happened.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the patient be relieved of the foods that cause heavy digestion, or have a viscous quality, like cooked flour in water, and rice, and vegetables, and wine, and fresh fish, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For heavy digestion often returns and makes the injury worse.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the bones of old people and decrepit individuals cannot heal or fuse well according to their nature due to the stiffness of the members, nor can those that are too soft, like the bones of young children; but take no notice, hold onto the broken bone with strong grips that unite the member together, as it was before, and do not restrict its movement completely, and for this reason, relieve them of heavy foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, and in this chapter, I will tell you all manner of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another when sharpening, just like the edge of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if the fracture is with a wound, and there is a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each condition has its own mechanism and specific tool for restoration, according to the memory that comes to it in place; and the fracture of the bone is known because the limb is twisted and widely opened by force, and sounds when pressed with the hand; and when there is no twist or pain in touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture, but it can have a twist, or a split, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You should not move it with the hand, but apply medications that come here later, and then tighten it very subtly now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the fracture which goes in an upward direction, and are the two disjointed parts, it is now necessary to put them back together evenly, so that the abscesses come one after another; and if hot abscesses come first, let them stay that way until the abscesses calm down; then place it evenly with gentle and precise movements, and know that the restoration of the bone is lighter than the restorations of those where pieces are missing; then tighten it as necessary afterward.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if a bone is broken into two parts, whether it is a hand or foot, or one of the smaller members, or at two joints, or at one joint and your hand, place the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member align, all instruments used should be in their proper places, and take care through your work that the patient does not suffer any injury or pain; and adjust both pieces of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And he will feel it well with his hand if it seems to him that it is not properly aligned: if the dressing is done neatly and not pulled too tightly, nor pressed as those who cause a hot abscess and contraction in the member by their own fault, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the member is at rest, gently instruct the patient not to move it, neither awake nor asleep, nor turn, or in any other way, and ensure that the member is securely rested so as to feel no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, it is not yet fully healed, and it is necessary to put it in a position where he feels no pain; and be careful that it is straightened properly, so that no distortion comes as it is restored, and the quality of the damaged member will depend on what I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	You know that broken members are diverse in size and shape and strength.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Because there are small members, such as arms and legs and similar ones; it is necessary to wrap them with soft and fine linen cloth; and for the larger ones, like the thigh or leg, it is necessary to wrap a wide and firm ligature around the entire member, embracing it equally from all sides so that there is no movement; then apply light bindings three times or four times, depending on the member, and tighten your hand slightly across the entire ligature, then go above the fracture and tighten less, allowing the fracture to move a little; and gradually soften the ligature bit by bit, pressing hard into the healthy part below until you have taken a good grip, then take another ligature and wrap it around again from the beginning over the fractured member; then return to the lower part of the fracture and tighten moderately, not too tightly or too loosely as we said in the first chapter above; then place soft bindings made of linen or cloth between the ligatures until they are even, then bind everything with a bandage on top, and then apply well-made splints above. If there is no abscess or swelling, do so.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is an inflammation or abscess, apply a soothing hot compress to it, which reduces the swelling, and leave it for several days; then tie your stars tightly, and make them half the width of a thin cane, or of wood used to make knives, or palm fronds, according to this figure.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the thread placed on the rupture be slightly thicker and wider than the others; and just as long as required for the member's size, whether small or large; then tighten the threads as you did in the first layer, and tie a fine thread over it, as in the first layer on the rupture; narrower at the end, but not too tight; and the thread should be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen; for if the thread is thick, it's like the work of fools who make their bindings with twisted linen threads, and that's a great error, because the binding cannot be even if it's too fine, and it's not appropriate that there be less space between each thread.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is angry because of the pain from the stars after dislocating them in their joints, he should put compresses of linen or other soft cloth over them to avoid bleeding.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by a fracture, and the bones are broken, I will then describe the treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not appropriate to dislocate all the stars of a member broken in the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the member is large, it is not appropriate to put stars inside until after 5 or 7 days, or more according to your judgment of the hotness of the abscess coming to the surface; and here is the ancient method of pastes to restore a dislocation, fracture, and twist: take flour that clings to the walls of the mill, mix it with plenty of egg, and make this preparation, not too clear or too thick, and use it; this is the common way of the paste that restores a break in various positions, especially for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of plaster for repairing breaks and dislocations and twists: take albac (almond) meal, ladan (resin), myrrh, and gum arabic, each in equal parts; add mirra (myrrh) and aloe in equal parts; add alech (spice) in nine parts; make it into a powder and mix with egg albumen; if the patient's body temperature is hot, use this plaster, as it is of good composition, and it heals broken bones quickly, and benefits many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another plaster for twists: take mugat (a type of plant) and vismalve (a resin), each in ten parts; myrrh and aloe, each in seven parts; acaice (a herb) in six parts; Armenian balm in ten parts; grind well and mix with water or egg albumen; apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method of splinting joints and realigning bones to their proper places, easing the pain that comes with it, and using bandages on the bone, and splints: take a new cloth, moisten it in hot oil, and wrap it around the joint.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Cyst splints do not restore, but they are good for easing hot abscesses and properly extracting bones that cause pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of splinting broken bones: take dry fig leaves and terrestrial pawpaw leaves, crush them together, and make a poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of mending the broken bone and thereby alleviating the pain from the abscess's return.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take the roots of marshmallow, chamomile, violet flowers, and grain flour, each in equal parts; grind them, mix with wine, and apply to the affected member after heating it. Alternatively, mix with fresh coriander water or water alone, and use as needed.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another stronger method of mending the member when a hard abscess arises during restoration.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of wormwood, and flaxseed, and fennel, and melilot, and chamomile, and flowers from violets, all in equal parts; grind and preserve with vinegar, or sweet water, or wine, according to the heat of the member and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates writes in his book that to restore a broken member, one should not use anything but a mixture of wax and oil, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen suggests applying warm, dry substances to a broken member to restore it, such as myrrh and aloe and incense, as we have mentioned.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of plastering that is effective for both injury and pain: take linen cloth and horse hair from men shorn, or feathers from an eye, or wool, and blend them equally, and make a paste and apply it and bind it firmly.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, after a little while, loosen it again and take care that the patient does not feel any pain or that the bone has not moved from its place; if pain appears along with itching, restlessness, or swelling, act quickly, loosen it, and remove the plaster immediately. Take a light cloth and a moist sponge from the sea, dip it in water, and gently lift the skin until the itching stops and the pain is soothed; then let the member rest for an hour, and apply dry linen, moistened with water or rose oil, and bind it up tightly, ensuring you are certain of the heat of the abscess. The inflammation of the affected limb will subside, and the pain will disappear; then continue with a delicate repetition of the process, using a little more plaster, but not too tightly as before, until it is completely healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is closed, red, painful and swollen, you have successfully treated it; but if it reappears, as you did at first, then you need to use plaster and binding.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if the member does not heal as we have said, do not release it until after three or four or five or seven days; and under no circumstances leave it for twenty days, until the fracture is healed and the adjustment of the limb to its place is close; then tighten it more than before and fatten its flesh, as I have said above. And if you see that the healing is drying up more than necessary, immediately apply hot water, every time you release it, and let it rest for a short while; by this means cure the member, and avert the harmful consequences that come from the foolish practices of those who twist the limb in an incorrect manner: it is dangerous, and these practices are extremely harmful, and I do not see anything else but to leave it alone or do it properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various methods of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many ways of fracturing bones, each with distinct shapes and causes. Some fractures are caused by the impact of a sword, or when a bone is pierced all the way through, like a hatchet or axe; such fractures are known as 'hatchet wounds'.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or, the sword may cut through the bone without piercing it completely, which is called 'absolute' fracture; and this type of injury can range from small to large wounds.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a pulsation or swelling, or cutting from stones or from blows against stone, or from other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a recent fracture, which approaches the bone tissue underneath or on top of the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound that is healed in the bone is as subtle as a hair, and the fracture is small, this type of break is called "capillary"; and if the wound is caused by striking with stone or with a blow or similar things, and the piece of bone enters inward, and the edges are smooth like the craftsman's work on kettles; if it lodges between the bones.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more often in those with moist heads, such as an infant's head; and it occurs in all these ways of dislocation, that small pieces are separated as if they were broken; and I will speak of it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all the ways of dislocations by pulling on them, and questioning at each point, and by corrupt flesh above it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair appearance is recognized when, after uncovering the bone and rubbing it thoroughly, the dislocation gap opens up.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fractures, be wary of accidents with the patient, and if you notice any harmful accident, such as vomiting blood, loss of consciousness, dilation, numbness, fever, sudden heat or redness, or other similar symptoms in various combinations, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any dangerous accidents and hope for healing, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the frost comes first to you, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day of the moon, if you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it happens that you hasten to remove the bone on the seventh day, so that the tissue around the bone is corrupted, then come the complications that we have mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone extends to the tissue covering the brain, it is necessary that you split the broken part in this way: and you pierce the patient's head with pain, and expose the bone in every way possible, and smooth the wound surface as much as you can, and if blood oozes upon exposing the bone, or an abscess forms, you should seek help from those who know, and fill the wound with moist, rose-scented cloth; and rest the wound until the abscess is healed, and be assured of no further bleeding. Then, begin to remove the bone, and this is done in two ways: one way is that you cut through the narrowest part first, and this is its shape...
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I use another treatment even greater than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have many different shapes, some narrow and others wide, and they are sharp and made of iron indelible; and make them lightly, without damaging the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and dense, it is necessary that you pierce it around, so as to administer cuts with measure, not allowing the point to go beyond the bone's soft part, and there must be a margin or a circle on top of the point, preventing it from penetrating further into the bone; and you need several of them, so that each one reaches its place according to the bone's thickness, ensuring measures for all bones; and this is the form of the three types of cuts:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality to percé the bone without breaking it is that you apply pressure on the bone and return your hand to its original position as long as you know the bone is pierced; then place the pressure elsewhere a little later, and do this all around, then cut with incisions the space between the cracks of the bone, and do so as delicately as possible, lightly, as we have said, while you still hold the bone in your hand or with any tool you have like tongs or pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain nor the soft tissue.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, it is necessary that you remove the tension remaining from the bone to all other tools resembling an incision instrument, but it should be more tense and subtler than the other incision instruments; and if nothing remains of the small bones or scales, gently remove them with the appropriate tool; then dress the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of treatment is that which Galen says, which is safer; it is very powerful, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary that you expose a part of the bone, either where the fracture is open, so that when you have exposed this part, you will place the tip of this curved scalpel beneath it, whose shape is as follows:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut through any part, and it is the acute side in the second rib, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike slightly with a small hammer, so that you gently chip away the bone all around, and take great care of the tissue beneath; if it is detached from the bone, gently lift it, because otherwise it will be cut badly, and with much pain.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not reach the skin, and the bone is only cut from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to remove that roughness, and shave off the scales with a delicate razor, having various quantities of it at hand, in order to make each one suitable for its place, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you encounter great difficulties and then even more subtle ones, do not cease from this task until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other haircuts and subtle fractures, it is necessary to make adjustments according to their location; and this is a matter that is not easily answered for one who has dedicated his study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if it pleases him to reveal itself, you must press the linen drape according to the size of the wound, soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another double drape, moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first drape; do this as gently as possible so as not to damage the syphilis, then apply a second bandage, without straining it so that it only covers the wound; leave it for a day or two until the abscess subsides, then untie it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, meal flour, incense powder, aristology, and similar substances; make a powder from these things and place it on the wound, and keep applying unprescribed medicines without burning; ensure that the wound remains clean, do not leave behind any treatment, or let it form boils, for when they gather on the flesh of the head, they corrode and destroy, causing great harm to the patient, since putting anything sharp on the syphilis causes damage.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care therefore, if no bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, it is uncertain without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if darkness comes not from the medicine that has been placed there, but that its virtue is in question, then you should mix a part of honey with three parts of rose oil and a drape of glue, and apply it to the wound; then cure it in the manner of cures that are appropriate, until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	You know that the two parts of the bone above are never broken, either together or separately, for they are two bones; and this one below is cartilaginous and does not break, but only bends or twists, then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary that you insert your little finger or a thin tool between the joints, and place the fracture correctly in your index finger, and hold it by force, until the joint returns to its natural position; do this gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain due to your action.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the joint, and the fingers cannot return to their place, then it is necessary that you place it equally at the head of a slightly thicker thread.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the fracture is from both parts, do the same thing, and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or fifth day, when the abscess has subsided, then place thin linen strips at the head of the joint, if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or turn to another part, if it is broken; and make sure the splints are so thick that they fill the openings of the wounds.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say that no restoration is complete unless the splints are soaked in butter and changed each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I do not think this is good, but it is necessary that they be soaked in a mixture of egg and flour powder; then leave the splints, as long as the bones are hard and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never burn the patient with goose feathers in place of others, and if it pricks around the wound, and holds the break, and blows the pain among; or do what you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses appear at the new wound while you are treating it, apply a plaster or moist cotton in rose oil, or in a poultice of eagle's fat.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if no abscess forms, apply a plaster made of sesame flour and incense powder, confited with egg yolk, then place light bandages on it without binding the neig; and if the break in the neig is small and broken into tiny pieces, extract them with suitable instruments, then clean the wound with hot oil and charcoals, and treat it with plasters and poultices as needed until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	from the rupture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is ruptured and there is no external wound, and the fracture is not severe enough to cause two pieces to be separated, but it is slightly displaced, then if you gently know how to recognize it, it can be realigned.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is in the right side of the jaw, you should insert your index finger of the left hand into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is on the left mandible, press the fracture gently from inside using your index finger of the right hand, and with the other hand pull it slightly outward, making them both equal.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is severe in two places, it is necessary that you administer an extension to both parts, as long as they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movement of the teeth causes a fracture, or if it is a break resulting from tension with a gold, silver, or silk thread, then place cerate on the broken jaw and cover it with two layers of cloth; put the cloth under a large, well-made star or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the jaw, and secure it as best you can, and instruct the patient to rest and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you notice that the shape changes on the third day, then readjust it; apply plaster next, mixing fine powder with enough egg or sesame flour after removing the cerate, and place a thin layer of plaster, letting it harden without disturbing the patient's condition, as long as it remains healthy. It often heals within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess forms, it is necessary to treat it as we have often said.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is both a fracture and a wound together, do not attempt to extract any pieces of bone that are still intact; use delicate tools for this task.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, expand it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And after you have extracted all these pieces and it does not delay, clean the wound if it is wide, and cover it with suitable bandages to promote healing.
de la forcele	from the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forceps break many times near the shoulder, and the fracture is in three manners: it may be broken and displaced into two parts, with fragments, and is easiest to restore; or there is a fracture with an accompanying wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And for the work when there is no wound accompanying the fracture, you need two assistants: one holds the injured part that is broken with the forceps; the other extends the collar towards the affected area; then equalize the fracture at both your hands, so that the shape is as it should be and shows neither bulge nor depression.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend it further, place a round spear of cloth or wool under the shoulder of the patient, as thick as necessary; stretch and relax the arm, hold the spear with your hand, and align the fracture properly, as is appropriate.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the arm out due to its attachment, since it comes off completely, then the patient should lie on their side with the injured arm under their body, and have someone press down on the shoulder above, until the bone of the arm is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then address the fracture with your hands, and if you feel any debris, it's fine to cut; pull out the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot be joined together in any way, use this instrument under the arm to prevent further harm.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and it should look like a spoon, and is not missing, and is as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the scope of the work; and it has two parts, as you can see, one wider, the other narrower, just like the wound's edge that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are sure of a hot abscess, if you cut the wound, and if the incision is small, then you doubt a hot abscess, if you cover the wound with cloth or bandages, according to its amount.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses occur, then moisten the cloth with rose oil and wool and wine, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The binding of the bone, when it is pierced or cut, is to place the plaster of fine, ground powder and egg white upon it, and put light bandages over, and insert a spike under the armpit if necessary; then take a very wide, three-finger-breadth strip of cloth, and place the double bandage over the bandages and plaster; next, take a thin, three-inch-wide and long stele, and wrap it around the cloth so that the edge of the cloth is hanging down; and place the stele on the fracture, and turn the cloth back over the shoulder, and under the healthy armpit and the afflicted one; rearrange each part, and when you see that the plaster holds well to the fractured bone, and clearly see that the stele does not move upon the broken bone, reward it with attention each day, and when the ties loosen, tighten them again; and make the patient lie on his back, and place a small pillow under the armpit to raise the dislocated part higher; lighten the fracture's strain by aligning the shoulder, or fasten the arm to the chest, and do not take it off for twenty days unless bad accidents occur; then repeat the plastering if necessary, tighten it, and leave it thus until it is healed; and it will be healed in no more than twenty-eight days, and sometimes less for men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	from the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	If the shoulder is dislocated far or deeply, it will not remain in place except by touch; if you put it back according to the shape of the dislocation and restore it to its natural state in every way possible, then sprinkle some fine, mild powder on the joint and apply light bandages, and cover with a double cloth. Then place a wide and thin steel plate, slightly larger than the shoulder, and so that it rests against all parts of the shoulder; use strips of linen for this, so that the steel plate is cut equally. And then tighten it firmly with a strong bandage so that the steel plate does not move from its place, and check it each day. Whenever it loosens, tighten it again and return the steel plate to its correct position if it has moved, and have the patient lie on his side. The shoulder will be healed in 20 or 25 days, and when this number of days is reached, untie it and be sure, for it is not a bone that can be put back easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a fragment of bone sticks out and does not go inside the wound, it is necessary to do as we have said in the calming of the hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	from the rupture of the worst
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The skin is never broken in the middle, but it happens rarely; but it often breaks at the extreme.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it recedes inside and causes the patient great pain, and weakness, and sometimes bleeds, and opens up the wound in the broken bone, and it feels much better.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and puts a cushion between his shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and aligns the ribs to both hands, and carefully adjusts it in all ways so that the bone figure is as it should be; then apply plasters and compresses over the gentle salt star or other light bandage, and wrap it in a cloth, binding it to the broken bone so that it does not move; and tighten the bandage around the back, adjusting it properly, and check the patient every hour, and if it softens, tighten it; and if it needs to be loosened, due to corrosion or itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, act quickly, loosen it, remove the plaster, and address the cure that has come about; then apply the plaster again, and tighten it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	from the fracture of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	You know that the fracture of ribs only occurs in the upper back and at the top, and they do not bend unless they are broken; and this causes great pain to the patient.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is such that you put it back in place as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, tightening it with a splint if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining inside, then the patient feels very great pain and stabbing, as if from crying, because the bone pierces the skin; also with hands, and sometimes he coughs and vomits a lot of blood, which is a great illness, and old doctors put much effort into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And for those who say it is appropriate to administer foods that cause bloating in the stomach to expel the fracture from within.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not pretend that hot poultices will not come if they have not already arrived.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it comes back, as healthy.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that none of you should place suction cups on the limb for bloodletting, as it seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt that the suction cup might draw away the excess fluids from the limb due to weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that none of you should cover the limb with moist wool and hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to even out the space around, then apply treatment for pleurisy, flesh, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear through the bone where the fracture is, then doubt arises in the patient, and it is necessary to cut into the broken rib cage, and place an instrument to hold it in place; and then the bone must be cut, and pulled gently, and then sew together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with bandages until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses appear, place moistened linen cloths soaked in rose oil on the affected area and lay the patient down; treat while the abscess is present, keeping them elevated on the side where it is located, until it heals.
de la brisure dou col	Of the dislocation of the collarbone
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No dislocation occurs in the collarbone bone, and rarely if it rains; also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to anyone and you want to know if they will recover, be on the lookout for their hands becoming soft, swollen, and numb, and unable to move or stretch them; if you can push an needle through without pain, then there is little hope.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	You know that it is deadly in many ways; if the limbs remain motionless and there is no pain when they are moved slightly, then know that the joint of the bone is intact and the patient will recover, if proper treatment is given.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if similar things happen to the spine, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, be vigilant if the legs are weakened, and if there are accidents in the hands, and on the back, excessive sweating and ejection without will; and when it is recalled to its belly, then excessive ejection without will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is recalled to its back and wants to move, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is deadly: do not labor in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not occur, then the thing is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that if there is a hot abscess, you apply warm rose oil or egg yolk oil to it until it is calmed; then put a comforting and drying plaster on it and secure it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is dislocated, it should be covered with a bandage; then the bone is reduced, and the two edges of the wound are sewn together if it is large, then dressed with ointment and bound tightly until it heals; and if the fragment of the bone is broken off, which is called the "fragment of the joint," you press your empty hand against it on one side, and place it level with the other hand, then apply the plaster and the splint, as needed; then tighten it, and if there are any dislocated bones, reduce them, and pull out, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	From the fracture of the bone of the shoulder blade
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	If the bone of the shoulder blade is fractured, and there is not even a slight reduction in pain at the site, it causes great pain, swelling, and inflammation where the fracture occurs.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over the fracture site, ensuring you understand where the fracture is and its shape; if the fracture is only at the top, then equalize the fracture until it returns to its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is very long, it bends inward, so make the patient lie on his belly until the restoration of that fracture becomes visible.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, place a splint over it, then put a wooden or iron rod on top and hold the fracture steady so that it does not move, and use the hand under the ribs to make them even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess appears and is not touched, as long as the abscess remains calm, apply what we have mentioned above; then return to restoration, tightening it as appropriate, unless there is some adverse event; this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder joint
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The "ajutoire" refers to the joint between the collarbone and the shoulder, and if it is dislocated, it must be restored using one of two methods: one involves taking a thick, sturdy strip, shaped as follows...
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And hold the two pieces of the shoulder together and bend them upwards, and watch over the patient lying down; then break one of his arms on the thigh until it reaches the socket, and place a wooden splint in between, then bend it onto any heavy object or have the assistant pull it downward; then adjust the braces equally with both hands until the fracture returns to its proper place.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And another way is to lay the patient on his back and tie one hand to his neck, then instruct the assistants to have one apply pressure over the fracture at the level of the hands, while the other stretches all the ligaments, extending them as far as possible.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that extraction is too painful, hold the broken piece firmly, and on the break, stretch each of the assistants to their side.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the break is near the shoulder joint, it is necessary to put a moderate tie below the acromion and another towards the throat, below the break; and likewise, if the break is on the side of the throat, it is advisable to place a light tie without effort, as long as the break remains level on the bone, then set the dislocation correctly and tighten it gently without causing complications.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if the abscess opens on its own, do not touch it for seven days, and place a moist cloth with rose oil on the opening until the abscess is calmed; then apply pressure, and know that you should put a splint over the fracture, then bring the arm up to the aid, and place your hand on the shoulder or under the breast; and cover it with a cloth, and apply pressure to the aid and the arm, so that the arm is in a straight position, unless something prevents it, or if the bone has not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints and place a broader and stronger splint over the fracture, with two spaces between each splint, so that each splint is larger than the fracture by three times on either side; then apply pressure to the splints as I have said at the beginning of this chapter about applying pressure to the fracture, but tighter and closer together.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the position of the stars and the constriction, as we have said, when you restore the broken member, and you doubt the warmth of the abscess, leave it bound for up to seven days, as we have said; then check the binding every three days to ensure there is no inflammation or swelling, so that healing can come to the member.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If it is appropriate, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accident happens and the binding is not removed for three or more days, have the patient sleep on their back with their hands on their stomach; place a soft cushion under the dislocated member, equal in thickness, and observe it every hour during the day and night to ensure that the dislocation does not move or become looser. If it becomes appropriate by the virtue of medicine and you give them food as we have mentioned above, in such a way that the food is initially subtle; then, when they start to eat, it will be abundant.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be re-set after forty days; and then one must release and apply baths and ointments for the joint to be directed correctly.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the tightness is severe and compressed, it may take up to several months or two months to release.
de la brisure du bras	of the dislocation of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the humerus, one being smaller and extending towards the hand, and the other larger, situated beneath the smaller bone towards the wrist; so it may happen that only the larger humerus breaks, or only the smaller one, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, their restoration is light and swift, whereas when the large ones are broken, healing is poor and more difficult than when they were broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the small bones that are broken, then it is sufficient to extend them slightly and make them even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large bones, then it is necessary to stretch them more strongly; and extend them on a cushion, placing the palm of the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower, allowing the patient to rest comfortably with their arms extended at their sides, with one minister supporting below the elbow and another above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then set it back even, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture each piece is set back in its place, and if there is no misplaced bone that grips the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place by manipulating it above and below, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, as I have mentioned in the specific chapter, then take care of the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if, in the beginning of restoration, abscesses appear, then apply a wrap of wax made from rose oil and white beeswax, neither too hard nor too soft; and wrap it gently over, until the abscesses are calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the plaster, and apply the plaster of the soft powder with enough egg, then place the stitches, and make the stitch from the fracture stronger and a little wider than the others; and know that it should have six stitches or more in different positions: whether the fracture is in one bone or two; and tighten more over the fracture than elsewhere, and always less distant, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the cloths on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and let the thread from which it is bound be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the ligament after no days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if no ill accident befalls the member, such as itching that comes upon it, then you must bathe the member in hot water until the itching is soothed; and allow the member to rest without constriction.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then repeat the straining, and if the ligaments become slack and the bones disarrayed, or any similar thing, address it accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if any tightening prevents the member from healing, because it is too tight, then you must soften it slightly and leave it for a few days until the tightening subsides, and then strain it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said comes to the patient, then he shall be dislocated for twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	If in doubt, then bind his hands to his chest, making sure the shoulders are even, and guard against movement and reaching, and have him sleep on his back; and know that this fracture will be healed in thirty days or forty-five, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the combinations and complexities of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	You know that at the back of the hand and on each finger there are often small fractures, and it brings only pain many times over.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient cuts a cross into it and holds it straight before him equally; then he places his hand on a cloth extended on the table, and extends the broken bones with the help of bandages, making them equal in sight, as long as they are properly joined; and applies a compress and poultice if an abscess does not come, and then puts a piece of salt according to the amount of the wound; and it is wrapped up in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is near the stomach of the plant, make a ball of cloth, and instruct the patient to press it against his broken limb; then take a long strip of cloth, and wrap it around with great care, just as large as the plant of the hand, and tighten it as needed.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the open air, it is necessary that you place a stick above and another below on the limb, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture occurs in any of the three joints, it should be set even, as appropriate; and tighten it with the limb, or if you see that a small stick needs to be placed to keep the fracture still and immobile, do so. If the fracture is in the other finger, such as the index or one of the others, set it even, and tie it with the healthy joint that follows; or you can bind them all together, which is better, or place a stick above, as necessary. Be careful during the restoration and placement of the post-op abscess, and support anyone who experiences complications, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	from the broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The hipbone is often broken, and one can clearly see it when it returns to its original position in front and behind; and its restoration is thus achieved by binding it tightly over the break, and similarly on the other side.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then extends each limb equally to both sides; and this is when the break is between the bones.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is close to the root of the hipbone, one of the ligaments should be bound towards the knee, and the others should be bound over and around the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And also if it is close to the knee, then the ligaments around the knee should be loosened and the extension below; then place the splints on the bone equally with both hands, as it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster and tie it, so that there is no movement.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it calm down and then return to your work and treatment; the bandage is made in this way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap around the fracture a hard bandage doubled in two or three and remove the excess, then turn the leg until the heels reach the root of the nail, and thread a long thread between the shin and the leg, below the knee, and come up with the thread above; then turn again on the leg and the shin the bandage, then put on the fracture a splint of stars, and place a star on the bone of the leg; then apply the eight-sided cloth between the leg and the shin gently to equalize the compression, then begin to tie in three or four turns around the fracture; and the more you go above the fracture, the less it tightens; then take two threads that you have threaded between the leg and the shin, and tie three stars that are above, and then return below with the thread, until you reach the sole; and tighten it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that nothing comes, no abscess or swelling or anything similar.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens that he dislocates it again and goes back to where it was, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone caught, it is necessary to do what one can; and if one cannot, it is necessary to break the joint and pull it out forcefully; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never should the foot be broken in this way with metal, as is done with the aid of the hand or arm; however, the patient does not improve with such restoration.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the foot is restored in 7 days, or less or more, depending on the diversity of complexes.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the alley of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	You know that in the alley of the knee there is little breakage, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, even if it is only a crack or an opening, it affects every wound, and without a wound, and this feels good for everyone.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that one puts together what is broken on both sides as much as possible; then apply the plaster, and place a round stick if needed, and tighten it appropriately, then follow all the arrangements that we have mentioned in other breaks, like an abscess or anything similar; for each case, do what is appropriate, as long as it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	from the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	You know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "fibula" and the other "tibia"; and all fracture occurs as it does in the arm, and the treatment is the same for both, except for the difficulty. And if both bones are broken together, the leg returns to its normal position from all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the thin bones are broken, they return to their original position.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the thick bone is broken, it causes great pain, and one can see it clearly, and it returns to its place from below.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then apply extension, and set it even, and tie the stars equally; but nevertheless, it is necessary that the fracture be ugly, with more pieces, so that the extension is lesser and lighter; and align it according to your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your task, take two strips of strong cloth that cover the leg from one side to the other, and they should be quite long, from the knee to the ankle; then wrap two bands around it, above and below, and tie them in the middle, so that the leg cannot bend to the right or left, and thus is well. And no one should administer any treatment to the length of the leg, for it is made of strong cloth, and they place the leg to prevent movement, and they perform this carefully at the fracture site where there is an abscess or other complications; and each day, move the leg to see if there is any sign of abscess or other accident, and treat it as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	From the fracture of bones in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but the bones in the foot can be fractured and the toes, and they do not always break in a single place, but in various positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if the bones in the foot are fractured and you see them interlocking with each other, making it very painful for the patient to put weight on their foot, similar to how they would want to walk, then place your foot on their leg, lifting where the bones are raised, and apply pressure until they return to their natural position. Then apply a splint and bandages over the top, and under the belly of the foot, a small wooden board with two holes for each toe, then secure the foot properly, wrapping it with cloth and other things as needed.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And after three days or four have passed, if you loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones either even, either broken, or discolored.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if none of the bones are broken, but they need to be restored, as we have said regarding the hand's two bones, then take a stick according to the length of the bone and make it slightly wider, and place it beneath the foot, securing it firmly; and if there are two or three, or more, broken bones, take a stick for each, wrap them in a piece of linen, and secure the cloth beneath the foot, so that it holds the bones well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, when we have spoken; and treat each case as it should be.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	On the fracture of the bone in the hand.
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If a woman's hand bone is fractured and the swelling subsides, then she should be laid on her back with the affected area elevated; cotton should then be inserted into the wound as far as the fracture, and pressed firmly in place. The woman is then stood up, and the hand is gently moved from side to side until the cotton reaches the entry point of the injury, and the bone returns to its place. If she wishes to urinate, she should remove the cotton, and when she has finished, replace it; this should be done for seven or eight days. Then the fracture will have healed, and if it appears healthy, a bladder of lamb's gut should be tied around the wound, and then inflated until the bladder is fully distended inside. The bladder should remain in place for as long as necessary until the injury has healed completely.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the shoulder or of the woman is broken, restore it as we have said about the spine's bone; and these fractures are not hidden from one who applies their knowledge and practice, and listen to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For fractures indicate various arrangements for the right path of restoration: understand this therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	When the staff is broken, take a goose throat and insert it into the staff; then wrap cloth around it, leave it for three days or longer, and it will heal naturally.
de brisure avec plaie	from fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	For one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bones of the leg or shoulder or similar, it is important to seek immediate care, so that the healing which we have mentioned serves as testimony.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, but there is lingering vitriol, and you have no other remedy, then begin to restore the fracture in the same hour or day, before abscesses form.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the abscess appears again, it is best to let it heal for a new day or two, until the abscess is calmed, and do not touch it even on the third or fourth day, as you might cause a worse complication.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible upon uncovering the heart, it is necessary that you place it gently with your hands, at a slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not appear even when placing your hands, use this instrument made of iron, with seven or eight segments long, and its width should be according to the size of the wound; and for this reason, it is necessary that it imprints deeply enough, three or four times, depending on what is required for each break; and it should be round and slightly thick, so as not to bend upon compression onto the limb during your work, and wide in front, thick in the middle, towards the front.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche," therefore it is necessary that the dislocated bone be placed back on top of the visible joint; and press it once, until it returns, and becomes even one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle and the instrument cannot properly grasp the bone, it is necessary that you hold the head of the bone, until the instrument has a good grip.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back, as we have said, with a suitable instrument such as a hammer or scalpel within your power, then remove what is stuck in the bone from hardness and small cuts.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, knowing that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you do your best to get it back in its natural place, then moisten the compress with black, astringent wine, and properly wrap it around; don't put any wax or other substances on the wound that could cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer stars (medicinal herbs) once you have restored the bone, leaving the wound uncovered, and clean the area around it as needed, according to the size of the wound. Be careful not to constrict the wound with the bandage; many fools have done this and caused the patient either death or severe corrosion. And the compressions should be gentler and softer than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or great, and you doubt that a worse accident may come, as we have said, and you feel pain in place instead of placing it on pillows, then wrap it tightly with hard cloth and bind it.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound is bowing or sinking, then remove what you have put on it and apply a healing dressing for wounds, such as a four-part ointment or similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, as long as it is healed and cured.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be dislocated in such a way that the bowstring corrals the bone slightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if it persists for a long time and cannot heal completely, knowing that there are small fragments of bone, then you must open the wound with a knife and remove all these misplaced pieces to stop the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula or other form of corruption occurs, it is necessary that you treat it according to what is said in this chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when a bone is broken and opens up on the limb, like the bone of the shin or the shoulder, or other similar bones in the large limbs, do not pull it, because many times death results, but leave it until it decays; perhaps after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	burns that come from the heat
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come after the healing of the burn, especially when it is near a joint, and the sight of the damaged limb is a terrible thing; and perhaps it cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care then, if we must prescribe medications: if you administer astringents such as aloes, incense, myrrh, sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others, so that you press any of these things or all together, and preserve them with astringent wine or with abundance of heat or with coolness; and place them on the wound firmly, and do not loosen it for several days; then dislocate it and begin again with another one until the swellings are removed; or bind it tightly with a well-made poultice, because the property of a poultice is to remove all swellings from the limbs; and if the nodulation has already become hardened like stone, it is necessary to remove it, cutting off the top, and making the excess visible; or shave it with any razor until it is removed, and cure it as long as it is healthy.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The weak member after treatment.
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored and the weak and slender members remain, it occurs for many reasons: one is because it was bound too tightly and not properly aligned; or because there are too many ligaments and it cannot assume the natural shape of the member; or due to excessive swelling; or from too great movements, not in their proper time; or because it has little blood in its body, so it becomes weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the treatment is that you make the patient eat, and tighten the body, until the strength multiplies within it; then administer baths, give joy and rest; then apply lead to the member, so that the lead attracts great blood flow, and frequently rinse it with warm water, until the blood flows back to the member and it returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	Both members twisted after health.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the members are twisted after restoration and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the member is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: do not believe those who say one must break the limb from its new position, and many foolish people have done this in our land; these actions are blameworthy, and great harm, and perhaps death may result. However, if the contusions and tortures are fresh, it is necessary that they be treated with hot water or mollifying herbs cooked, such as vismalva leaves, roots, melilote, and similar things; apply a soothing plaster made in a proper way, taking the mucilage of vismalva and mixing it with gelatin fat or sesame oil, and make a plaster on top. Or you take fig fats and grind them with colon powder and other medicines that reduce inflammation.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is the bone dislocated by rubbing continuously and for a long time with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And allow the limb to move every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the inflammation and hardness is like stone, and it needs to be cut with iron, as carefully as possible up to the bone, using a delicate incision; and apply compression and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book on dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocations occur from a joint moving out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs due to no apparent cause, it is necessary to try to bring the limb back towards its normal position urgently.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the limb may swell, and by chance if it is reset at that time, it may cause great pain when the swelling occurs; in many cases, this leads to spasms and other pains. However, once the inflammation has subsided, treat the patient's wound, then gently raise the affected limb with hot water and oil, and reset it, caring for each limb as is appropriate for its condition.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the shoulder joint up to the foot.
des mandibules	and of the jaws.
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It is often the case that the jaws become dislocated, and there are two types of dislocation: either they are slightly out of place, a bit loose; or they come completely disconnected, hanging towards the lower part, preventing the patient from holding their mouth shut, from closing it, and even affecting their speech with their tongue.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns to its proper position through various dispositions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it immediately, without delay; and in such a way that the healers place the patient's head with his malady, and pull one of his hands to the root of the dislocation of the mandible inside the mouth, so that the dislocation is from two parts; and the other two hands are extended equally; and command the patient to soften his jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And balance them equally until they return to their proper place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is brought back, it should be carefully done, especially if both lower jaws are involved, by using hot water and oil, gently realigning them; do not delay in bringing it back, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are realigned equally and the patient's mouth heals well without strain, apply moistened cloth bandages made of rose oil and wax, then gently tie them; have the patient sleep on their back, keeping their jaws between two cushions so they do not move to the left or right, nor should they make any efforts. Instead, consume light food and drink until the pain is gone and the jaws are fully healed; then begin eating normally again, without opening the mouth too wide for eating or drinking while the lower jaw is still healing.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be brought back to their original position within an hour and do not return to their normal place, this causes fever and frequent sweating, and perhaps intestinal problems, and sometimes pure colic vomiting.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is fatal; and often death comes to those who experience it within seven days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The fork cannot be removed from the inside of the continuation of the bone, and the more it is pulled, the worse it feels. It is never right when taken out towards the outside, and one can feel this clearly.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then he presses the joint firmly into the palm, and it will return; then he applies the plaster and the bandage, and tightens it; and the dislocation which is towards the shoulder cannot dislocate; if not, and if it dislocates even once, he must put it back in its place, as we have said; then he applies the plaster and the bandage, and tightens it, and instructs the patient to rest until he is healed; and thus the same thing happens with the dislocation of the shoulder, when it is out of place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	**Shoulder Dislocation**
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	You know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: one is when it dislocates at the acromion end; the second is at the part of the scapula; and sometimes it dislocates above, which happens rarely; and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor inside for the nerves; and often it dislocates towards the acromion, especially in those with little fat, because for them it becomes severe; but for those with enough fat, although it slightly dislocates and returns slightly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to no one that there is a bruise or fracture, and a hot abscess forms in the shoulder, and he thinks it is dislocated because of that.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary that you test it, as long as you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And dislocations are known when they tilt towards the axis, and make a distinction between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their diversity manifest; and you will find at the top of the shoulder a dip, and by pressing the shoulder blade against the top of the shoulder, as if it were one thing; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his side, or move in any way; and also, if it is dislocated upward, unless it is concealed, because you will find it manifestly by touching; and this kind of dislocation is not solely for bringing back, when it is new, or if the entrapped part is diseased.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the attendant places his hand on top of the patient's limb, then puts his palms under the joint, and lifts the joint with force towards its place; and the attendant lets go of the hand, extends it upwards, then places it underneath; this will bring relief.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said above, the patient should be bathed in hot water; and administered gently softening and soothing remedies such as a decoction of althae, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and then cared for. Then the patient is placed on their back, and a piece of equal thickness of wool is put under the joint, not too soft nor too hard, then the heel of the foot is placed on the wool, and the top of the shoulder gently lifted, and the hand of the patient is drawn; and another attendant holds the top of the shoulder so that it does not move. The shoulder returns immediately, and if you see it dislocated, reset it in this manner: and be sure to have present a man who is stronger than the patient; and he should stand upright towards the side of the patient, and pull the shoulder away from under the joint of the patient, and lift the joint upwards, so that the patient's arm hangs down; and another attendant pulls the hand of the patient downwards towards the stomach.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, and any heavy thing causes no pain, then the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And it is also adjusted in another way: take a long stick and insert it into the ground so that the end of the stick is as bright as a pistal, neither too thick nor too thin; then place it beneath the patient, but with soft cloth above, and the patient's arm extended downwards on the opposite side, so that the joint returns to its place. If this does not work for all the things we have said, then do this treatment: take a stick from both arms, wide as four fingers, which has a bright end to enter fully beneath the shoulder in this form.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then place a heavy cloth over the head, so that it does not hurt the patient, and put the patient on their back; then stretch one arm above the head, and bind the aid to the head, and the arm at the elbow of the hand, then put the arm on a broad shovel, and let the hands hang down, and leave the body hanging from the other side: the joint is now restored.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is dislocated, in any way, it is necessary that you put beneath the joint a thread of equal wool, then apply the plaster with the apparatus, consisting of fine powder, incense, and egg yolk, over the entire shoulder and around, then pull the joint gently, and tie the bandage to the plaster, and press the hand against the collarbone, and let the hands remain in this position.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he move little, as long as the limb is comfortable, for it will heal faster; and then after a few days or seven, he moves it; and if it is stiff and not softened, it will heal.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is stuck due to moisture or another cause, it is necessary that you administer cauterization at three points, as is described in the chapter on cauterization.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if all this is done, and after seven days the dislocation releases but the joint does not hold, and the arm cannot be raised above the head, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is either compressed, stretched, or softened; and know that the joint will never return to its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the worst, and the limbs, if done behind, is caused by a sudden movement and extension of the hands, and another force should be applied; and treat until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after healing, cracks may appear in the member, and delayed movement; if the patient uses it many times, as long as these cracks are light, they will be eased and return to their original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	regarding the dislocation cost
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You know that the jointure that is dislocated is valued at a price, and it returns to its place; if it is dislocated from all sides, especially front and back, and the dislocation is not rectified, because one can see it well and feel it well; and it is cured according to each form.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the diseased part with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	Because the joint is stiff, preventing the arm from bending and touching the shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it in such a way that the abscess closes and does not reappear, because if an abscess forms again, resetting it would be difficult, especially when it is at the back; it is more painful than other dislocations, and may even lead to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is possible when it can be brought back, that you extend his hand with both of yours; and his arms are spread out, and the hands turned to the side according to the cost around, from inside and outside, and bring the joint together at his palms together, or at the base of his palm, until he returns to his place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his palm, and turning the root of the palm, which is out of place, according to the joint.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, apply a strong extension; and have the second minister extend his arm, and tie him with a long and wide cloth, until you have joined the joint to his hand; then lubricate the joint with no oil to soften it, and bring the joint back together, until it returns to its place; and when it is in place, apply dry plaster with egg white, and form the splint, and bend the arm at the patient's elbow, and leave it for several days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, loosen the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not well locked, repeat the plastering and binding, and leave it for several days, until it is firmly set; then loosen it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if the patient feels pain after resetting the joint, and it becomes stiff, bathe and massage it gently, applying pressure until it is relieved; or place a greased sheep's fat on the joint, leave it for one day and night, then remove it, and immerse it in a bath; and when it is warm, rub the joint temperately, then apply the fat again, and then enter the bath; and do this twice or three times until it is healed; and if you notice, put fine moist warm wax with butter on it, and strain it on; it will return to its normal state.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The hand joint is misaligned and its return to normal is lighter than that of other joints. Nevertheless, it must be carefully repositioned, immediately after it becomes disaligned, so as to prevent swelling or hot abscess formation.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the repositioning is such that you place the patient's hand on a table, extend their fingers, and observe them until they are aligned equally, so that the palm rests on the joint's surface, holding it in this position until it returns to normal. However, you should check if it has returned to its proper place; then, place the patient with the back of their hand on a table for extension and repositioning.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, let the patient place the back of his hand on a table, and look to see the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, then it is indeed a sign that the straining of soothing plasters over abscesses has not been successful, and thus it remains without beginning again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place for any number of days, then the joint remains twisted; and it does not harm the patient for as long as the hand is swollen, and nothing can be extracted: then know that the nerve or artery is cut; there being no other cause but to extract carefully through cauterization, and perhaps there is no other remedy.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is dislocated, if you place the splint as we have said, then stretch it and leave it for a day, then release it and do so again.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he cannot move it well, and there is no fracture, then apply hot water moistened cloth, and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	on the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Under no circumstances should the fingers of the hand be pulled apart, nor on the back of the palm or on the palm itself; then straighten the finger and carefully bring the dislocated joint back into place, holding the top of the finger, and bend it towards the side where it is separated. Leave it in this position for a day, and then reset it again the following day; do not tie it up, but release it on the second day and make it move, then rejoin it; and repeat this process until it is healed. The same should be done if the finger is dislocated towards the palm of the hand, or on any other side, until it is cured.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	dislocation of the spine
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine or the neck is dislocated, and there is no cure, the patient often dies quickly.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the movements jump without volition, and he cannot hold them, and often the members become weak, either both legs or both arms, or sometimes the whole spine becomes stiff; this is called 'gibbosity'. The treatment for this is to reward the stiffness if it has been present since childhood: if there is no cure or recovery from it.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the old ways of treatment speak in great words, but they bring no real benefit; but I have abridged it according to my intention and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the stiffness that comes to the penis in front, no one has any health; and also that which comes straight to one side, and it is only the one who properly comes to the back who can cure it, as I say; and it is that the patient should be stretched on his face equally in the first position, and have his eyes closed tightly so he does not tremble; then insert a stick into the head in the earth-formed position, and another at the foot, and tie a band around the asses of the patient, and one at the waist, and another at the thighs, and at the ankles; and these ministers know the bands, one on the head and the others at the feet, among the two sticks; and they should be well fastened, the stick as we have said, and the doctor places his palms on the formed spine until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return with this treatment, take a table three feet long, cut a slot in the wall, and place the patient on their side, then push the edge of the table against the wall, placing the middle of the table on the bone; and put both feet on the other side of the table, pressing firmly until it returns to its place; and if you see fit, do this with a tourniquet around the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And take two sticks, each a foot long, and insert them into the patient's head, on either side of the bone, with a space of an inch between them; and make in each stick a small hole, or let the tourniquet pass through, so that they do not move; and between these two sticks, place another stick turning, which will tighten the tourniquets, and have two small sticks, each one inch long, on this turning stick to turn the tourniquets; then tie the strap connecting the tourniquets to the head and the other strap to the feet, and let each assistant twist their tourniquet with all their strength, and the master will make the bone straight as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, apply a drying plaster with plenty of heat, and then the compresses, and then the end of a tablet three fingers long, which should adhere to the area of the gibbosity and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a ligature, as we have said, and give the patient gentle treatment until they are healed; and if anything occurs at the end of their healing, it is appropriate to administer softening and soothing medicines, using the method that we have mentioned above; and never should one apply a piece of plaster, nor should any appearance emerge in the rear spine, believed to be dislocation; and it is the bone that has opened, for which one must not have any presumption, as it may bring about death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of dislocations of the spine
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	You know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only result in dislocations, not like the other joints; and the hip joint is aligned according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and more inside, less aligned at the front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation within itself is such that when you join the injured leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer, and opens the knees of the patient more widely than those who are healthy, and they cannot flex their knee fully; and these are the signs that there is inflammation near an abscess in the heat of the hip joint, because the bone of the thigh comes closer.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him who experiences this at death, it is that this event is contrary to what has been said before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him who experiences this beforehand, it is that his leg is sound according to the healing; however, do not bend the knee without pain, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot do so before, and he retains urine, and the ankle swells, and when he tries to stand, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who experiences this afterward, it is that he cannot spread or bend his knee, and one leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the pain is in the thigh instead of below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	They reset this appearance of dislocation if it is such that you reward it when dislocation is ancient, and it lingers according to its position, otherwise there is no cure; and he should not dare do so.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for those whose dislocation is recent, and it is of the four types of dislocation, if you hurry to return the joint, bringing it both inside and outside, and moving it to the right and left; then it may return, and no other cure is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this way, you must then use a strong minister, extending the leg strongly at two hands, or binding it tightly above the knee; and other ministers should place their hands on top in such a way that they pull their hands down towards their buttocks, then tighten a strong rope around the calf; and others should hold the head with a rope; and all extend upwards and downwards at once, until the patient is completely lifted from the ground, remaining still.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to all four limbs, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If the dislocation is in the knee, it is necessary to treat its appearance. The patient should be placed on their side with the healthy leg above the injured one, then tie the ligament at the root of the thigh and the one behind the angle. Then stretch the ligament towards the angle and towards the strength; have other assistants grasp the patient's arms, embrace the large ligament of the injured thigh, and extend it to a different form; it will return to its place now, and this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot hold it in the manner we have said, then it is necessary that you tie both feet of the patient together with a strong soft bandage on both heels and both knees, and let the leg of the patient be extended two fingers more than the other; then hang it over a post, and let it reach two arms' length above the ground; then command the minister to embrace the top of the thigh, and have other ministers hanging with the patient, who embrace the thigh, for the joint now comes back naturally.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is external, if the patient lies down as we have said in the case of stiffness, then tighten the bandage properly on the leg of the patient, also on the side; then place two hot coals, one at the top and one at the foot, and insert a hot coal between the thighs of the patient, forming it; and place moist towels around, so that they do not hurt the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and make them put the dislocation back in its place with their hands.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it does not return, place it on a table and press it as we have said in the previous section, and lay the patient on their healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when dislocation occurs, it is necessary to stretch the affected leg forcefully, as I have said, and alleviate the patient's pain by applying pressure with one hand, then stretching it downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is towards the outside, it is not necessary to stretch the affected leg downwards or raise it up, but rather, it should remain in the same position as when the hip was dislocated outward; just as we have said, gently pressing it down on both hips, and then extending the leg as mentioned before. It must be pressed against the joint on a table. And this will be effective when the patient extends their legs, and they are even. Then, tighten the cuffs, apply a splint, and wrap a bandage around it, so that the hip does not move. Let it rest for three or four days, then untie it and apply a splint; and if you see that they are even, just as before, leave the bandage on for three more days, after which gently make the patient walk, until the limb is healed.
de la dislocation dou genoil	From the dislocation of the knee.
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The limb is dislocated in three ways: internally, externally, and posteriorly; but not anteriorly.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if he does not flex at the knee, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg if he can, and place his face on your hand, and place his foot on yours. Then take his knee in your palms and pull between your fingers, then bend both sides of the knee joint; and another assistant extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it flexes slightly at the knee. And apply a poultice, and keep the leg extended at the knee, and bind them together firmly for three or four days, then release them; and let not the patient move about, until the limb is comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not at all straight, apply firm extension as we have said in the treatment of the spine, as long as it is healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	On the dislocation of the talus bone.
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The talus bone is neither perfectly aligned nor fully dislocated, being both inside and outside its proper position.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and there is tenderness in the area where it is dislocated; its reduction is gentle, and one should gently extend their hand towards the affected side when it is slightly dislocated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is dislocated from all sides, you should make the patient lie straight, and hold the leg away from the body with the aid of another person, above the ankle; then take the foot in your right hand, and twice stretch it towards yourself, then upwards, and nicely pull the foot upwards; do this twice more, as we have said, by bending and stretching the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, repeat the process, because it will return; and if it cannot return like that, make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and insert a firm stick in the ground between his legs, and wrap the sheets around him so he does not hurt himself; then have each minister hold the thigh, and others stretch the foot towards his hands or the knee, so it lies above the ankle; then each minister should stretch equally, and the stick should be placed between the patient's legs to keep him still when they stretch him; then place the mirrors equally on both sides of the dislocation, and another minister hold the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will return properly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when the wound is healed, apply a poultice and compress it, stretch the limb, and bind the foot to the leg, keeping the shoes on behind the ankle so the ligaments do not become too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the stretching is gone, untie it on the third day or fourth, and the patient must walk for four days; and if he continues beyond that time, it is not fortunate for him to heal completely.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses form, it is necessary to soothe them, as we have said elsewhere, while they are fresh.
des dois	Of the two (parts/sides)
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When both (sides) are dislocated, if they need to be rightly extended without effort, it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any other part of the back or foot, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back or on a table completely straight, and place your foot on what opens from these joints, then press with your foot's form until it returns; and when it is even and opens nothing, put a table under the sole of the foot at the level of two joints, then stretch it strongly, and leave it for three days, then release it; and let it rest until it is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	From wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound occurs with dislocation and it is desired to restore it, it often happens that the patient dies: if you are not careful in treating it, since you lack knowledge of this art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not merciful and slow, then do not be bold; at the beginning, use hot apithic applications on the abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you see no hope of recovery; but when there is hope, immediately reposition the limb to its correct place, so that the abscess does not return; and while the limb is dislocated, apply hot apithic applications to the abscess, treat the wound as appropriate from drying agents, and if it is a fracture with small broken bones, reduce them, and follow what we have said about simple diseases; and beware of entering a path of fear, as I have said, for this is your salvation according to your Creator, and for the knowledge of your arms and body.
Amen	Indeed, here is the line
