And the author of this book, upon completing for you, my children, this book which is a part of the science of medicine in its entirety and reaching the pinnacle of clarity and exposition in it, saw fit to complete it for you with this article which is a part of practical work by hand.
For practical work by hand is improved in our country and in our time completely lacking, to the point that its science is almost studied and its trace is interrupted. And what remains of it are slight illustrations in the books of the predecessors, which have been corrupted by hands and subject to error and confusion, until its meanings have become obscure and its benefits distant.
So I saw fit to revive it and compose this article in the manner of explanation, exposition, and summarization, and to provide illustrations of cautery blades and all other surgical instruments, as this is an addition to the clarity and essential for what is needed.
The reason there is no skilled craftsman in our time is because the practice of medicine is long, and its practitioner should first train in the science of anatomy, which Galen described. Until one becomes knowledgeable about the benefits of the organs, their forms, their temperaments, their connections and disconnections, the knowledge of bones, nerves, muscles, their numbers, their origins, and the positions of the outlets of arteries and veins.
For this reason, Hippocrates said that there are many physicians in name but few in deed, especially in the art of the hand. We have mentioned a part of this in the introduction of this book.
For whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have mentioned regarding anatomy is likely to make a mistake that could kill people, as I have witnessed many who have presumed in this science and claimed knowledge without actual learning or understanding.
That is what I saw a ignorant doctor do, who cut into a goiter on the neck of a woman, and thus opened some arteries of the neck causing the woman's blood to flow until she fell dead before him.
And I saw another doctor who proceeded to remove a stone from an old man, and since the stone was large, he took a risk and removed it along with a piece of the bladder. The man died around three days later, and I had been called to remove it, but upon seeing the condition of the stone and the patient, I determined that it was beyond my capability.
And I saw another doctor who was employed by some of the officials in our city to practice medicine.
A young black boy had a fracture in his leg near the ankle with a wound, and the ignorant doctor quickly bound the fracture tightly over the wound with bandages and splints without leaving any room for the wound to breathe.
Then he let him follow his desires, left him for days, and ordered him not to loosen the bindings until his leg and foot swelled, and he was on the brink of death.
I was called to him, so I quickly loosened the bindings, and he gained some relief from his pains. However, the corruption had already taken hold in the limb, and I could not reverse it.
The corruption continued to spread in the limb until he perished.
And I saw another doctor who cut into a cancerous tumor, which ulcerated after days until the sufferer's condition greatly worsened. This is because if the cancer is purely of a dark mixture, it should not be treated with surgery at all.
Unless it is in a limb that can tolerate its complete removal.
And for this, my son, you should know that work with the hand is divided into two parts: work accompanied by safety and work that results in damage in most cases.
And I have warned in every place in this book about the work that involves risk and fear; you should beware of it and reject it.
So that the ignorant do not find a way to criticize or slander, take for yourselves firmness and caution, and for your patients, kindness and thoroughness.
And use the best method leading to safety and praised outcomes, and avoid dangerous and difficult-to-cure diseases.
And keep yourselves from what you fear may bring doubt into your religion and worldly affairs, for it is more lasting for your honor and exalted in this world and the next for your stations.
For Galen said in one of his admonishments: Do not treat bad diseases and thus become bad physicians.
And I have divided this article into three chapters.
The first chapter.
On cauterization with fire and cauterization with sharp medicine, organized and arranged from head to foot, including images of the instruments and cauterizing blades, and everything needed for work by hand.
And the second chapter.
On incisions, bloodletting, cupping, surgery, extraction of arrows, and the like, organized and arranged with images of the instruments.
The third chapter.
On bonesetting, dislocations, and the treatment of swelling and the like, arranged and titled from the head to the foot, with illustrations of instruments.
The first chapter.
On cauterization.
And before we mention working with it, it is advisable to mention the manner of its benefits and drawbacks and in what temperament it is used.
I say that the discussion on the manner of the benefits and drawbacks of cauterization is a long discourse, a precise science, and a hidden secret, and many wise people have spoken about it.
They differed on this, and I have summarized briefly from their discourse to avoid lengthiness.
I say that cauterization generally benefits all sorts of ill temperament, whether with or without matter, except for two temperaments: the hot temperament without matter and the dry temperament without matter.
As for the dry temperament with matter, there is disagreement. Some say that cauterization is beneficial in this case, while others argue the opposite, stating that cauterization is not suitable for a disease caused by heat and dryness because the nature of fire is heat and dryness.
It is impossible to cure a disease that is hot and dry with a treatment that is also hot and dry. Those who argue the opposite claim that cauterization with fire can be beneficial for a hot and dry disease that occurs in people's bodies. For when you add the body of the human and its moisture to the temperament of fire, you affect the body of the human with cold.
And I say by his saying because experience has revealed that to me many times, but this matter should not be imagined except by one who has trained and practiced in the art of cauterization to a high degree. And he noted the differences in people's temperaments and the state of diseases in themselves, their causes, their symptoms, and the duration of time they last.
And as for the other temperaments, there is no need for you to fear them, especially the cold and moist diseases, as all physicians agree on them and do not differ about the benefit of cauterization in them.
And know, O my sons, that one of the secrets of treatment is cauterization with fire and its advantage over cauterization with burning medication because fire is a single essence whose effect does not extend beyond the organ which was cauterized and does not harm another connected organ except with minimal damage.
And cauterization with burning medication may extend its effect to other organs and may cause a disease in the organ that is difficult to treat and may even kill. But fire, due to its nobility and the generosity of its essence, does not do that unless it is excessive.
And this has become clear to us through experience due to the length of service, attention to the craft, and understanding the realities of the matter.
And for this reason, I have dispensed with lengthy discourse, but if it were not inappropriate for my book, I would present to you a mysterious secret about fire and its manner of action on bodies and its removal of diseases with philosophical, demonstrative speech that penetrates your understanding.
And know, O sons, that they have differed about the time in which cauterization is appropriate, and they made the best time the season of spring.
And I say that cauterization may be appropriate at all times, for the harm caused by the time is overshadowed by the benefit brought about by cauterization. Especially if the cauterization is for severe necessary pains that are dangerous and cannot tolerate delay, due to the fear that it might result in a calamity that is greater than the slight harm caused by the time.
Do not let what the common people and ignorant physicians imagine come to your minds, O sons, that cauterization which cures a certain disease will never return, and they consider it permanent.
It is not as they imagine, for cauterization is like medicine that alters the temperament and dries the humidities which are the cause of pains.
However, cauterization is preferred over medicine due to its swift success, strong effect, and severe power.
The disease may return at some time depending on the temperament of the patient, the establishment and strength of his disease, and what accumulates in his body from excesses and neglecting himself in acquiring them from foods and other such causes.
Except if the disease for which cauterization is used is a mild disease in an organ with little excess and humidity. Like cauterizing a tooth for pain and the like, it is possible that such pain may not return, and this occurs rarely.
And as for the common people's saying that cauterization is the end of medicine, it is a correct statement not in line with what they mean, because they believe that no treatment with medication or otherwise is beneficial after cauterization, and the matter is contrary to that.
The meaning of "cauterization is the end of medicine" is that when we use various treatments for a disease and those medicines are ineffective, then we use cauterization as the last resort, which proves effective. From this comes the saying that "cauterization is the end of medicine. Not in the sense that the common people and many ignorant doctors have understood it.
The early scholars mentioned that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron. They said this because gold is balanced and of noble essence, and they claimed that the site of cauterization does not suppurate. However, this is not always the case.
For I have tried it and found that it only does so in some bodies and not others, and cauterization with gold is indeed better and more preferable than with iron as they said. However, when you heat the cautery in the fire, it is not clear to you when it has reached the desired temperature due to the redness of the gold.
Because it quickly cools down, and if you increase the heat, it melts in the fire and becomes liquefied, causing the practitioner to face difficulties. Therefore, cauterization with iron is faster and more accurate for practical purposes, God willing.
I have arranged this chapter on cauterization into sections organized from head to foot to make it easier for the student to find what they need, God willing.
The first chapter.
There is one fontanel in the head.
This fontanel is beneficial for excess moisture and cold affecting the brain, which are causes of headache, frequent discharge from the head to the area of the eyes and ears, excessive sleep, toothache, and throat pain. And in general, for every disease that occurs due to cold, such as paralysis, epilepsy, strokes, and other similar diseases.
The method of this treatment is to order the patient first to purge with a mild, brain-cleansing medicine for three or four nights, according to what is required by the strength of the patient, his age, and his constitution.
Then order him to shave his head with a razor, then seat him in front of you, sitting cross-legged with his hands on his chest.
Then place the base of your palm on the base of his nose between his eyes, and where your middle finger ends, mark that spot with ink.
Then heat the olive-shaped cautery, which looks like this.
Remove enough bone to the size of a clove or a grain of coriander, then lift your hand. If not, repeat with the same iron or another if it has cooled. Until you see the bone as I have described, then take some salt, dissolve it in water, soak a piece of cotton in it, and place it on the area. Leave it for three days.
Then apply cotton soaked in fat on it and leave it until the redness from the inflammation subsides, then treat it with the four-part ointment until it heals, if God wills.
And they say that the wound is better and more beneficial as long as it remains open to discharge pus.
And some mentioned that the skin should be cauterized down to the bone, and the cautery iron should be held until part of the thickness of the bone is burned. Then what has been burned from the bone should be removed and treated thereafter.
And others said that the cauterization should be intensified until it strongly affects the bone, causing a piece to fall off like the shape of a dirham or a small coin. They claimed that this releases vapors from the head and leaves the wound open for a long time.
Then it is treated until it heals. I do not see these types of cauterization at all except in some people and as a risky method, and leaving them is better for safety's sake. For the head weakens whenever its natural connection is dispersed, as we have observed in other organs.
Especially if the patient's head is naturally weak. The first type of cauterization is safer and better in my opinion, and it is what I use. Follow it for safety, if God wills.
The Second Chapter.
On cauterizing the head as well.
If a chronic pain occurs in the head and persists for a long time with the patient, and treatments such as bloodletting, purgatives, cupping, ointments, and dressings have been used, especially if single cauterization which we described has been applied and nothing was beneficial, then consider. If the patient's head is naturally strong in constitution and not weak, and if he feels intense cold, apply another cauterization slightly above the previous one. Then cauterize each horn of his head until the thickness of the skin is reduced and the amount described is exposed from the bone. Cauterize at the back of his head in the area known as the axe, and be gentle with your hand in this case; do not expose the bone because the patient will feel intense pain, more so than from any other cauterization on the entire head. I will mention this cauterization in its proper place.
The cautery used for the horns of the head and its back should be milder than the cautery used for the center of the head, and this is its form.
Chapter Three.
On the cauterization of non-chronic migraines.
If pain accompanied by headache occurs on one side of the head and extends to the eye, make the patient vomit with medicines that cleanse the head and use all other treatments I mentioned in the classifications of diseases. If this does not work, then cauterization should be applied in two ways. Either cauterize with a sharp, burning medicine or with iron.
As for cauterization with a burning medicine, take one clove of garlic, peel it, and cut off the tips from both ends. Then incise the area of pain on the temple with a broad lancet until there is a space under the skin large enough to hold the garlic clove.
It enters under the skin until it disappears, then pull it tightly with a good tightness and leave it for fifteen hours, then release it and remove the garlic and leave the wound for two or three days, then heal.
It is covered with cotton soaked in lard until the area pusces, then treat it with ointment until it heals if God wills. And if you want, you can do that with some of the cauterizing medicines I provided in the eighteenth article on cauterizing medicines.
And as for cauterizing with iron, it is done in this manner: heat the cautery tool which has this shape:.
It is called the nail-shaped cautery because its head is like the shape of a nail, with some perforations, and in the middle, there is a small突起。请注意，最后部分“nub"或"projection"的翻译“突起”在医学历史文本中可能需要更精确的术语，但是根据指示，这里不添加任何解释或注释。因此，“突起”作为对“small nub/projection”的直接翻译被使用了。由于用户要求严格遵循指示且不能包含额外说明，以上微小调整旨在保持句子的流畅性，同时忠实于原文的意思。但如果严格按照要求，正确翻译应为：“It is called the nail-shaped cautery because its head is like the shape of a nail, with some perforations, and in the middle, there is a small projection.”
Then place it on the site of pain and hold your hand as you rotate the iron slightly, and the amount by which you cauterize should be about half the thickness of the skin. Raise your hand so as not to burn the artery below, which could cause bleeding. Then soak some cotton in salt water and place it on the area and leave it for three days. Then soak the cotton in lard, and then treat it with ointment until it heals if God wills.
And if you wish, you cauterize this temple with the knife-like protruding part of the cautery tool, and be careful not to cut the artery in this non-chronic temple especially.
Chapter Four.
Cauterizing the chronic temple.
If you treat the temple with the previously mentioned treatments and what we discussed in the divisions of diseases, and the treatment is not effective, and you see in the condition what cannot be managed by the initial cauterization with medicine or fire that we mentioned. You should heat the knife-like cautery until it turns white, then apply it to the site of pain in a line about half a finger long or so, and leave it once while you hold it tightly until it cuts the artery and reaches near the bone.
However, you should be careful not to affect the jaw that moves during chewing, for if you burn the muscle or nerve that moves it, spasms may occur.
Be cautious and watchful of the bleeding from the artery you have cut, for there is great danger in cutting it. Especially for those who do not know what they are doing and have not tried a proven method, it is better to refrain from the procedure.
The management of accidental bleeding from the artery will be discussed in detail in its appropriate place in the book, God willing. If you see in the condition that this cauterization is not sufficient.
I have seen the body of the patient enduring cauterization in the middle of the head as described, and treat the wound until it heals, if God wills.
And if you wish, use the cautery we mentioned in the chapter on arterial forceps with the two-bladed iron, for it is a better and more effective cautery than this one.
Chapter Five.
On cauterizing the pains of the ears.
If pain occurs in the ear due to cold and is treated with laxatives and other treatments we mentioned in the classification, but the pain does not go away, then heat the cautery known as the point, which has this shape.
Then apply it around the entire ear after heating it, circling around it, or around both ears if the pain is in both. And keep the cautery a little away from the base of the ear after marking the spot with ink. The cautery should be about ten points in each ear or so. Then treat the areas until they heal, if God wills.
Chapter Six.
On cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Hemorrhoids that are treated with cautery are of the type that occur due to phlegm, as I mentioned in the classifications of diseases.
Cauterization should be avoided for the type that occurs due to dryness and nervous spasms.
When you have treated this type of hemorrhoid with suppositories, fumigations, and gargles but your treatment has not been effective, it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cautery sessions. One at the base of the ear, the second slightly below his temple, and the third at the junction of the lips.
Make your cautery on the opposite side of the affected area because the relaxation occurs in the side that appears healthy.
The image of the cautery is to cauterize it opposite the upper part of the ear, slightly below the temple, and another one in the cheek, and its length should be equal to the length of the thumb.
Lower your cautery until it burns to about half the thickness of the skin, and this is the image of the cauterizing tool, which is a type of knife that has been shown before, but it is slightly finer as you can see. It is advisable that the knife should be slightly thicker, then treat the area as previously mentioned until it heals, if God wills.
Chapter Seven.
On the cautery of chronic stroke.
If the stroke becomes chronic and treating it with what we mentioned does not work and there is no fever in the patient, cauterize it with four cauteries. One cautery on each temple of his head, one in the center of the head as we mentioned, and one at the back of the head as previously described.
The description of the cautery is as previously described, and it may also be cauterized at the mouth of the stomach for better effect, then treat it as previously mentioned.
Chapter Eight.
In terms of forgetting.
That which is caused by phlegm should first be treated by giving the patient large decoctions and purified brain cleansers.
Then shave his whole head and apply a mustard poultice, as written in the section on poultices, apply it several times, for it is a form of cauterization.
Do this in the same order I mentioned there, for he will be cured by it. If not, cauterize him three times at the back of his head, arranged from the top of the head to the bottom of the neck.
Make the space between each cauterization the width of a finger, then treat the cauterization as previously described. If you want to increase the treatment and the patient can tolerate it, cauterize the middle area again.
If you wish to increase the treatment, cauterize him on the temples, then continue treating him until he is healed. The cautery should be olive-shaped as previously described.
Chapter Nine.
On the cauterization of hemiplegia and the relaxation of the entire body.
It is necessary to proceed with purifying the head with decoctions as we have mentioned. Then shave the patient's head and cauterize it with one cautery in the middle of the head, one on each temple, and one at the back.
And three on the vertebrae of the neck. If you need more than that for a case of bodily laxity, and if the patient can withstand it and the disease is strong and established, then apply four cauterizations on the vertebrae of his back. And continue with the cauterization until you burn most of the skin, then raise your hand. Then treat it as previously mentioned until it heals, if God wills, and the cautery iron should be olive-shaped.
The Tenth Chapter.
On the cauterization of epilepsy.
Only the epileptic who has epilepsy due to phlegm should be cauterized. It is appropriate to first cleanse his brain with large cathartics and all other treatments we mentioned in the classification, if the patient is an adult and can tolerate taking medications.
As for a child who cannot tolerate medications, use gargles and cleansing mouth rinses to cleanse the brain well in advance, over many days, along with improving his diet.
Then shave his head, then cauterize once in the center of the head as previously described, and another cauterization at the back. And on each temple of his head, apply one cauterization. If the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then apply the cauterizations mentioned for paralysis and bodily laxity on the vertebrae of the neck and back. The cautery iron should be olive-shaped as previously described.
If the patient is a child, make the cautery iron gentle in this manner.
Chapter Eleven.
On the Treatment of Melancholy.
If the cause of melancholy is corrupted humors and thick phlegm, apply the cauterizations we mentioned in the treatment of paralysis.
If the cause of melancholy is an excess inclined towards blackness and the body of the patient is moist, give him what purifies his brain as was mentioned previously in the division.
Then shave the head of the patient. Then make a firm cake from linen in the shape of a circle, then place it in the center of his head while the patient is sitting cross-legged, holding it on all sides. Then take one pound of old sheep's fat.
Then heat it over fire to a moderate warmth, as much as a finger can tolerate when inserted into it. Then pour it in the center of his head within the circle and leave it until it cools. Do this once a week for the patient along with other proper treatments until he recovers, if God wills.
And if you wish, use small scattered cauterizations without holding the cautery iron firmly, but rather by hovering it. For this type of cauterization moistens the brain moderately.
Then apply cotton soaked in sheep's fat or chicken fat to him.
Chapter Twelve.
On the Cauterization for Water Discharge in the Eye.
If it becomes clear to you the beginning of the water flowing into the eye by the signs which were mentioned in the division, then hurry and cleanse the patient’s head and protect it from all moistures and sweat him in the bath on an empty stomach for days.
Then order him to shave his head and cauterize it in the middle of the head, then cauterize two more times on the temples if the water starts flowing into both eyes or from one side if it is in one eye.
Then cut with the cautery all the veins and arteries under the skin, and let the cauterizations be long in the width of the temples, and be cautious of bleeding.
If you see anything of it, then cut it immediately with whatever treatment is possible for you, and we will come to the wisdom in dissecting the arteries, cutting them, and being cautious of bleeding.
It may also be cauterized at the back of the head under the two bones with two significant cautery points.
Chapter Thirteen.
On the cauterization of chronic tears.
If the tears of the eye are chronic and persistent, and they originate from the veins and arteries that are on the outer surface of the head outside the skull, and you are certain that this is due to excessive cold and thick phlegm, then cauterize with the same cautery I described at the beginning of the flowing water. Cauterize in the middle of the head, two cautery points on the temples, and two more at the back of the head under the two bones. If additional treatment is needed, cauterize one point on each side at the corner of the eye near the eyebrow with a small cautery iron.
Chapter Fourteen.
On cauterizing the nose.
If you treat it with what we mentioned in the division and the treatment is not effective, then quickly wash the patient with decoction of colocasia for three nights, then shave his head and cauterize it with a moderate cautery using an olive-shaped cautery iron. Then cauterize slightly above the eyebrows under the hair with a nail-shaped cautery iron twice, and be careful not to cut the artery. This is the image of the nail-shaped iron.
Chapter Fifteen.
On cauterizing the relaxation of the eyelid.
If the eyelid relaxes due to illness or moisture, cauterize the eyelid once with this crescent-shaped cautery iron.
If you wish, cauterize slightly above the eyebrows twice on each side, keeping away from the temples, and the length of each cautery should be equal to the length of the eyebrow.
Do not excess with the cautery; rather, to the degree that a third of the skin is charred, and the shape of the cautery iron should be as described.
Chapter Sixteen.
On cauterizing the eyelid.
If the eyelashes turn inward and irritate the eye, then the cautery for this has two types. Either cauterization with fire or cauterization with a burning medicine. For cauterization with fire, you should have the patient stop plucking his eyelashes, if he does so, until they grow long and even.
For if you graft them when they grow, then bind his eyes with a bandage so that they do not move until they grow. Once they have grown and stabilized, place the patient's head in your lap, then mark on the eyelid with ink in the shape of an oak leaf.
And the beginning of the mark should be near the eyelashes, then place under the eyelid cotton soaked in egg white or in the saliva of the bustard, then heat an iron, this is its shape.
Then iron over the shape you marked little by little in many times until the surface of the skin, which is like the shape of an oak leaf, is burned entirely, especially its outer part. A sign of the success of your work is seeing that the eyelid has tightened and the hair has risen from the eye's flesh.
Then lift your hand at that time and leave it for three days, then apply cotton with fat until the scab falls off, then treat it with ointment until it heals, if God wills. If any hair returns after some time and the eyelid relaxes.
Then repeat the cautery on that area as you did first. If the hair is in the lower eyelid, cauterize it until it returns to its natural position and does not scratch the eye. As for cauterization with a burning agent, it is to have the patient leave the eyelashes until they grow and even out.
Then make a shape of an oak leaf from paper, then take from the known soap and unslaked lime, about one dirham of each. Crush them both very well together, and do this quickly so that they do not dry out. Then spread it on the paper you made like a leaf of as and place it on one or both eyelids and put under the eye cotton soaked in egg white and the patient's head in your lap.
Place your index finger on the medicine and press it slightly while moving it whenever the patient feels the sting of the medicine because he will feel a stinging like fire. As long as he feels the sting, leave the medicine and move it with your finger. When the sting subsides, remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And observe, if you see the eyelid has risen as it does when cauterized with fire or cut, otherwise, reapply the medicine to the area that was not affected and did not turn black until you complete your work and the eye is cauterized. Then place cotton with fat on it until the inflammation of the burn subsides.
Then treat it with the palm ointment or another until it heals. You should be extremely careful during the procedure to ensure that no part of the medicine falls into the eye, for if the eyelid relaxes after a few days, there is a fear that hair might enter the eye.
Reapply the medicine to the area of the eyelid that has relaxed as you did initially, then treat it until it heals. This is a picture of the leaf of as.
Know that people's eyes may differ in size, so adjust your cauterization accordingly. The right way is not hidden from one who has experience in this craft.
Chapter Seventeen.
On treating the hernia that occurs in the corner of the eye.
If you treat the hernia with what we mentioned in the divisions of diseases and your treatment is not effective, it should be cauterized according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap, and have a servant hold his head between your hands so that he does not move or shake his head.
Then, place cotton soaked in egg white or in the saliva of a catfish on his eyes, then heat the cautery which looks like this.
It should be hollow like the shape of an eagle feather tube on one end where the cautery is, and if you wish, the other end can be open, or it can be closed like a rod, but this hollow one is better for your work, God willing.
Then, squeeze the hernia if it is open and remove the pus, dry it, or if it is not open, then open it and extract its purulent matter. Then place the heated cautery, which is very hot, on it, holding it firmly until it reaches the bone.
Move your hand slightly away from the eye toward the nose during cauterization so that your hand does not make a mistake or startle the patient, causing the cautery to fall into the eyelid and damage it. If you reach the bone on the first attempt, if not, repeat the cautery if necessary.
Leave it for three days, then apply cotton with fat and treat it with a drying ointment until it heals. If forty days pass and it does not heal, apply an abrasive and corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and scrape it as will be mentioned in its section, God willing.
Another method for cauterizing the hernia mentioned by some early practitioners is to direct attention to the site of the hernia, cut it open, then place a thin tube into the incision, this is its shape.
Pour into it an amount of molten lead weighing a dirham, and hold the tube firmly without movement, and the patient must not move at all so that the molten lead does not flow to his eye, and you should place cotton soaked in egg white or water on the patient's eye.
For the lead burns the site of the hernia and cures it wonderfully. If the hernia is healed by what we have mentioned of cauterization and treatment, then there is no need for further action; otherwise, it is necessary to use nasal piercing and return the hernia to the nasal passage as will be detailed in the specific section on this topic.
Chapter Eighteen.
On cauterizing the cleft lip.
A cleft often occurs in the lip called a slit, especially in the lips of children, as it frequently happens. If you treat this cleft with what we have mentioned in the section on division and the treatment is not effective, then heat a small knife cauterizer shaped like this.
Its hollow should be as thin as a knife, then place it while hot quickly into the cleft until the cauterization reaches the depth of the cleft, then treat it with keroty until it heals, if God wills.
Chapter Nineteen.
On cauterizing the abscess occurring in the mouth.
If a tumor appears at the base of the gums or in the palate or at the roots of the molars, then it becomes hard and bursts, and pus flows out forming an abscess, and if treating it does not succeed, you should heat a cautery to the extent that it can fit into the abscess.
Then, insert it while hot into the abscess hole and hold your hand until the iron reaches deep inside it and its end, do this once or twice, then treat it with what we have mentioned of treatments until it heals, if God wills.
If the material is severed and it heals, well and good; otherwise, it is necessary to examine the area and remove the diseased bone according to what will come in its chapter, if God wills.
Chapter Twenty.
On cauterizing loose teeth and gums.
If the gums become loose due to moisture and the teeth move, and treating them with medicines is ineffective, place the patient's head on your lap, then heat the cautery, which will be depicted after this, after placing the tube on the tooth.
Then insert the heated cautery quickly and hold your hand for a little while until the patient feels the heat has reached the root of the tooth, then raise your hand. Then repeat the cautery several times as desired, then have the patient rinse their mouth with salt water.
Hold it for a while and then remove it, for the loose tooth will become stable, the relaxed gums will tighten, and the harmful moisture will dry up.
Chapter Twenty-One.
On the Pain of the Tooth.
If the toothache is due to cold or there is a worm in it and treatment with medicines is ineffective, then cauterization is done in two ways: either by cauterization with fat or by cauterization with fire.
As for cauterization with fat, it is to take buffalo fat, boil it in an iron spoon or a shell, then take cotton, wrap it around the end of a probe, dip it in the boiled fat, and place it on the painful tooth quickly, holding it until it cools.
Then repeat it several times until the heat reaches the root of the tooth. If you wish, you can dip a wick or cotton in cold fat and place it on the painful tooth, then put a heated iron above it until the heat reaches the bottom of the tooth.
As for cauterization with fire, it is to take a copper or iron tube that has some thickness so that the heat of the fire does not reach the patient's mouth. Then, heat the cautery tool, which is depicted in its form, and place it directly on the tooth, holding your hand until the cautery tool cools. Do this several times.
The pain will disappear either that very day or the next day. After the cauterization, the patient should fill his mouth with good fat, hold it for an hour, then spit it out. This is the form of the cautery tool.
Cauterize with whichever end you prefer and to the extent possible. This is the form of the tube.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
On castrating pigs.
If the pigs suffer from phlegm and cold moistures, and do not mature with medications, and you want quick maturity, heat the hollow iron, which has its ends perforated, as shown in its figure.
So that smoke comes out from the other end when cauterizing, place it heated on the same swelling once and twice if needed until you reach the depth of the swelling. If the swelling is small, make the iron according to the size of the swelling.
Then leave it for three days and apply cotton soaked in fat until what was burned by the fire is gone, then treat it with ointment and lint until it heals, if God wills.
Chapter Twenty-Three.
On cauterization for hoarseness of the voice and shortness of breath.
If moistures overwhelm the windpipe, especially if this is accompanied by a cold temperament, it is appropriate to first purge the patient with laxative medicines, then cauterize him at the indentation of the neck near the base of the throat in the lower area.
Beware that the cauterization does not reach the throat, and do not burn more than half of the skin. Then cauterize another spot at the joint of the neck at the last prominent vertebra, and the cautery iron should be awl-shaped as previously described.
Then treat it with what was previously mentioned until it heals, if God wills.
Chapter Twenty-Four.
On Treating Lung Disease and Cough.
If the cough and lung disease are due to cold moisture and there is no fever or consumption in the patient, and the disease is chronic, cauterize two spots above the clavicles at the low, soft, empty areas and another cauterization in the middle of the chest between the breasts.
The cautery should be needle-shaped as previously described. If you prefer, your cauterization may be done by puncture with the cautery tool called the point, whose image was previously described in the puncturing of ear pain, and the number of points should be around thirty or so.
Then treat it with what was previously mentioned until it heals. You may also make a cautery instrument with three prongs in this shape to expedite the cauterization, as you can perform three cauterizations at once with it. This is the shape of the cautery instrument.
Chapter Twenty-Five.
On Cauterizing the Armpit.
If the head of the humerus dislocates due to slippery moisture or does not stay in place when reduced, so that it becomes habitual and dislocates at the slightest movement as we have observed, it should first be reduced. Then the patient should lie on their back or on the correct side. Then raise the skin inside the armpit upwards with the fingers of your left hand if the joint has dislocated inward.
Then heat the iron with two blades which looks like this.
Then iron the skin until it penetrates to the other side and the shape of the branding will be four brands, and sometimes it is branded with an iron that has three blades, in which case the shape of the branding will be six brands, and the blades should be as thin as the material allows.
And this is the image of the iron with three blades.
And one may be added to this number so the brands are eight, then attach to the branding finely ground balls with salt, then the patient must rest and not move the limb for a time until it strengthens, and if the dislocation is upward, which seldom occurs.
Brand above the shoulder a single nail-like brand or several punctate brands, for the joint will strengthen, moisture will dissipate, and the patient will heal.
Chapter Twenty-Six.
On branding the stomach.
If cold and excessive moisture occur in the stomach, causing it to deviate from its temperament, and if various treatments have been ineffective, then the patient should lie on his back, extend his legs and arms, and then be branded with three brands. One brand below the nipple, the size of a finger, with a nail-like iron, and two brands below on both sides of the single brand so that the shape of the brands forms a triangle, spaced apart so they do not come together if pus forms, and the depth of the branding should be about two-thirds the thickness of the skin, and this is the shape of the brands.
In this manner and to this extent, no more.
And if you wish, make one large scar in the center of the stomach as follows.
And the cautery with which this single scar is made should be circular, as follows.
And the stomach may be cauterized by spots for those who are apprehensive of this cautery. This is done by marking points on the stomach with ink to the extent you desire, then cauterizing them with a spotted cautery, and then treating it with the previously mentioned treatment until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Seven.
On cauterizing the cold liver.
If pain in the liver is due to cold and moisture or to a foul humor until it has departed excessively from its natural temperament, and if the patient's treatment with what we mentioned in the division does not succeed. It is advisable that the patient lie on their back, and mark three cautery points with ink on the liver, below the ribs where the arm of a person ends, in this shape and exactly this quantity.
There should be the thickness of a finger between each cautery mark. The cautery should be made along the length of the body in a straight line, and do not press your hand tightly on the cautery iron.
The heat should be such that it burns half the thickness of the skin, no more. The patient should stand on their feet; if they cannot stand, they should lie down with their legs extended and arms raised. This is the shape of the cautery iron.
You may apply these cauterizations with a knife-shaped iron if you have the skill and caution to perform it, taking care not to overdo the cautery so as to burn all the skin, thereby burning the abdomen and reaching the intestines, for the skin there is thin, so be aware of this.
Chapter Twenty-Eight.
On cauterizing the swelling of the liver.
If there is an abscess in the liver and you want to determine if that swelling is in the liver's flesh or its membrane, then if it is in the liver's flesh, the patient will feel a heavy pain without sharpness.
If it is in the membrane of the liver, there will be a sharp severe pain. I have observed that its treatment has often exhausted physicians. It should be that the patient lies on their back, then you apply ink to the swollen area for identification.
Then heat the cautery in the fire, which is the cautery that resembles a chisel, and this is its shape. Cauterize it once with it until all the skin is burned, and continue the cautery until you reach the membrane, thus removing all the pus, then treat it as you would an abscess until it heals.
This type of cauterization should only be performed by someone who has extensive experience in the practice of medicine and has dealt with these diseases multiple times through experience. In that case, they may undertake such work, but I consider leaving it to them the best option.
Chapter Twenty-Nine.
On the cauterization of the hemorrhoids.
The early scholars mentioned cauterization with the roots of the zeraund for cold hemorrhoids in this manner: take one long dry root of zeraund, as long as you can find, and it should be as thick as a finger. Then dip it in oil and ignite it in fire. Then cauterize it with one large cautery between the connection of the collarbone and the neck, two small cauterizations slightly below the veins leaning towards the side under the chin, and two large cauterizations above the breasts, between the third and fourth ribs.
Two more cauterizations between the fifth and sixth ribs, slightly tilted backwards. Another cautery in the middle of the chest and another above the stomach. Three cauterizations from behind: one between the shoulders and two beside the spine, below the cautery that is between the palms.
You should not penetrate deeply with the cautery but it should be on the surface of the skin slightly. Some early scholars mentioned that some people used an iron cautery resembling a nail, heating it and inserting it between the ribs until it reaches the tumor itself.
The treatment is expelled as we mentioned in the case of liver tumors. Cauterization in this area is dangerous; either the patient may die immediately, or an incurable fistula may develop in the area.
Chapter Thirty.
On the cauterization of the spleen.
If you treat the spleen disease with the treatments we mentioned in the division and it does not work, then cauterization can be done in three ways, all of which are correct. One of them is to apply three or four cauterizations arranged along the length of the spleen.
In the shape of the liver cauterizations that are presented in its form, and there is between each cauterization the thickness of a finger or slightly more, and the nature of the cautery is what we mentioned for the liver cautery, and do not deepen your hand in the cautery, and the patient's image is lying on his back.
And the other side is in the elbow, and you lift the skin opposite the spleen where the patient's left elbow ends, and lifting the skin should be across the body so that the cauterizations fall along the length of the body.
Then insert the two very hot probes until they penetrate the skin on the other side, then remove the cautery so that there are four cauterizations. If you wish to use the other cautery with three probes.
Then treat the site of the cautery after allowing it to discharge pus for many days, as this is more effective than all the previous treatments mentioned.
Chapter Thirty-One.
On cauterizing ascites.
Cauterization is only beneficial for dropsical ascites, specifically. If you have treated the person with various treatments mentioned in the classification and your treatment has not been effective, it is advisable to cauterize with four cautery marks around the navel and one on the stomach.
Another cautery on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind his back between the shoulder blades, one opposite his chest, and another opposite his stomach. The depth of the cautery should be close to the thickness of the skin. Then leave the cautery open to discharge pus for a long time.
Do not stop treating the patient after cauterization with what is appropriate, as it combines both meanings and hastens recovery. The shape of the iron used for cauterizing the back should be nail-shaped, as previously described, and that used for the back should be olive-shaped.
Chapter Thirty-Two.
On Cauterizing the Feet and Legs.
If they swell in the edema and are filled with yellow water, it is appropriate to cauterize on the top of the foot between the little toe and the ring toe.
Hold the cauterizing iron with your hand and do not bend it. Then raise your hand and do not return it at all, for the yellow water will drain out. The cauterizing iron should be shaped like this.
Then cauterize both legs, twice on each leg. The cauterization should be done with the blade end of the cautery iron. The cauterizations should be along the length of the leg, one below the knee and another below it towards the middle of the leg. Each thigh should also receive two cauterizations.
Leave the cauterization open without treatment for a long time, allowing the water to drain from it. Then treat it with all the methods we have mentioned.
Chapter Thirty-Three.
On Cauterizing Diarrhea.
If the diarrhea is due to cold and moisture, which weakens the holding and digestive powers in the stomach and intestines, and if it has not healed with various treatments, and you see that the patient can tolerate cauterization and is strong enough, then cauterize them with a large cautery on their stomach. As mentioned previously regarding ironing the stomach with a circular iron and four irons around the navel, use the delicate nail iron lightly, or an iron on cotton over the anus, large or two.
If you see the humidities abundant and the patient tolerating that, then apply an iron on the pubic area, an iron on each side, and sometimes add two small irons on the stomach near the large one. For it is a successful treatment whose benefit does not fail, if God wills.
Chapter Thirty-Four.
On ironing hemorrhoids of the anus.
If there are chronic hemorrhoids, whether many or one, and they are composed of thick cold mixtures or corrupt humidities, and have been treated with what we mentioned in the division but the treatment was ineffective, then apply three irons to the patient on the lower part of the sacral vertebrae slightly below the waist in a triangular shape.
An iron below the navel by about two fingers, and if you determine that his stomach has cooled and his food is not digesting and you see his face swollen, then apply a large iron on his stomach as previously mentioned and an iron on his liver. And another on his spleen with a nail iron. Leave the ironing open for a while, then treat him until he recovers, if God wills.
Chapter Thirty-Five.
On ironing warts.
After cutting it, if the polyp is cut, heat the iron which resembles a mill then insert it hot into the center of the cut polyp and push your hand until the iron reaches the source of the bleeding. Do this once or twice.
If the warts are numerous, cauterize each one as described, then treat them with appropriate ointments until they heal. Cauterizing them again over cotton can be more beneficial.
Chapter Thirty-Six.
On cauterizing the hemorrhoid that occurs in the anus and its surrounding areas.
If the patient does not respond to incision and the procedure we described in its place and is afraid of that, it may heal by cauterization. If one develops a hemorrhoid and it persists, with pus and corrupt humors flowing from it, the first thing you should do is measure it with a thin probe.
Then determine its depth with the probe. Then heat the iron which resembles a mill and insert it hot into the hemorrhoid straight to the depth of the probe's entry. Repeat the cauterization until all the corrupt substances are burned, once or twice or three times as needed.
Be careful not to burn a nerve or a major vein, especially if the hemorrhoid leads to the bladder or the intestines.
Be cautious of all these areas. You should only do this if the hemorrhoid is in a fleshy area and you determine that it is not perforated. Then treat the area until it heals. If the area becomes sealed, the secretion stops, and remains so for a period of time, know that it has healed completely.
And if the materials do not cease from him, know that it is penetrable or there is rotten bone in its depth or something like what will be mentioned in its place.
Chapter Thirty-Seven.
On Treating the Kidneys.
If pain occurs in the kidney due to cold or dense wind and the patient's strength decreases because of it, it is advisable to cauterize on both sides directly on the kidney with a nail cauterizer as previously mentioned. Sometimes we might cauterize a third time on the same spot so that there are three cauterizations in a row, which is more effective for treatment.
Chapter Thirty-Eight.
On Cauterizing the Bladder.
If weakness and laxity occur in the bladder due to cold and moisture until the patient cannot hold urine, cauterize once below the navel on the bladder where pubic hair begins, and cauterize once to the right of the navel and another to its left.
The cauterization on each side should be about the width of a thumb joint, and cauterize once at the lower back or twice if necessary. The cauterizer should be nail-shaped as previously mentioned.
Chapter Thirty-Nine.
On Cauterizing the Womb.
If cold and moisture cause a substance to form in the womb, preventing conception and spoiling its function, or if pain occurs upon its arrival, it is advisable to cauterize three times around the navel as mentioned in the cauterization of the bladder. Brand on cotton below the back or two brands and the iron should be spiky.
Chapter Forty.
On how to dislocate the hip.
Erroneous moistures may affect the hip joint, causing it to dislocate. Its sign is that one leg appears longer than the other when comparing them side by side, and you will find an empty space where the dislocation occurred. It should be treated by branding the affected area around the hip joint in a circular shape.
After you mark with ink around the joint as it circles, so that the joint itself is in the center of the circle. The iron used should be as previously described for branding the stomach. If this iron is not available, then use the large olive-shaped iron to brand three times.
Make the brand deep according to the thickness of the entire skin, then treat it until it heals, if God wills.
Chapter Forty-One.
On branding for sciatica.
If pain occurs in the hip joint and the cause is cold and moisture, and if the treatment mentioned in the division has not been effective and the condition has persisted, it should be treated by purging the patient with strong purgatives such as black seed or senna seeds, or similar.
Then brand it, and there are two methods of branding: either branding with burning medicines or branding with fire. Branding with fire can be done in various ways, one of which is to brand three triangular brands on the hip joint itself, like this shape.
And it should have a suitable depth, and there should be between each cauterization and the next the thickness of a finger, and the cautery iron should be olive-shaped. Sometimes a single cauterization is made in the middle on the hipbone itself, thus making four cauterizations. And if you wish, use the circle previously mentioned for dislocating the hip with one cauterization.
To make the circle enclose all of the hip and burn through the entire thickness of the skin, this is the description of the cautery for sciatica if the pain is confined to the hip itself and does not extend to the thigh and leg.
If it extends to the thigh and leg, then apply two cauterizations on the thigh at the place where the patient indicates the pain is felt, and one above the ankle by four fingers slightly towards the outer side. The cautery iron should be knife-shaped, and the depth of the cauterization should be only as thick as the skin.
And if he indicates that the pain extends towards the toes, cauterize where he points with a point cautery three or four times, or more if necessary. If he indicates the pain is below the knee towards the leg, cauterize there once with a knife-shaped cautery iron.
And be careful in all your cauterizations that you do not go so deep as to burn a nerve or a major artery, thereby causing the patient a severe or permanent disability.
I have seen cases where cautery was performed above the ankle and was excessive, causing gangrene in the leg until it reached the foot, perforating it entirely and ruining the entire limb, then diarrhea occurred followed by death. If the pain is on both sides, cauterize them both in the same manner described.
Some of the wise scholars have mentioned in cauterizing the hip, its description is as follows: a vessel-like object is made from iron and its diameter is half a shibr. Its mouth should be as thick as a date stone or slightly less. Inside this vessel there are another two vessels.
And there should be the width of a thumb joint between each vessel. The vessels are open on both sides, and their height is about one or two joints. A handle made of iron, firmly attached to the vessels, is created for them, and this is its form.
Then it is heated in the fire until it turns red and spits sparks. Then it is placed on the affected hip, with the patient lying on the healthy side, and it cauterizes it with three circular cauterizations at once. Then it leaves it for three days and dresses it with fat, leaving the wound open for some days.
Then treat it with ointment until it heals. The author of this book says that this type of cauterization is rarely used due to its unpleasantness and the horror of its appearance, and few are those who can endure it. However, it is an effective cauterization for those who can withstand it and apply it correctly.
As for cauterization with burning medications, it involves making two vessels like rings into which the lead of the pipe can be placed, made of brass or iron.
There should be a height of about two joints or so around them, and the distance between them should be the thickness of a finger. They should be open at both the bottom and the top, and they should be joined together in this manner.
Then place it on the true hip with the patient lying on his sound side, and firmly hold your hand. Then pour between the two circles some sharp water that has been warmed by fire a little, and keep it for about an hour; the patient should endure its stinging and burning, as he will feel a sting like fire.
Until the stinging subsides, then raise your hand with the instrument and wash all the sharp water off the hip with fresh water. Then leave it for three days and apply fat to it until the blackness of the burn disappears. Leave it for some days until pus flows from it, as this is more beneficial.
Then treat it with ointments until it heals. If the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make a poultice for him as something that retains water according to what you did for the hip equally. This is the description of sharp water and I have confirmed it in the article on preparing medicines.
Take an equal amount of soda ash and unslaked lime, crush them, and place them in a new pot that has one small hole at the bottom, just large enough for the liquid to pass through. Place another glass pot under the bottom of the pot.
Pour fresh water over the soda ash and lime, enough to cover them by a finger's depth after you have firmly pressed them with your hand. Leave the pot until the sharp water drips into the lower glass pot. Then collect all of that water and pour it over another portion of lime and soda ash, also renewed.
It is then extremely sharp and can be used in many medical procedures and for cauterizing various body parts, as it acts like fire itself. Some medicines that can also be used to cauterize the hip include colocynth, baladrana honey, lime mixed with soap, all pounded together.
Galen reported a story about an ancient man's treatment for hip pain and sciatica, greatly exaggerating its importance, claiming that it does not need any other treatment and that it cures in one attempt.
To the extent that he might enter the bath carried and come out cured. This is done by taking green mercury, and if green is not available, then fresh dry [mercury] should be taken, ground finely with some fat, and applied to the hip where the pain is, or on the leg, or on the thigh.
It is tied and left for about three hours or until the patient feels that the burning has subsided, then he enters the bath. When his body starts to sweat, he should enter the pool, for the pain will go away and he will be cured by the will of God. If he is not cured, repeat the poultice again after ten days.
For he will be cured if God wills. Know that one should not use cauterization with these medications unless the body has been purged. Dioscorides mentioned that goat dung, if used to cauterize sciatica, is beneficial for it.
The cauterization should be done as follows: take some wool, soak it in old oil, and place it on the deep spot between the thumb and the wrist, which is closer to the wrist. Then, take dry goat dung.
Ignite it with fire until it becomes a coal, then place it on the wool and leave it until it is extinguished. Then take another piece and continue doing this until the sensation reaches the middle of the arm to the hip, and the pain subsides by the will of God. This type of cauterization is called dung cauterization.
Chapter Forty-Two.
On treating back pain.
Pain in the back may arise from various causes, such as a fall, a blow, excessive vomiting, and the like. It results from the accumulation of cold, moist matter, and cauterization is only applicable to this type.
When the pain results from the accumulation of cold matter, after the patient is purged with aromatic seeds and the like, cauterization should be performed on the back where the pain occurs, in three rows across the affected area. The location should first be marked with ink. In each row, there should be five cautery points or more, depending on what you see fit based on the patient's tolerance and strength.
Cauterization should be done with a point cauterizer. If you prefer, you can perform three or four cautery points with a medium-sized double-pronged cauterizer in this manner.
Chapter Fifty-Three.
On cauterizing the initial stages of hunchback.
This condition often affects young children. A sign of its initial onset in a child is difficulty breathing when standing and moving, and you may find a protruding vertebra at the end of their spine that stands out from the other vertebrae.
If you observe this and wish to halt its progression, cauterize it with a circular cautery tool in this manner. Apply the cautery equally on each side of the vertebra. If you prefer, cauterize around the vertebra in two or three rows with a point cauterizer, ensuring the points are close to each other. Then treat the area until it heals as mentioned.
And it is important not to use cauterization on the hump that results from nerve spasm.
Chapter Forty-Four.
On Cauterizing Gout and Joint Pains.
If the joint pains are due to cold humidities that affect any part of the body, and if the pains occur in the legs, it is customary for physicians to call this gout particularly.
If cold gout is treated with the various treatments we mentioned in the classification and the pains do not subside, then cauterization can alleviate them. This involves cauterizing around the joints of the legs after purging, performing many cautery sessions. The cauterizer should be olive-shaped and medium-sized, resembling this form.
And if you need to apply cauterization to the foot's surface, do so with a point cautery. If the pains ascend to the knees or other joints, which often occurs, cauterize each knee with three or four cautery sessions on each side using the same olive-shaped cautery.
If more cauterization is needed, perform it, but do not penetrate deeply with the cautery; it should only be as deep as the thickness of the skin. If the pains ascend to the hips or back, use the cauterization methods we have described for those areas.
If the pains are only in the hands, apply point cautery around the wrists in two rows. If the pain persists in the fingers, apply a point cautery on each joint and on the palm. If the pains ascend to the elbows or shoulders after a few days.
Treat both from all sides and do not let the patient lack good management and taking of medicines, for if he improves his diet and expels phlegm, then he will recover with this cauterization, if God wills.
Chapter Forty-Five.
On cauterizing fistulas.
If a hernia appears in the groin and part of the intestine and scrotum descends into the testicle, and this is newly occurred and recent, it is advisable to order the patient to abstain from food for a day and to use laxatives that will expel stool from his body.
Then he should lie down in front of you on his back, and order him to hold himself until the scrotum or intestine protrudes, then push it back with your finger. Then mark with ink under the hernia on the pubic bone a sign resembling a half-circle, its ends toward the upper body.
Then heat an iron that looks like this.
Until it comes white and throws off sparks, then push the intestine or scrotum back into his body. Then a servant should place his hand on the area to prevent the intestine from protruding. The patient's legs are spread apart, and a pillow is placed under him. Another servant binds his legs.
Another person should be on his chest, holding his hands. Then place the iron directly on the mark and press with the iron standing straight and hold it until it reaches the bone, or repeat once more if it did not reach the bone the first time.
You must protect your effort from the protrusion of the intestine while cauterizing so as not to burn it, which could result in either the death of the patient or a great disability. Know that if you do not reach the bone with the cauterization, your work will not succeed. The cautery for children should be delicate according to their size and for adults according to their size.
Then, treat the cauterized area after three days with fat until the fire's roughness disappears, then continue treating it with ointments until it heals. Let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the wound is completely sealed.
You should make his diet during the treatment period what soothes his stomach so that the intestine does not protrude when defecating. Then, if he wishes to get up after forty days, use a tight bandage and keep it on for another forty days. He should reduce exertion, overeating and drinking, and loud shouting.
For if this procedure is followed, he will be completely healed, God willing. I will discuss the treatment of hernias by incision in its own section, God willing. As for a hernia that occurs elsewhere in the abdomen and is new, if you want to prevent it from worsening, cauterize the area with a round cautery according to its size. Let what you burn of the skin be about two-thirds, then treat it as we have described, for it will not worsen, God willing. Some early practitioners have mentioned cauterizing the hernia with a triangular cautery in this manner.
After you outline the hernia with ink, make a line across at the upper side of the hernia and another line downward. Place your hand in the middle and use one nail-shaped cautery. The first cauterization is easier and better, God willing.
Chapter Forty-Six.
On cauterizing the uterus.
If pain occurs in some organs due to a fall or blow and that pain persists for a long time and treatment with medicines is ineffective, it should be cauterized with a cautery of puncture. The cauterization of each organ should be according to its size, strength, and weakness.
If the pain persists and affects the uterus, and if it heals from the first cauterization, well and good; otherwise, you should repeat the cauterization because such pains usually move from one organ to a nearby one. You should follow it with cauterization until the patient is healed.
Chapter Forty-Seven.
On cauterizing leprosy.
As for lepers, they may greatly benefit from cauterization, especially those with leprosy caused by the corruption of phlegm and black bile.
If you want to cauterize it, examine it. If the leprosy is in its early stages and treatment with what we mentioned in the classification has not been effective and you fear that corruption may take over the entire temperament of the patient, cauterize him on the head with five cautery applications. The first one in the middle of the head, the second below it towards the forehead at the end of the hair, two on the temples, and one from behind on the occipital protuberance. Insert your hand slightly with the cautery so that it affects the bone a little.
And remove the scales from it to facilitate the breathing of the thick vapors and cauterize it like the spleen as mentioned before, and if leprosy has persisted in the patient and appeared clearly, then it should be cauterized with these cauterizations which we mentioned for the head. Cauterize at the tip of the nose, two cauterizations on the cheeks, two on the neck vertebrae, six on the back vertebrae, one large one on the buttocks at the base of the tail, another above it on the same plate, and two on the hips, one on each hip. And two on the knees, one on each knee, two on the shoulders, two on the elbows, two on the ribs of the chest, and cauterize each joint of his fingers and toes with a cauterization, and on each heel of his feet and the wrists of his hands.
And be careful of the nerves at the back of the heels so as not to burn them. It may also be cauterized on the pubic bone, another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver. Know that the more you increase the cauterizations, the more beneficial and effective it is.
And know that the patient does not feel pain from cauterization as a healthy person would, because his body has become numb. The cauterizations should be of varying sizes according to the organs and joints, as previously described for the characteristics of the instruments.
Then treat the cauterization with crushed cress seeds mixed with honey and other treatments until it heals, if God wills.
Chapter Forty-Eight.
In cauterizing numbness, when a body part becomes numb and is treated with medicines, ointments, and dressings but does not heal, then cauterize the numb body part itself according to whether the part is large or small. Let your cauterization be slightly deeper in the thickness of the skin.
Then treat it with ointment until it heals. Cauterization may also be performed for some numbness that affects the hand or foot due to issues in the vertebrae where the nerves that move that body part exit, which can alleviate the numbness.
None but those who are knowledgeable about the anatomy of body parts and the exits of the nerves that move the body should undertake this.
Chapter Forty-Nine.
On Cauterizing Ulcers.
If an ulcer persists and no medical treatment is effective, then cauterize it slightly deep into the thickness of the skin until the whiteness disappears and its color changes.
Then treat it with ground lentils mixed with rose oil, pennyroyal leaves, and pigeon's blood or the blood of doves, using an equal part of each. Mix everything together and apply it to a cloth, which should be kept in place until it heals.
Chapter Fifty.
On Cauterizing Cancer.
If the cancer is in its early stages and you wish to halt its progression, cauterize around it in a circular manner with a circular cautery. Some wise men have suggested making a severe cauterization in its center, but I do not agree with this because I anticipate that it may ulcerate, and I have observed this occurrence multiple times.
The correct thing is to cauterize around it in a circle as we said or with many cautery points.
Chapter Fifty-One.
On cauterizing the hernia.
If a person develops a hernia and it delays in maturing, either due to the influential humor causing it, or due to the age of the patient if he is an elderly person with little blood, or due to time, and you wish to hasten the maturity of the hernia, cauterize around it with many small cautery points drop by drop.
Then leave it, for it will hasten to mature. If you want to cauterize its base, heat the cautery instrument which looks like this.
Place it in the center of the hernia until it penetrates the skin, and let the cauterization be on the lower part to facilitate the flow of pus. Then treat it as appropriate until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-Two.
On cauterizing the cancer.
Cancer is a corruption that spreads in the organ, consuming it like fire consumes dry wood. If you see cancer in a place that can be cauterized with fire, heat many nail-shaped cautery instruments, both small and large, according to what is suitable for the location of the cancer.
Then cauterize it from all sides until all the corruption is completely removed and nothing remains. Then leave it for three days, and apply powdered sulfur with oil to the cauterized areas until all the scabs and corruption fall off entirely.
Then treat it with poultices that promote flesh growth. If you see after three days that the flesh grows properly without corruption, otherwise repeat the cauterization on what remains of the corrupted areas. The ulcer can be treated with sharp medicine.
For it serves as a substitute for fire with quicker efficacy. I have mentioned its treatment with sharp medicine in the division, so take it from there whenever you need it.
Chapter Fifty-Three.
On the cauterization of reversed and non-reversed nails.
This condition often occurs on the soles of the feet, and it is a rough thing that irritates the person. Cauterization for this has two forms: either cauterization with fire or cauterization with sharp water.
As for cauterization with fire, it involves heating a hollow iron instrument similar to an eagle's feather. The instrument should be made of iron and sized to fit around the nail on all sides, with a thin edge. Then place the heated instrument over the nail and rotate your hand around the nail with the instrument until it reaches the depth of the nail.
Leave it for three days until pus forms, then dress it with crushed wild thyme mixed with salt. Leave the dressing on overnight, and the nail will be pulled out from its root. Then treat the wound site with a flesh-growing ointment until it heals. If the nails are not reversed.
This condition often occurs on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and legs. You should take a tube made of copper or iron or shaped like an eagle's feather, place it over the nail or wart, and then pour a small amount of sharp water into the tube.
Hold your hand while turning it with a slight twitch so that the edge of the tube affects the base of the nail, and let the sharp water find its way to penetrate to the base of the nail, and let the patient endure the sting of the sharp water for a moment.
Then leave it, for the nail will be extracted with its root. Do this one by one until you have treated all of them in the body, then treat the areas after extraction with ointments that promote flesh growth.
Chapter Fifty-Four.
On cauterizing the tonsils.
If one of the tonsils is affected by cold in the nerve or by quartan fever or the like, it should be cauterized four or five times between the vertebrae with one cautery per vertebra and once on the chest. And on his stomach, apply one cautery with an olive-shaped cauterizer, for the tonsil will subside and hasten the maturation of the cold disease.
Chapter Fifty-Five.
On cauterizing abscesses that occur in the body.
Sometimes, ugly abscesses may appear in the body due to thick, cold, and corrupted materials. When they first appear, each abscess should be gently cauterized at its head using a heated cautery stick, or the root of a long reed, or a lentil-shaped cauterizer.
Cauterize the blisters when they first appear in this manner; it will prevent their increase, disperse the causative substance, and the patient will recover. However, this should be done after the patient has been purged with a venesection.
Chapter Fifty-Six.
On staunching the bleeding that occurs when an artery is cut.
Bleeding often occurs from a severed artery when a wound is exposed externally or when a tumor is cut open or an organ is cauterized, and the like, making it difficult to sever it.
If this happens to someone, quickly reach with your hand to the mouth of the artery and place your index finger on it and hold it firmly so that the blood is contained under your finger and nothing comes out. Then, put olive tweezers, small and large, in the fire and blow on them until they become very hot.
Then take one, either small or large, depending on the wound and the place where the artery has ruptured. Place the hot instrument directly on the artery after quickly removing your finger, and hold it there until the bleeding stops.
If the blood gushes out when you lift your finger from the mouth of the artery and extinguishes the hot instrument, quickly take another one from the instruments in the prepared fire. Continue doing this, one after another, until the bleeding stops.
Be cautious not to burn a nerve that might be there, as it could cause another disability for the patient. Know that if blood is bleeding from an artery, it cannot be cut, especially if the artery is large, except by one of four methods: either by cauterization as we said, or by amputation if it has not already separated. For if it is amputated, its ends will contract and the blood flow will stop. Alternatively, it can be tightly tied with threads, or medicines that cause clotting can be applied and secured firmly with bandages.
And as for those who attempt to stop it with a ligature or by tightening with cloth or placing burning substances and the like, it will not be stopped at all except rarely. If any of that occurs to someone and there is no physician or medicine available, he should promptly place his index finger on the mouth of the wound itself as we have described.
And he should tighten it greatly until the blood is contained and flows over the wound and on the artery, and the finger should not be removed from it with very cold water continuously until the blood coagulates, thickens, and stops. During this time, you should look at what it needs of cauterization or medicine.
The Second Chapter.
On incisions, cauterization, bloodletting, surgeries, and the like.
Khalef said, we have mentioned in the first chapter every disease that can be treated with cauterization by fire and burning medicines, their causes, reasons, instruments, and forms of cautery devices. I have arranged this from head to foot in sections.
And I follow the same path in this chapter to make it easy for the student to understand what is required.
Before I begin, you should know, my children, that this chapter contains more risks than what is in the first chapter on cauterization.
For that reason, the warning should be more severe because the work in this chapter often involves bloodletting, which is essential for life, when opening a vein or incising a tumor, cauterizing an abscess, treating surgery, extracting an arrow, or incising a stone and other similar procedures that all carry risks and fear, and death often occurs in most of them.
And I advise you to avoid what is dubious for you, for various kinds of people with different ailments may come to you in this craft; some of them may be weary of their illness and have become indifferent to death.
Due to the severity of his illness and the length of his suffering, and with the disease settled in a way that indicates death; and there are those who spend their wealth on you and provide for you, hoping for health, but his illness is severe. Therefore, it should not be for you to assist anyone who comes to you with such a condition at all.
Let your caution be greater than your desire and eagerness, and do not proceed with anything unless you have certain knowledge that is valid to you regarding the praiseworthy outcome. Use in all treatment of your patients the precedence of knowledge and warning about what safety will lead to.
For in that you will find support in acquiring praise, glory, remembrance, and commendation. May God guide you to wisdom, O sons, and not deprive you of the right and success. Indeed, that is in His hand; there is no god but He.
I have arranged this chapter into sections following what was mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, from the ankle to the foot, to make it easier for you to find what you need from it, if God wills.
The first section.
On the treatment of water that accumulates in the heads of children.
This ailment often occurs in children at birth if the midwife presses the child's head without gentleness. It may also occur due to a hidden illness that is not known.
I have not seen this ailment except in children, and all that I saw of them quickly met death. Therefore, I deemed it best to refrain from treating it. Indeed, I saw a child whose head was filled with water, and the head grew larger each day. Until the child could not even sit up due to the enlargement of his head, and the moisture increased until he died.
This moisture either gathers between the skin and the bone or accumulates beneath the bone on the dura mater. The procedure for this is as follows: if the moisture is between the skin and the bone and the swelling is small, it should be cut in the middle of the head with one transverse incision, about two inches long, so that the moisture can flow out. This is the image of the surgical instrument.
If the moisture is more and the swelling is larger, make two intersecting incisions in this form:.
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, its sign is that you will see the sutures of the head open on all sides, and the water will sink when you press it with your hand; this should not be hidden from you. It is appropriate to make three incisions in the middle of the head in this form:.
After the incision, all the moisture is drained out, then the incisions are sutured with bandages and ligatures. Then, it is covered from above with a poultice and oil until the fifth day. Afterwards, the bindings are removed and the wound is treated with lint and ointments. Do not stop binding the head moderately and nourish the patient with all dry food that is low in moisture.
Until the organ strengthens and heals. Another method for the incision is to look where the bone of the swelling and the accumulation of water appear, as it may be more towards the back of the head or the front, or on the right or left.
You aim the incision where the swelling and accumulation of water have appeared, then make the incision as much as you can manage, but be careful not to cut an artery, causing bleeding from which the patient could die along with the discharge of moisture.
Chapter Two.
Cut the two arteries behind the ears, which are known as the carotids.
If one is affected by acute ailments in the eyes or chest, and this persists without improvement from medicinal treatments, then the most effective remedy is to cut these two arteries.
If you intend to cut them, you should shave the patient's head with a razor, then rub the area with a coarse cloth so that the artery becomes visible. Then, secure the patient’s neck with their garment. Look for where the pulse beats; their position is slightly below behind the ears, and they are rarely hidden except in some people.
Then, mark them with ink and cut them with a sharp scalpel down to the bone. This should be done at the level of the head. If you prefer, insert the scalpel beneath the artery and pull it upwards while cutting. The length of the cut should be about two fingers wide.
If the pulse is cut, blood will gush out in a pulsating manner, spurting forward continuously. If the artery is not clearly visible, you should estimate about three finger-widths from the ear, then mark it with ink and incise down to the bone. What should be done is...
You should let about six ounces of blood as a moderate measure, though you may allow more or less depending on what appears to you regarding the strength of the patient and the fullness of their arteries. Then, examine the wound; if there is any membrane remaining attached to the bone, cut it off.
So that a hot swelling does not occur, then bind the wound with a wick from linen cloth, then treat it with ointments until it heals.
Chapter Three.
On cauterizing the arteries in the cheeks.
If a person suffers from chronic migraine or acute attacks due to sharp moistures and heat in the cheek muscles, or severe chronic headache and the like, and has been treated with various medical treatments without success, we have tried cauterizing or sealing the arteries in the cheeks as described.
The method of cauterization involves shaving the hair from the cheeks of the patient and locating the visible artery in the cheek, as it can be identified by its pulse. It is rarely hidden except in some individuals.
Or, in severe cold, if it is hidden from you, let the patient tighten their neck with a fold of their garment, then rub the area with a cloth or apply a hot water compress until the artery becomes clearly visible. Then take the scalpel, which has this shape. Then, gently cut the skin with it until you reach the artery, then insert a forceps and pull it upwards until you extract it from the skin and free it from the surrounding tissues on all sides. If the artery is thin, you can twist it with the tip of the forceps. Then, cut a part of it according to how far its ends spread and contract without causing bleeding. If it is not amputated or severed, the blood will not flow properly. Then, let about six to three ounces of blood flow out.
If the artery is large, it should be tied in two places with a doubled strong thread, and let the thread be either of abriresm or of the tendons of the lute so that corruption does not quickly affect it before the wound heals, causing bleeding.
Then cut what remains between the ties, do this at that time or another later. If you wish to cauterize it close to the bone with a surgical cautery until its ends fall off, it will serve the same purpose or even better as we said.
Except if the patient has a fever or an overheated temperament, for cauterization is something that aids in consuming moistures and thus is more beneficial. After excising the arteries, the area should be stuffed with old cotton, and tightly bandaged. After removal of the bandage, it should be treated with drying medicines that promote flesh growth and with bandaging until it heals, if God wills.
If bleeding occurs from the artery during your work, immediately cut it either by cauterization or fill the area with pitch and hold tightly until the blood stops. If you do not have any of these, place your finger until the blood clots.
Cool the area with very cold water until the intensity subsides and bind it as necessary. What is lighter and easier than excising the artery is to cauterize the vein with this double-bladed cautery after marking the two points with ink.
Heat it extremely hot until it reaches the bone and cut the vein in two places so that there is distance between its ends, for they will not unite with this cauterization at all. This is the image of the cautery.
The two knives should be sharp like small points, but they are much less sharp than the knife because if they were as sharp as the knife, cold would reach them quickly and the flesh would not cut easily. If there is some thickness in them, they retain the heat of the fire.
Cut the flesh quickly, and this method is better than all others, being lighter and easier. The space between the two knives should be about the thickness of a finger.
Chapter Four.
On the treatment of persistent hot tearing to the eyes.
If the tears are constant and their flowing is from the veins on the outer part of the skull, and if no benefit has been gained from any medical treatment with drugs, and you see that the patient's face has reddened. He feels a crawling sensation on his forehead like the crawling of ants, and his eyes are weak and moist, with his eyelids eroded and swollen due to the sharpness of the tears. Those who first treat this condition resort to this method, which they call treatment by sword, wherein you order the patient to shave the hair from his forehead.
Then, make three parallel incisions on the forehead along its length. Each incision should be about two fingers long. The first incision should be parallel to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, the second slightly away from the movement of the muscle in the temple, and the third on the other side.
Be careful not to cut the two arteries on the sides, and keep your hand away from the connection of the jawbones. The distance between each incision should be about three fingers apart. Have pieces of prepared sponge or many dry cloths with you to absorb the blood.
Then insert the sharp two-edged lancet which looks like this. From the incision next to the temple to the middle incision, and peel off all the skin between the two incisions along with the fascia on the bone. Then do the same from the middle incision to the third incision, then remove this lancet. And also insert another tool into the first incision, which is called a single-edged scalpel sharp on one side and smooth and not sharp on the other side, and this is its image:.
And make its sharp side face upward toward the flesh attached to the skin and its smooth side face the bone, and push it until it reaches the middle incision, and cut with it all the vessels descending from the head to the eyes without the cut reaching the outer skin.
Then do the same from the middle incision to the other incision. After a moderate amount of blood has flowed, squeeze the areas to remove clotted blood, then in each incision place a wick of cotton wool and put on it a dressing moistened with a decoction and oil or vinegar and oil.
To prevent a hot swelling, on the third day, loosen the bandage and use frequent washing with lukewarm water. Then treat it with a poultice of balsamicon with rose oil and other treatments used for wounds until it heals, if God wills.
Chapter Five.
On the treatment of tears and discharges to the eyes from the interior of the head.
When there occurs in someone a constant, sharp, hot discharge that causes the eyes to appear sunken and small, with weakened vision, and the eyelids become ulcerated and the eyelashes fall out. There will be a sharp, painful headache and continuous sneezing. Know from these symptoms that those materials and secretions only come from many deep veins. The best treatment for this is to order the patient to shave his forehead, then make one incision in the middle of the forehead.
There will be a sharp, painful headache and continuous sneezing. Know from these symptoms that those materials and secretions only come from many deep veins. The best treatment for this is to order the patient to shave his forehead, then make one incision in the middle of the forehead. Or raise it slightly with the incision starting from the left temple to the right temple, and the incision should reach the bone. Keep your hand away from the chewing muscles that move during mastication. Once the bone is exposed, soak up all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate the edges of the incision with old cotton or a flax thread, then secure it from above with sutures. Soak the sutures in a potion and oil to prevent a hot swelling. When you remove them and see that the hot swelling has subsided, you should scrape the bone until flesh begins to grow on it.
Then treat it with a drying regimen that promotes flesh growth, such as taking two parts of wheat flour and four parts of calafonia, preparing an ointment from them, and using it to promote flesh growth in such injuries.
Chapter Six.
On the treatment of what falls into the ear.
Everything that falls into the ear is one of four types: either a metal object or something like stone such as iron and glass, or a plant seed like chickpeas and pits, or a liquid such as water, vinegar, and the like.
And if it is a foreign object, when a stone or something like a stone that does not grow in the ear falls into it, face the sun with the ear. If you see the stone, drip some violet or turpentine oil onto it, then try to remove it by moving the head or sneezing with pepper. Plug the nostrils when sneezing comes, after placing a band of cloth or wool around the ear and stretching the ear upwards, as this treatment often causes it to come out. If it does not come out, then try to remove it with a gentle probe, which is illustrated here.
If it comes out with the probe, and if not, try to remove it with a gentle, slightly curved blind hook. If it does not come out that way, then make a tube of copper and insert one end of the tube into the ear hole well.
Plug what is around the tube with softened wax mixed with oil so that there is no path for air other than the tube, then draw it out strongly with your breath; this often causes it to come out. If it does not come out by the methods described and if not, take a little of the incense of the Anbat or the bird-luring incense, and place it at the end of the probe.
After wrapping it with tight cotton, then gently insert it into the ear hole after drying the ear from moisture. If it does not come out by all the methods described, proceed to make an incision before a hot swelling or convulsion occurs.
The method of the incision is to bleed the patient first in a moderate amount according to their strength. Then sit the patient in front of you, turn his ear upwards, and make a small incision at the base of the ear where it is lower near the cartilage.
The incision should be crescent-shaped until you reach the stone, then remove it using whatever instruments you can. Then immediately suture the incision quickly and treat it until it heals.
And if what has fallen into the ear is one of the seeds that grow and swell, try to remove it as mentioned. If it does not come out, then take a thin, delicate lancet shaped like this.
Attempt to cut that type of seed fallen in the ear with it. You should only do this if you are certain that the seed has become moistened by the steam in the ear until it becomes small pieces, then remove them with a blind hook or a delicate scoop or by suction.
As mentioned, it is easy to remove them. As for water in the ear, the patient should first try sneezing with cinder while filling his ear with some old cotton while lying on the ear that contains the water, if it comes out that way.
Otherwise, take many thin and smooth stones along the fingers, warm them slightly by fire, then have the patient insert one of them into his ear hole, lie down on one side, and strike the stone in the ear with another stone.
He should continue doing this with each stone until all the water comes out. Alternatively, take a piece of papyrus or feather, insert one end into the ear, and heat the other end until most of it burns, then repeat with another feather.
Do this repeatedly until all the water comes out, or draw it out with a tube as previously described for stones. As for removing animals that have entered the ear, if it is small-bodied like a flea or similar, treat it as mentioned in the section on incisions.
If his body is large and apparent to the sense, try to remove it with pitch and curettes, and its removal is easier than all that pierces the ear. As for the extraction of the worm generated in the ear if you treat it with what we mentioned in the section on fumigations and your treatment does not succeed.
You should look into the ear in the sunlight, then if any part of the worm appears to you, remove it with pitch or with delicate curettes. If nothing appears to you from it, take this tube, which is depicted here.
Narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, insert the thin end into the ear as much as the patient can tolerate, then suction strongly with it. Do this several times until all the worms come out. If they do not come out, seal around the tube with wax as I mentioned to you in the case of the stone.
If they do not come out with the methods mentioned, use the fumigations that I have described, which the ancients have tested for killing worms. You will find that in the section on fumigations. The application of ointments and medicines to the ear is done with this instrument, and here is its depiction:
As you see, it is made of silver or copper, narrow at the bottom with a small hole and wide at the top. If you prefer, the pipe inside the tube can be made of sturdy brass. If you wish, take a wire and wrap cotton tightly around one end.
Then pour the ointment or juice or any of these medicines into the tube while it is in the ear, then insert the wire with the cotton from the top and squeeze it moderately with your hand so that the ointment is forced into the auditory canal and is felt.
Enter it to the patient, and let what is poured into the ear be warmed slightly by fire, and beware that the thing which drips in is not extremely cold or extremely hot, for the ear cannot tolerate that.
Chapter Seven.
On the treatment of obstructive ear condition.
Some children may be born with their ear canals unperforated.
Some people may also experience an obstruction in the ear canal due to a wound or abnormal growth of flesh. This obstruction may be deep within the ear canal and not visible to the eye.
It may also protrude slightly outside the ear canal and be visible to the eye. What occurs deep in the ear and is not visible is generally more difficult to treat, while what is visible should have the patient's ear exposed to the sun. Examine it, and if you see the obstruction clearly, open it with a delicate surgical instrument, which would look like this:.
Its tip should be slightly broad and limited at the end, with the rest of the instrument smooth on both sides so as not to harm the ear. If the obstruction is due to flesh that has grown in the ear canal, grasp it gently with a delicate forceps and cut it carefully until all the flesh is removed.
If the obstruction is deep in the ear, take a smooth, delicate probe, warm it slightly over fire, then insert it into the ear canal. If you feel the obstruction and the patient experiences hearing heaviness, gently remove it.
And be careful not to injure the earlobe, then place in the ear a wick according to the size of the hole, which has been coated with Egyptian ointment. Do this for days until you are certain that the wound will heal or take a wick and soak it in water and sprinkle ground zاج on it.
And use it, but if you see the ear has swollen with a hot swelling, it is necessary to remove the wick and replace it with another that has been coated in kerotie which is made with rose oil until the hot swelling subsides, then treat it until it heals.
If bleeding occurs, soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear and use the rest of the treatment that stops bleeding as mentioned in the chapter on bloodletting.
Chapter Eight.
On the treatment of warts that appear on the eyelids.
These warts that appear on the eyelids may be moist or dry, and it is necessary to grasp them with tweezers or a forceps and cut them off at the root with a scalpel, then apply powdered zاج to the area.
If bleeding occurs, cauterize it with a gentle lens-shaped cautery. Cauterization after cutting is better. They often return if any of the roots remain, but if you cauterize with fire, it burns those roots and they do not return.
Chapter Nine.
On the treatment of transient cold in the eyelids.
Often there appears in the eyelids something that resembles frost in its severity and hardness.
And therefore it is called frost, which is a gathering of thick moisture in the upper and lower eyelids. The treatment for this is to examine it; if the frost protrudes on the outer part of the eyelid and can be moved in all directions, then its condition is easy, so make a horizontal incision across it.
Then peel it gently from all sides until it is removed, then hang it with the forceps and cut it. If you cannot cut it without penetrating the eyelid, that will not harm the patient at all. If the incision is large,缝合它，并治疗直到痊愈。请注意，提供的翻译中包含了不应有的内容（最后一句的中文），这是由于我在遵循指示时出现了错误。根据您的要求，我将只提供英文翻译，不再添加任何额外的内容或解释。因此，请忽略上述混合语言的最后部分，正确的翻译应仅包含英文内容，如上文所示。
If it is small, then there is no harm, as the ointment will heal and bind it. If the frost leans towards the inner surface of the eyelid, turn the eyelid and hold the frost with forceps without needing to make an incision, and cut it from all sides.
If you penetrate the eyelid with the cut, it will not harm anything. Then wash the eye after cutting the frost with salt water and treat the area with healing remedies until the patient recovers.
Chapter Ten.
On the treatment of the boil that appears in the eyelid.
The boil is a swelling that occurs in the layers of the upper eyelid, and it most often affects children. It weighs down their eyes, causes them to have night sweats, and they are unable to look at sunlight. In order that the tears flow to them.
And therefore, you often see them leaning on their faces and they sleep this way, with their eyelids under the eyebrows moist and swollen, and the boil is clearly visible. When you press the area with your fingers, you feel the boil between them. The procedure is for the patient to place his head in your lap.
Then take a piece of linen, prepare it as a wick, and make a circle from that wick according to the size needed to surround the boil on all sides. Then place it over it and press with your fingers on all sides to gather the boil in the center of the circle.
Then, with the scalpel, make a transverse incision in the center of that moisture. The incision should not be larger than that made in a vein. As for the depth, you should cut through all the skin until you reach the boil.
In most cases, the boil will protrude from the incision in the form of a white piece of fat. You should pull it out with a cloth wrapped between your fingers to the outside while rotating your hand right and left until it is completely removed. Be careful not to enlarge the incision so that the scalpel does not reach the eye and harm it.
If the boil does not appear at the beginning of the incision, you should slightly enlarge the incision gently until the boil protrudes. Then pull it out as we said. Then soak a cloth in vinegar and water and place it on the area and secure it with a bandage. Some people crush salt for this purpose.
He places it in the depth of the incision to dissolve any remaining moisture, then continues treating it until it heals. If a hot swelling occurs in the area, treat it with soothing bandages until it heals.
Chapter Eleven.
On Types of Eyeshadow.
If excess eyelashes grow outside the natural course beneath the normal lashes and persist, they harm the eye and cause various diseases such as constant tearing, relaxation of the eyelids, whiteness, and thickening until this becomes a reason for the eye's failure.
Eyeshadow application can be done in four ways: either by branding with fire, or by using a sharp medicine as previously mentioned in the cautery section, or by cutting and stitching, or by using reed, which I will describe.
You should place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the eyelid with your left hand. If it turns, otherwise insert a needle with a thread from below the eyelid and pass the needle with the thread from above, close to the hair itself, and pull the thread upwards with the eyelid.
You turn it with a retractor, then incise inside the eyelid without touching the excess hair from the larger meibomian gland to the smaller one. Then thread the suture and place a small pledget of cotton or cloth under the eyelid, then mark the eyelid with ink.
It resembles the shape of an oak leaf, except that the shape should be according to how much you want to lift the eyelid, as this can vary among people. Some may need a suitable amount of the eyelid to be cut depending on how relaxed the eyelid is.
Some may require the cutting of less, all of this according to the relaxation of the eyelid, then cut with the scalpel on the two lines that were taught, and start from the larger opening to the smaller one, and let each incision be near the natural hair by the thickness of a needle.
Then insert the forceps into one of the corners of the skin, then peel it all off, then approximate the two lips with a needle and fine wool thread, wipe away the blood, and attach any remaining threads to the eyebrows with some adhesive substances.
If you wish to do so, and otherwise, it does not matter. Then leave the sutures and threads for about three or four days, then treat it. If you prefer, leave the wound unsutured and treat it with things that dry and constrict, as the eyelid rises when the wound is sealed and united, and suturing is better.
This method of compressing has been mentioned by the earlier authorities, except that it involves some burden on the patient; however, it is a good technique and there is no danger in it. Another method of compressing is to shape something over the eyelid like the shape of a leaf of ivy as we have described. Then raise the eyelid with three forceps, which can be spaced apart or grouped in this manner:.
Then cut what remains of the eyelid with a small scissors in this manner, cutting moderately:.
If you are unable to hold the forceps and they do not stabilize for you, take a needle with thread and insert it in the center of the shape, and insert another thread near the larger opening and a third thread near the smaller opening. Gather the threads between your fingers moderately, then lift them with your hand in a balanced manner.
Lift the skin that was incised entirely as we described, then approximate the edges of the wound with sutures and treat it until it heals. If a hot swelling appears when you cut or make an incision, alleviate that swelling with cerote or similar soothing ointments.
Sometimes the lower eyelid may also evert, and in such cases, you should use what we have mentioned of cutting, suturing, and cauterization with fire or sharp medicines. Cauterization with fire or sharp medicine is more effective and gentler on the patient than cutting and suturing, though cutting and suturing can also be skillfully performed.
Cauterization with reed is done in this manner: you turn the eyelid inside out and make an incision on the inside as described. Then, you make two thin reeds or wooden pieces whose length matches that of the eyelid and their width is less than the width of a scalpel.
You notch the ends of both pieces on each side where the threads will hold. Then, gently bring them together over what remains of the eyelid and tightly secure the two reeds on both sides. Leave it for several days; the tightened skin will die, turn black, and腐烂。
Until it falls off by itself. If it takes longer, use a punch to notch it, then treat it until it heals. Once it has healed, the eyelid will rise and the eyelashes will not turn inward towards the eye. This is how the two reeds are made, fashioned in this shape and size, with the same length and width:
Chapter Twelve.
On Removing Inward-Growing Eyelashes with a Needle.
If there is a hair or two hairs, the procedure is to take a thin needle and insert into it a thread of smooth fine silk, then gather its ends and tie them in a very gentle knot, and let the length of the thread be about a span.
Then attach another finer thread under the loop and tie its ends if you wish. Then have the patient place his head in your lap, and let it be near sunlight so that the work can be clearly seen, for it is delicate work. Then insert the needle with the loop into the root of the extra hair.
Pierce through the eyelid quickly until it emerges above the natural hair, then pull the thread up to the loop and insert that hair into the loop, whether it is one, two, or three hairs, not more.
Then pull with your hand until the hair comes out with the loop from the eyelid along with the natural hair. If you pull the loop and the hair does not come out with it, pull the loop downward with the thread that you attached to it until the loop comes out of the upper hole.
Then put the hair back in and pull it out. Do this until it rises to the upper hole and you can see it clearly. At that point, remove the loop and the thread, tighten the eye, and leave it tightened for two or three days until the hair stays in place and flesh grows over it.
If the hair is short, either add a long hair from natural hair so that it rises with it, or leave it until it grows longer over time, and then raise it.
Chapter Thirteen.
On the treatment of styes that occur on the upper eyelid.
Which is affected by this sty is called arnibia, and this sty is either natural or incidental. The incidental one results from the healing of a wound, split, burn, or the like.
The procedure is to cut open that healed area, separate its edges, and place a wick of linen between them, then bind it until it heals. It is not advisable to use things that dry and constrict in its treatment.
If you do that, the sty will return worse than before. Instead, use things that relax, such as fenugreek and turpeth with water in which alum and linseed have been boiled, and apply a diachylon ointment dissolved with some fat to the wick and treat it thus.
The principle of treating it is to strive by every means that it does not heal in the same condition as before. The procedure we mentioned is part of correcting the sty, not restoring the area completely to its original state.
Chapter Fourteen.
On the treatment of styes that occur on the lower eyelid.
This sty that occurs on the lower part is truly called a sty, and it can be natural or incidental. The incidental one results from a wound, split, burn, or the like.
The method for treating it is to take a needle with a doubled thread, pierce the flesh with it, and pass it from one side to the other until the thread is at both ends of the flesh. Then pull the flesh upward with the needle and cut it with a broad scalpel.
If the eyelid returns to its proper form, otherwise take a needle and place it at the site of the incision and turn the eyelid with it, and make two cuts on the inner side of the eyelid so that the ends of the two cuts are from the corners of the cut you made until they meet, thus forming a corner. Until when they come together, its form becomes similar to this shape:.
It is the Greek letter lambda, then remove that flesh to the extent that its sharp side is lower than what adjoins the eyelid, then join the separated parts with two stitches sewn with wool thread, then treat it with the relaxing and bandaging medications we mentioned until it heals.
If the eyelid has been affected by a cut, stitching, or cauterization, it should be incised with a slight cut also without hair of the eyelashes as previously mentioned, then separate the two edges with bandaging as we described.
In summary, the treatment of ptosis, whether from above or below, should be carried out according to what appears suitable for the form of the ptosis, as it may vary greatly in appearance, and the skilled practitioner will devise a method by whichever means is possible for him.
Until the form is restored to its natural state or接近它，疾病的本身在大多数情况下会指引你适合的治疗方法和工具。
Chapter Fifteen.
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
This adhesion may affect many people by the upper eyelid adhering to the white of the eye, preventing it from moving easily and hindering its natural functions; therefore, it is necessary to insert the tip of a probe under the eyelid.
And raise it upwards or extend it with a forceps, then cut the adhesion with a gentle scalpel that is not as sharp as other scalpels but slightly blunt so as not to alarm the patient during the procedure, which could cause the scalpel to slip and harm the eye with its sharpness. Your cutting should be as if you are peeling off that adhesion.
Wait until the eyelid returns to its natural state and the adhesion is completely healed. Then, pour salty water into the eye to wash it, or drip a solution of zingiber officinale dissolved in water into it. Finally, separate the eyelid from the eye with a cotton swab.
Place wool soaked in egg white over the eye, and after the third day, use pounded ginger until it heals.
Chapter Sixteen.
On the removal of the ingrown nail and excess flesh around the nails.
The ingrown nail can be of two types: either it is neural, resembling a hard, thin membrane, or it is non-neural, resembling a white, solid moisture that breaks apart when touched by iron or pulled with forceps.
No forceps were used in it, and both types begin from the larger aperture until they are inserted little by little until they cover the pupil and prevent light and eye movement. The method of cutting them is to have the patient place his head in your lap.
Then he opens his eyes and you lift the eyelid with your hand, then grasp the cataract with slightly curved forceps and pull it upwards. Then take a needle, insert a hair from horse or cattle hair and a strong thread into it, bend the tip of the needle slightly, and pierce it into the center of the cataract.
Then you thread it with the needle and tie the cataract with the thread, pull it upwards, and use the hair to peel off the side of the cataract that is next to the iris as if you are spreading it out with the hair completely, then cut the remaining part at the base of the aperture with a delicate scalpel or a small scissors and leave the natural flesh of the aperture.
To prevent the constant flowing of tears from cutting it, the cataract can be pulled with forceps alone or with a thread as we said, then peel it off with a smooth-edged scalpel that looks like this:.
Be careful that the scalpel does not touch the corneal membrane, causing a tear and damaging the iris. After cutting, put some powdered salt or zingiber officinale in the eye and leave it for another day, then treat it as necessary until it heals.
If the cataract is not adherent and you cannot insert a needle into it or secure forceps to it, this type of cataract is often treated with medication as described in the classification section. If you wish to cut it, open the patient's eye.
Take a delicate, smooth, and weak-edged scalpel in this form:. Shave the nail from above gently with it. If you see that it becomes loose and crumbles due to the shaving, then instill a drop from your vial into the eye of Zanjari eyewash or red eyewash or powdered salt, and bind the eye for another day.
Then repeat the procedure on it until it is all gone, unless you encounter a hot swelling in the eye; in that case, leave it and treat the hot swelling until it heals. Then repeat the shaving procedure on it until it heals. As for the flesh growth in the meibomian gland...
If the growth severely irritates the eye, attach that growth to a hook and cut some of it, but do not overcut lest it cause tearing. Then instill into the meibomian glands red eyewash or Zanjari eyewash until it heals.
Chapter Seventeen.
On the removal of warding and any excess flesh that grows in the eye.
Red flesh may grow in the eyes of some people, accumulating until it covers the pupil or approaches it or overflows onto the eyelids, and sometimes the eyelids turn outward. It resembles the rose of jelenar.
The treatment involves having the patient place their head in your lap, then open their eyes, and remove all of that red flesh using tweezers suitable for this purpose.
Or hold it with a forceps or pincers, then cut the flesh bit by bit until all of it is removed by cutting, and be careful of the eye so as not to harm it while working. Your cutting should be done either with the scalpel we described for cutting nails or with a small scissors. Like those with which you pick the threads, as its image will come in the next chapter.
Once the cutting is complete and all the inflammation has gone, fill the eye with ground salt or drip in red saffron or similar caustic medicines. Apply cotton coated with egg white to the outside of the eye to prevent hot swelling.
If any inflammation remains and the blood overpowers you and you fear hot swelling, then leave the eye alone and treat it with what calms the swelling. Then return to it gradually until it heals. Do the same for any excess flesh that appears in the eye of this kind.
However, you should avoid treating any weak eye, whether naturally or due to an illness, with iron instruments. Do not engage in any of these procedures until you are certain that the organ can withstand such treatment.
Chapter Eighteen.
On removing threads from the eye.
Threads are red veins that form over the eye, hindering vision and weakening the eye over time. You should first examine if the eye containing these threads is strong and free of any other illness besides the threads.
Then, perform the leeching; that is to say, instruct the patient to place his head in your lap. Then attach those veins with one or two hooks according to your skill, and the hooks should be gently curved in this manner:.
or they could be double hooks in one body as follows:.
Then, carefully cut those veins with a delicate scissors and wipe the blood from time to time until you see that the veins have departed and the blood has coagulated. Be careful not to harm the eye with the tips of the scissors, and let your work be done in the morning facing the sun.
Be very careful in your work so as not to cut any other veins. When you are finished, drip green or red sheyaf into the eye to let its sharpness consume what remains of the spittle. If you cannot leech it all at that time, bandage the eye with something that soothes its pain.
Leave it for days until its pain subsides and you are safe from the hot swelling, then repeat the procedure on her in exactly the same manner until it heals. This is the image of the scissors to use for this.
Leave it [with the patient's head in the student's lap, another one drying the tears and ensuring clear vision at the front and back of the eye while you] begin the procedure by opening the eye with fixed or triangular speculum that a student holds.
Be precise, with the patient's head in the student's lap, another one drying the tears and ensuring clear vision at the front and back of the eye, and you may begin the leeching from the top of the eye or from the bottom, but it is preferable to dry two hooks on the upper side, one at the end of the crown and the other at the beginning.
Hold it between the middle finger and the index finger, then hang weights underneath opposite them. Then hold it between the little finger and the ring finger and lift your hand lightly until you see all of the vein raised. Cut from the smaller side if you want with scissors or with a delicate knife.
Insert the needle with wax and stretch the entire vein until it rises on the flesh, and do not cut the dried part, for tears and blood will make it easy (soft) for you.
Then cut with scissors what extends beyond the crown from above and below until nothing protrudes except in the cornea. If you can lift it from the cornea, peel it off with wax, which is better, though it may be difficult for some people.
And when you cut it, the area will swell for days, and the pain and the heat of the swelling will subside, then repeat the procedure on it.
Chapter Nineteen.
On restoring the septum to the nose.
Physicians call the septum a polypus, and if you treat it with cauterization or with sharp, burning medicine as previously described and it does not heal, there is no remedy except to incise the swelling when it has ripened and extract all the moisture or pus within it.
Until the bone is exposed, and if the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument that looks like this:
It is called the rough head, made from Indian iron, with its head rounded like a button, engraved with fine engravings similar to those of a file or rasp. Place it on the site of corruption in the bone, then rotate it between your fingers while slightly pressing your hand until you know that the corruption has been scraped off.
And do this several times, then treat the area with drying and contracting medicines. If the area seals and flesh grows and the discharge stops, and if it remains for forty days without recurrence or inflammation and no incident occurs in it.
Know that he is healed. Otherwise, there is no remedy except to return the polyp into the nasal opening in this manner: reveal the bone again with iron or a sharp medicine, once the bone is revealed, take it out in this form:
The tip of the iron should be triangular and its end conical, drawn to the tip as you see. Then place it on the bone itself, which is near the nostril, and keep your hand slightly away from the eye. Then rotate your hand with the instrument until the bone is penetrated and the patient feels it.
If one finds air coming out when he holds his hand over the nose, then treat the area with contracting and drying medicines as I have informed you. If flesh grows and the place hardens, then the material that was protruding outward will return into the nose, which will be less severe for the patient, if God wills.
The Twentieth Chapter.
On the Treatment of Eye Growths.
If the entire eye has a growth and it does not cause any harm or deficiency to the sight, it is appropriate to ease the patient, then place them in a basin. Then put a leech on the back without restriction and let it suck gently.
Then place on the eye a poultice made from acacia, frankincense, gum, and cinnamon. Then bind the eye over the dressing with many bandages. The method of the bandages is to take soft linen in abundance, fold each piece into four folds to make them thick.
Then place them one on top of the other according to what the eye requires, then bind them tightly with a strong cloth. Repeat the cupping by suction without restriction, then remove the cup and leave the eye bound for a day and night.
If the bandage loosens during that time, it should be tightened well. Then remove the bandage after a day and night as we said. If you see that the eye has recovered, otherwise repeat the dressing, padding, binding, and cupping until it recovers.
The Twenty-First Chapter.
On Cutting the Umbilical Cord.
If a hernia appears in the umbilical layer, then protrudes and emerges outside the eyelids resembling an umbilicus, and this spoils the appearance of the person, and you wish to cut it, then the procedure is as I describe.
It involves inserting a needle into the base of the umbilicus from bottom to top, then inserting another needle with a doubled thread on the side of the orifice and passing it through, leaving the first needle as is.
Then cut the place where the doubled thread bends, tie it around part of the umbilicus near the needle and tighten it well. Then remove the needle and apply wool soaked in egg white to the eye, leave it until the threads fall off with the umbilicus, then treat the eye with what strengthens it.
Until the wound heals, you may bind the umbilicus from all sides with a circle of cloth until the eye becomes more protruding. Then, use a thin scalpel that reaches the depth of the eye to let the egg-like moisture flow out, causing the eye to drop and wither in place, then bind it until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
On the treatment of scabies.
This ailment which is called scabies is a discharge that gathers in the eye, resembling flowing water but there is none. The method of treatment is to seat the patient on a chair upright, then take his head in your hands from both sides.
Move it until you see the discharge move downward with your eye, then it stabilizes and does not move, and the light is released, and the patient sees things as he used to see them. If it does not go down, we know that it is water. If the discharge does not descend as we mentioned,
otherwise, seat the patient in front of you, then take a thin scalpel and make an incision slightly above the cornea at the point where the conjunctiva meets the cornea in the limbus until the material is released.
Once it is released, drip warm water mixed with honey or water in which fenugreek and honey have been boiled into the eye. Then continue treating it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Three.
We have mentioned the types of water in the classification and which is suitable for draining with clear and explanatory words, so take that information as accurate. At this point, you should seat the patient in front of you, cross-legged, facing a light source near the sun.
His healthy eye is tied and pulled tightly, then you raise his eyelid with your left hand if the affected eye is the left one or with your right hand if it is the right eye.
Then place the tip of the probe near the cornea with a thickness of a morat in the white part of the eye from the side of the smaller aperture, then push the probe forcefully while turning it with your hand until it penetrates into the white part of the eye and you feel that the probe has reached an empty space.
The depth to which the probe should go should be equal to the distance from the pupil to the edge of the iris, for through the clarity of the cornea, you will see the copper clearly in the eye. Then direct the probe upwards to the place where the fluid is.
Then press it down repeatedly; if the fluid descends immediately, the patient will see what his sight has been opened to right away, with the probe still in his eye. Then let it rest for a little; if the fluid rises again, lower it once more without removing the probe.
When it stabilizes and does not rise, gently remove the probe while slightly turning it with your hand little by little. Then dissolve some pure Andranian salt in water and wash the eye internally with it. Afterwards, apply moist cotton or wool externally over the entire eye.
With rose oil and egg white, you bind it along with the healthy eye. As for us and our time, we place ground cumin with egg white on it. If the probe does not enter the eye due to its hardness, because there are those whose eyes are extremely hard. It should take the scalpel which is called the brid which has this form:.
Pierce only the area of the wound with it and do not deepen the piercing, but rather create a subtle opening for the probe, then insert the probe as mentioned. When your work is complete, prepare a secure bed for the patient to lie on his back in a dark room.
He should abstain from all movements and coughing, and his food should be what alleviates his condition. He should not move his head to the right or left at all, and the bandage should remain in place until the third day. Then, remove it in that dark room and test his vision.
Show him things and then reapply the bandage until the seventh day. You should not do this during treatment or after cauterization at your time, but you should avoid it before because water rises quickly with intense viewing.
If a hot swelling occurs, you should remove the bandage before the seventh day and treat it with what calms the swelling until it subsides. Once it has subsided, then release his vision and place a veil over his face through which he can gradually train his sight while in that dark room for several days.
He should leave the house gradually and manage his affairs. Know that in cauterization, the learner cannot do without observation multiple times before proceeding with the work. I have heard from some Iraqis that they mentioned making a penetrating probe in Iraq with which water can be sucked up.
I have not seen anyone in our country make this, nor have I read about it in the books of the early scholars. It is possible that this is a recent development. Here are images of various types of probes for those who are ignorant of them:.
It is made of copper especially and its tip is of this particular thinness, pointed and triangular.
Chapter Twenty-Four.
On the treatment of flesh grown in the nose.
Fleshy growths of various kinds may appear in the nose, some resembling many-legged scorpions, others being hard and cancerous with a dark color, and some being soft and not dark in color.
As for the soft growths that are not malignant or cancerous, the patient should sit before you facing the sun, and you should open his nostril, place the forceps on those growths, then pull them out, and cut what has been reached with a sharp, delicate instrument from one side.
To ensure that all the flesh has been removed, if any part remains that you cannot cut, scrape it off with a delicate instrument gently until nothing remains. If bleeding overwhelms you or inflammation occurs suddenly.
Treat it as appropriate, or if it is a malignant swelling, immediately cauterize it until the bleeding stops and all the flesh is removed. Then, after cutting, apply vinegar and water or a liquid to the nose. If the nose opens and moisture flows into the throat.
Know that it has healed if the moisture flows as it should. If the moisture does not flow as it should, know that there is growing flesh inside on top of the loose bones which the instrument could not reach to cut. In this case, you should take a linen thread that is somewhat thick.
And make many knots in it, and place between each knot the length of a finger or less. The patient then inserts one end of the thread into his nose with a probe or as much as he can after making it like a button and pulling its thread until it reaches the nasal cavity.
And it comes out at the throat. This action is often done by children in school, and it is easy for anyone who wants to do it. Then gather the two ends of the thread, one end that came out of the mouth and the other that remained in the nose.
Then use the thread with knots to cut the flesh. Do this until you know that the flesh has been severed by the knots of the thread. Then remove the thread, and in the nose, after wiping the blood, place a wick soaked in Egyptian ointment. Do this for three days or more.
Until the ointment consumes all that remains of the flesh. Then place a lead tube in the nose for several days until it heals. If drying treatment is needed, use that method.
And this is an image of the device used to drip oils and medicines into the nose:.
He places a small lamp made of silver or brass, open and its flow path is also open.
And if you prefer, make the tube closed like a reed, and the oil applicator flat.
It has a handle at the end as you see, to hold when heating oil or any liquid substances you desire.
Chapter Twenty-Five.
On warts growing at the tip of the nose.
Warts often grow at the tip of the nose, increasing in size over time until their appearance becomes ugly.
Therefore, it should be cut off at the first sign of its appearance and completely removed. Then apply either cauterization or a burning medicine that can replace cauterization to the area. If it is not cut off until it grows large, examine it; if it is hard, solid, uniform in color, and has little sensation.
Do not treat it with iron for it is a cancerous tumor. I have often seen that cutting this tumor has led to great harm for the patient. If the tumor feels soft upon touch and is not uniform in color, and you find that it can be completely cut out. Purge the patient, and cut it without hesitation. Treat the area with substances that dry and constrict until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Six.
On suturing the nose, lip, and ear. If the connection is severed due to a wound or the like, know that if there is a separation in any of these cartilages, it seldom responds well to treatment except in some people.
It is advisable that when someone presents with such an issue, if the wound is fresh and bloody, you should bring the edges of the wound together with sutures and treat it until it heals. If the separation has caused the edges to part and each side has become healthy, it is best to peel back each side to the thickness of its outer skin until it bleeds.
Then the lips are sewn together and tightened, and powdered sulfur and frankincense are sprinkled on it. A plaster of unguent or another type of healing ointment is placed over it. It is left tightened for two or three days, then it is released.
And the medicine is changed until the threads fall off by themselves. Then it is treated with ointment until it heals. The method of sewing is to join what has been separated, either with needles as described in stitching the abdomen or with thread as previously explained there.
Chapter Twenty-Seven.
On removing knots that appear in the lips.
Many people may develop small, hard tumors inside their lips, some resembling morsels of corns and others smaller or larger. It is advisable to turn the lip, incise each knot, and grasp it with forceps.
Then cut it from all sides. After cutting, fill the area with powdered zaj and let it stop the bleeding. Then rinse with vinegar and salt, and treat the areas with astringents until the wounds heal.
Chapter Twenty-Eight.
On removing excess flesh from the gums.
Often, excess flesh grows on the gums, which the ancients called aphtosa. It is advisable to grasp it with forceps or hold it with a probe and cut it at its base. Allow the blood to flow out, then apply powdered zaj to the area.
Or one of the astringent and drying suppuratives, then if that flesh returns after treatment, it often returns; cut it again and cauterize it, for it will not return after cauterization.
Chapter Twenty-Nine.
On scraping teeth with iron.
Rough and ugly crusts may form on the surfaces of the teeth, both inside and outside, and between the gums. These crusts may blacken, yellow, or green until they cause damage to the gums and make the teeth look unpleasant.
It is advisable that the patient sit before you with his head in your lap, and you should scrape the molar and tooth where the crusts and sand-like substances appear until nothing remains. Do the same for the black, green, yellow, and other discolorations until it is clean.
If what is inside disappears with the first scraping, otherwise repeat the scraping on another day, a second time, and a third time until you achieve your goal. Know that the molar requires various types of scrapers with different shapes according to what is suitable for your work.
For the scraper used to scrape the molar from the inside is different from the one used for the outside, and the one used between molars has another form. Here are several forms of scrapers that you should have prepared:
Chapter Thirty.
On extracting teeth.
It is advisable to treat the molar for pain with every means possible and to hesitate before extracting it, for there is no replacement if it is extracted, as it is a noble essence. Even if extraction becomes necessary, it should be done cautiously.
It is necessary if the patient decides to extract it that you ensure until you find the aching tooth sound. For often the pain deceives the patient, and he thinks it is in the healthy tooth, so he extracts it, but the pain does not go away until the diseased tooth is extracted; we have seen barbers do this many times.
When you have identified the aching tooth with certainty, then you should incise around the tooth with a strong enough surgical instrument until you separate the gum from all sides, then move it with your fingers or with delicate forceps gradually little by little until you loosen it.
Then take hold of it firmly with the larger forceps, and have the patient's head between your knees so that he is secured and does not move. Then pull the tooth straight to avoid breaking it. If it does not come out, then take one of those instruments, insert it under the tooth from all sides gently, and rock it as you did before.
If the tooth is perforated or decayed, you should fill that hole with a piece of cloth and secure it well with a thin strip of wax so that it does not crumble when you pull on it with the forceps. You should also carefully incise around the gum from all sides thoroughly.
Be cautious with your effort so as not to break the tooth, leaving part of it behind, which would cause the patient greater harm than his original pain. Beware of doing what ignorant barbers do in their hastiness and eagerness to extract it without using the methods we have described.
For often great calamities occur to people, the least of which is that a tooth may break and some or all of its roots remain. Or it may be extracted along with some of the jawbone, as we have witnessed many times. Then, after its extraction, he rinses his mouth with a drink or vinegar and salt. If bleeding occurs from the site, which often happens, then grind some zadj and pack the area with it.
Otherwise, use it if the zadj does not help you. The image of the delicate forceps that are used to move the tooth first should have long ends, a short handle, and be thick so that they do not bend when you grasp the tooth with them. This is the image of the large forceps:
It should be as you see, with thick handles so that when you grasp them they do not yield or bend. The ends should be short and made of Indian iron or well-tempered steel, with teeth at the tips that interlock to grip firmly and tightly.
The ends may also be made like the shape of a file, which also makes them strong and precise in grip.
Chapter Thirty-One.
On Extracting Tooth Roots and Removing Broken Jawbones.
If after extracting a tooth, a broken root remains, it is advisable to place cotton with fat on the site for one or two days until the area relaxes, then you can insert the dental wax or forceps into it. which resemble the mouth of the bird called the pelican, and this is a picture of the forceps:.
It should be made like a file inside or like a scalpel. If it does not respond to extraction with these forceps, you should dig into the root and remove all the flesh with a lancet, then insert the tool that resembles a small lever, which is depicted as follows:
Short-ended, slightly thick, and not brittle so that it does not break. If the root comes out with this, otherwise, use these other tools, whose images are as follows: the first is triangle-ended and somewhat thick:.
An image of another delicate triangle:
We also use this two-pronged tool, which is depicted as follows:
And with other tools and iron instruments that have been mentioned in the description of tooth extraction. We also use this tool that resembles a large fishing hook, which is depicted as follows:.
Triangular-ended and slightly thickened to avoid breaking, and it should not be brittle. Know that tooth instruments are numerous, as are other tools; they are almost innumerable. A skilled and experienced craftsman may invent tools for himself according to what his work and the diseases themselves suggest.
Because there are diseases for which the ancients did not mention tools due to their varying types. If a bone in the jaw or one of the bones in the mouth breaks or becomes rotten, examine it in its place with one of these suitable tools or forceps mentioned for extracting roots.
We use this, and its appearance is as follows:.
It should be slightly thick to control the bone so it does not slip until the bone comes out, and we treat the area with appropriate medications. If there is a slight infection in the bone, remove its infection and darkness until it is clean, then treat it until it heals.
Chapter Thirty-Two.
On the Extraction of Teeth that Have Grown in the Wrong Position.
If the teeth grow outside their natural path, they spoil the appearance, especially if this happens in women and slaves. It is advisable to examine; if a tooth has grown behind another tooth.
If it cannot be extracted or pushed back, then extract it. If it is attached to another tooth, cut it with this instrument, which is depicted as follows:.
It resembles a small beak and should be made of sharp Indian iron. Your cutting should be done over many days due to the hardness of the tooth, so as not to disturb the other teeth. If it protrudes firmly due to its coldness, cool it with a file that looks like this:.
It should be entirely made of Indian steel, with a very fine edge like that used for making needles. Cool the tooth gradually over many days with gentle application so as not to disturb the tooth and cause it to fall out. Finally, smooth it and remove it with some chisels.
If a tooth has broken and is bothering the tongue when speaking, it should also be filed down until the roughness of the break is smoothed out and does not harm the tongue or impair speech.
Chapter Thirty-Three.
On securing loose teeth with silver threads or gold threads.
If the front teeth become loose and move due to a blow or fall, and the patient cannot bite on anything edible for fear they will fall out, and treating them with constricting medicines has not been effective.
The solution is to secure them with a gold or silver thread, and gold is better because silver can corrode and rot after a few days, while gold remains in its state forever without such issues. The thread should be of moderate thickness to fit well between the teeth.
The method of securing is to take the thread and insert its bend between two healthy teeth, then weave the ends of the thread among the loose teeth, whether one or more, until the weaving reaches another healthy tooth on the other side.
Then, you return the weaving to the side where you started and pull gently and wisely so that it does not move at all. Make sure your thread is tight at the roots of the teeth so it does not come loose. Then, cut the excess ends of the thread with scissors, gather them together, twist them with wax, and hide them between the healthy tooth and the loose tooth.
So that the tongue is not irritated, then leave it tightened in this way permanently. If it loosens or breaks, secure it again with another thread, and thus it will serve its purpose for a long time. This is the image of the teeth and the method of securing two loose teeth between two healthy ones as you see.
And it may happen that one or two molars return to their place and fit in as we have described and remain, and this is done by a skilled craftsman. And he may carve bone from the bones of an ox and make it in the shape of a molar and put it in the place where the molar has gone. And it is fixed as we have said, so it remains and one enjoys it.
Chapter Thirty-Four.
On cutting the ligament that appears under the tongue and hinders speech.
This ligament that appears under the tongue may either be natural, with which a person is born, or it may be accidental from a wound that has healed.
The procedure involves opening the patient's mouth, placing their head in your lap, lifting the tongue, then cutting the ligament transversely until the tongue is freed from its restraint. If there is some stiffness or knotting and this is due to a healed wound, make an incision with forceps and cut it transversely until the ligament is severed and the knot is resolved.
Be cautious that the incision is not too deep in the flesh so as not to cut an artery and cause bleeding. After the cutting, rinse with rose water or vinegar and cold water. Then place a cotton wick under the tongue for the patient to keep each night.
To prevent it from healing again, if bleeding occurs, apply powdered zajah to the area. If the bleeding persists, cauterize the area with a suitable lens-shaped cautery tool. Then treat it with all treatments until it heals.
Chapter Thirty-Five.
On Extracting the Frog That Develops Under the Tongue.
A swelling that resembles a small frog may occur under the tongue, preventing it from its natural function, and it might grow until it fills the mouth. The procedure for this is to open the patient's mouth towards the sun and examine the swelling.
If you see it as dark or black and hard, and the patient feels nothing of it, do not treat it for it is cancer. If it tends towards white and has moisture, then pierce it with a lancet and cut it open with a delicate knife and remove it from all sides.
If the blood overpowers you while working, apply powdered zajah until the bleeding stops, then resume your work until you remove it completely. Then rinse with vinegar and salt.
Then treat it with all the appropriate treatments until it heals.
Chapter Thirty-Six.
On the Treatment of Tonsil Swelling.
And what grows in the throat from other swellings may present glands inside the throat that resemble those appearing externally, known as tonsils. If treating them with what was mentioned in the section does not heal them.
If the swelling is hard, dark in color, and has little sensation, do not treat it with iron. If it is red in color and its base is thick, also do not treat it with iron for fear of bleeding. Instead, leave it until it ripens, either to be softened or to burst on its own.
And if it is white in color, round, and its base is thin, this is what should be cut. The procedure is to look before the operation to see if its hot swelling has completely subsided or decreased somewhat.
Then seat the patient facing the sun, with his head in your lap, open his mouth, and take an assistant who will hold his tongue down with an instrument that looks like this:.
It is made of silver or copper, thin like a knife. When you press the tongue with it and clearly see the swelling, take a forceps, pierce it into the tonsil, and pull it out as much as possible without bringing any of the membranes with it.
Then cut it with an instrument that looks like this: it resembles scissors, but its ends are bent so that the mouth of each one faces the other, both being very sharp. It is made from Indian iron or Damascus steel:.
If this instrument is not available, then cut it with a lancet that looks like this:.
Sharp on one side and blunt on the other. After cutting one tonsil, cut the other in the same manner. After the cutting, the patient should gargle with cold water or vinegar and water.
If bleeding occurs, gargle with water in which pomegranate peels or oak leaves or similar astringents have been boiled until the bleeding stops. Then continue to treat the patient until he recovers. Sometimes other swellings may appear in the throat besides the tonsils; these should be cut in the same manner as described for cutting the tonsils.
I treated a woman who had a tumor that grew inside her throat, extending towards the larynx, barely sensitive, which was almost blocking the throat. The woman was breathing through a narrow passage and it had prevented her from eating and drinking water.
She was on the verge of death had she remained another day or two, and the tumor had two branches that extended until they came out through her nostrils. So I acted quickly, inserting a clamp into one of them and pulling it, thus extracting a piece successfully.
Then I cut it where I reached it from the nostril hole, and then did the same for what protruded from the other nostril. Then I opened her mouth, pushed her tongue aside, and inserted the clamp into the tumor itself, cutting off a part of it, from which only a small amount of blood flowed.
The woman's throat was cleared, and she immediately began to drink water, then took some food. We continued to cut parts of that tumor repeatedly for a long time, and the tumor would regenerate what was cut off, so this went on for a long time with both of us.
I devised a plan and cauterized the tumor inside the throat, which stopped its growth. Then I left that place and did not know what happened to her afterwards.
Chapter Thirty-Seven.
On Cutting the Tumor of the Tonsil.
Which is called a cluster if a phlegm descends to the tonsil and swells, and if it is white and rectangular, it is called a pillar. If it is thick at the bottom and round, it is called a cluster. If it is treated with what we mentioned in the division and the treatment is not effective.
I have seen the hot swelling subside from it and become thin, so it should be cut. What was of it round and collected and had no length, and was blood-colored or dark-colored or black or without feeling, then it should be avoided from being cut.
In it, there is a need to operate on the patient; therefore, if you see it as described, white and long, you should sit the patient facing the sun, press his tongue with the tool that was previously described, then insert the probe into the growth.
And pull it down and cut it with one of the two tools I mentioned for cutting the tonsils. It is best to only cut what has exceeded the natural limit without adding more, for if you cut more, you will harm the voice and speech.
Then after the cutting, use what we described for cutting the tonsils and treat it until it heals. If the patient is reluctant to have it cut, you should employ a method to cauterize it without fear or hesitation. The purpose of cauterization is with a sharp remedy, which involves placing the patient's head in your lap.
Then press his tongue with the tool we mentioned, then take some of the sharp water I described in the section on cauterization and mix it with unextinguished lime, making it neither too thick nor too thin. Fill this mixture into the recess of this tool, and this is its shape:
The end of the tool where you place the medicine should have a recess like that of a spoon. Place the tool with the medicine directly on the growth itself while the patient is lying on their side so that saliva flows out of his mouth from inside his throat, so that nothing goes down into his throat and harms him.
Then hold the medicine in your hand and squeeze it on the tooth for about half an hour until you see that it has turned black and the pain of the medicine's bite has subsided, and if you wish, take some cotton, wrap it around the end of a stick, and soak the cotton in the medicine.
Insert the stick with the cotton into a tube from above until the cotton sticks to the tooth. Do this repeatedly until you achieve the desired effect of cauterizing the gum. Then leave it, for it will wilt and fall off after three or four days. If you need to reapply the medicine, do so.
After cauterization, wipe around the gum with cotton soaked in fat and dry the area around it from the medicine. Then rinse with cold water and treat externally with poultices and internally with gargles until healed. This type of treatment is safer than cutting and more reassuring.
Teeth can also be treated with a milder method than cauterization and cutting; they can be treated with fumigation as follows: take frankincense, zaufa, thyme, saffron, sage, chamomile, cypress, and similar herbs. Gather all of them or some of them in a pot and submerge them in vinegar.
Boil the pot, which is sealed with clay from a wise person, and make a hole in the center of the lid. Attach a hollow instrument to this hole, made as follows: it can be crafted from silver or brass.
Insert the end with the funnel into the patient's mouth so that the steam rises to the tooth through the tube until the gum swells well. Then repeat this several times until it wilts. Do not perform this treatment at the first sign of swelling.
For often it increases the swelling, and it should only be done when her hot swelling subsides. If this tool is not available to you, take a reed and attach a chicken eggshell to one end so that the mouth of the patient does not burn.
Because the eggshell prevents the heat of the steam from burning the mouth, and this is good for treatment with safety.
Chapter Thirty-Eight.
On the removal of thorns and other objects that pierce the throat.
Often a bone or fish spine, or something similar, pierces the throat. You should extract what is visible to the eye after pressing the tongue with an instrument towards the sun.
So that you may clearly see what is in the throat. For what does not appear and is hidden in the throat, it is advisable to induce vomiting before the food is digested in the stomach, as the piercing object might come out with the vomit, or the patient can swallow a piece of lettuce or the root of chicory.
Or swallow a bite of dry bread, or take a piece of soft sea sponge, tie it to a string, then swallow it. When it reaches the spot of the thorn, pull the string quickly. Do this several times.
For the thorn or bone often sticks to it and comes out. If it does not come out as described, then use a lead instrument of this shape:.
It should be slightly thicker than a needle and have a curved end. The patient should gently insert it into their throat while raising their head upwards, being careful not to touch the larynx to avoid causing coughing, and use it to push out the bone or thorn, or the doctor can insert it with their hand.
And inserting the patient into it is better for his knowledge of the location of the embedded object and to push downwards or pull his hand upwards with the tool, all of that according to what is suitable until it comes out.
Chapter Thirty-Nine.
On Removing Thorns Embedded in the Throat.
If you treat the leech with what we mentioned in the division regarding treatment with medications and it is not effective, then examine the patient's throat in the sunlight after you press his tongue with the tool that was described to you.
If you see the leech, pull it out with a small hook or a fine, firm tweezers. If you cannot do so, take a hollow tube and insert it into the patient's throat near the leech, then introduce an iron rod heated by fire into the tube.
Do this several times and the patient should abstain from water throughout the day. Then, take a vessel filled with cold water, open his mouth over it, and let him rinse with it without swallowing a drop, moving the water around with his hand from time to time.
The leech will fall off when it senses the water. If it does not come out as described, fumigate the throat with urine and alum using the tool described for fumigating nasal passages. Do this several times, and it will fall off.
The method of fumigation involves taking a pot with heated charcoal, covered with a lid that has a hole in the center. You attach one end of the tool to this hole, then add the fumigating substance. The patient places his mouth at the other end of the tube and seals it so the fumes do not escape until he feels the fumes reach his throat.
For the leech falls from its place, and if it does not fall, then the incense is repeated several times and the patient endures thirst and eats salty food and garlic without drinking water; surely it will come out with this management. And this is a figure of an instrument that attracts the leech from the throat when it is seen.
It resembles forceps as you see, except that it has this bent part which enters the throat and its ends resemble a bird's mouth with the roughness of a file; so when it clamps onto something, it does not leave it.
And another instrument used to press the tongue, it is a wide iron ring as wide as to fit inside the mouth over the tongue. It enters the mouth standing on its side, keeping the mouth open against the will of the patient and he cannot remove it at all until it is taken away.
Description of the instrument used to open the mouth in exactly this same measure.
Chapter Forty.
In it, there is discussion about softening swellings and incising them.
Swellings are of many diverse kinds, as will be mentioned one by one in this book. They differ in softening and incising in two aspects: one is the type of swelling itself and what moistures it contains.
The second aspect is due to the body parts where they occur, because a swelling occurring in the head is different from a swelling occurring in the buttocks, and a swelling occurring in a fleshy area is different from a swelling occurring in a joint; each has its own specific treatment method.
There are swellings that should not be lanced until the pus within them is ripe and complete, and there are those that should be lanced when they are just beginning and have not fully ripened, like the swellings that occur near the joints.
For if a swelling occurs near a joint and persists until the surrounding area becomes putrefied, it may corrupt the ligaments or nerves of that joint, which could result in the disability of that limb, or the swelling may occur near an important organ.
For if you delay lancing it until it ripens, you will harm the important organ, or if it is near the anus, lance it when it is just beginning and not fully ripe. You must lance the swelling that is near the anus when it is just beginning and not fully ripe so that the pus does not penetrate inside the anus and cause an fistula.
And it becomes to a point where it does not heal. You should know the time for lancing swellings that have fully ripened, which is when the pain of the swelling subsides, the fever disappears, the redness and inflammation decrease, and the head of the swelling becomes defined, along with other signs.
You should place the incision at the lowest part of the swelling if possible, so that it is easier for the pus to drain downwards, or in the thinnest and most prominent part of the swelling. The incision should be made lengthwise on the body if the swellings are on areas like the hands and legs.
Places where muscles, tendons, nerves, and blood vessels are located, generally in all flat areas without bends. As for those that bend, the incision should follow the contour of that area. If the swelling is in fleshy areas, it is best to avoid lancing it.
Until it fully matures as we have said, for if you cut it before that, the pus will continue to flow from it for a long time and will be much more harmful and dirty, and its lips and depths might become hardened, and some swellings may spread across the body when necessary or according to what the limb requires.
It is appropriate to use one incision for small swellings and a wide incision or many slits according to the size of the large swelling. There may be some swellings where it is necessary to puncture the skin and cut if it has become like a rag.
And it has happened to some extent that it has died, similar to what occurs in many abscesses and hidings. Some are split into a three-cornered slit, and some are cut in the shape of a plant leaf, like the Arabian swelling.
Some require a circular incision, a crescent-shaped incision, and the like. For those that do not have a head, such as flat smooth swellings, it is appropriate to use only a simple incision. If the swelling is large and has gathered for a long period, after you have made an incision, do not hurry to extract all the pus at once.
Rather, extract some of it, then allow the swelling to subside for another day, and then extract some more pus. Do this gradually several times until all of it is extracted.
Especially if the patient is weak, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old man, as the vital spirit often dissolves with the sudden release of pus, and the patient may die without you realizing it. Beware of this matter greatly.
After you have lanced these tumors, it is necessary to clean the wound and examine it. If the tumor's incision is small or if there is only one simple slit, use linen or old cotton for bandaging. If the tumor is large and has many slits from the lancing.
It is necessary to insert a wick into each slit until they all reach each other. If part of the skin has been cut from the tumor or excised, it should be filled with old cotton or the fuzz of linen without moisture and secured until the third day.
Then remove it and treat it with the appropriate ointments until it heals. If bleeding occurs during your procedure, use cold water and vinegar after soaking a piece of linen in them, and apply it to the bleeding area several times.
If the bleeding persists, it is necessary to employ the procedures and treatments, including evacuations as described in many places in this book and from the division. If you are in winter and the tumor site has many nerves, it is advisable to soak the dressings with a hot drink and oil.
Place it on the affected area. If you are in summer and the areas are fleshy, it is advisable to apply dressings soaked with cold water and oil or a cold drink and oil. On the third day, as we have said, you should clean the tumor and wash it.
Use similar methods for its treatment until it heals. This is what you need to know about the general treatment of tumors. As for the details, I have described each tumor and the way to treat it separately in a summarized form.
Chapter Forty-One.
On incising tumors that appear on the scalp.
Tumors of small size appear on the scalp, and they are a type of boil contained in membranes that have sacs like those of a chicken's egg. There are many types; some are fatty, and others contain moisture similar to mud.
Some contain moisture resembling pus and broth, and there are those that are hard and solid. All of these pose no danger in incision and extraction unless an artery is encountered during the incision.
The procedure for incising them is to probe them first with the instrument that will be shown after this, called the lancet, to determine their contents. If they contain moisture, make an incision along the length in a simple manner as follows:
Begin the incision from line ~B~ to line ~C~. Once the moisture has drained, peel and cut away the entire sac that contained the moisture, leaving nothing behind, for it often returns if any part remains.
Then, soak a cotton ball in the strong ointment if available, or in saltwater, and fill the wound with it. Leave it until the next day, for it will dissolve any remaining sac. Repeat this process by applying the cotton ball with the strong ointment again and a third time if necessary.
Continue until you are certain that no part of the sac remains. At this point, treat the wound with ointments until it heals. If the tumor contains fatty matter, incise it in this manner:.
Make a firm incision and place the retractors at the lips of the wound and peel it from all sides and strive in extracting the peritoneum which contains it, if an artery impedes you then do what was described to you after and likewise do with the swelling if it is hardened from the cut.
And the treatment is as mentioned, and incising the hardened swelling is easier because it has little blood and moisture. Some of these swellings in the head in some people have no moisture at all. This is because I incised a swelling in.
The head of an old woman, and I found the swelling like a hard, rough, white stone that could not be broken, and if someone threw it, it would injure them. None of the other swellings occurring in the head were like this, such as the swellings that appear on the heads of children.
And at the base of the ears, make a slight incision all over them and turn their lining downwards so that the discharge easily flows down. Then treat it with appropriate treatment.
The Forty-Second Chapter.
On Incising Swellings in the Neck: These swellings often appear in the neck, under the armpits, and in the groins, and may occur throughout the body. Those that appear in the neck can be singular or multiple, and some may develop from others.
Each of these swellings is inside its own peritoneum, similar to tumors and head swellings as described. There are many types of these swellings; some are hardened, some contain moisture, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
I have not seen any of them in good condition to touch, and its surface is close to the color of the skin; it moves in all directions and is not attached to the neck nerve, nor to the thyroid, nor to an artery, and it is not sunken. It should be cut with a slight incision from top to bottom of the body in this form, from line ~G~ to line ~B~:.
And peel it from all sides and stretch the edges of the skin with forceps or with two forceps or with many forceps if you need to, as we said in the case of head tumors. Extract it little by little, and make sure not to cut a vein or a nerve. The scalpel should not be too sharp.
So that your hand does not overcut or disturb the patient, causing you to cut what does not need to be cut. If you cut a vein or an artery and it hinders you from working, put in the wound powdered zaj or some of the styptics that stop the blood.
And suture the wound and leave it until the severity of the swelling subsides and the wound relaxes and begins to show signs of putrefaction, for the blood will stop then. Return to your work until you finish, then examine with your index finger if any more small growths remain, cut them and clean them.
If there is a large vein at the base of the growth, you should not cut the growth from its root but should tie it with a double tight thread and leave it until it falls off by itself without harm. Then fill the wound with old cotton that has been soaked in Egyptian ointment and treat it.
And if the entire sow's [teat] is cut off, it is necessary to bring together the lips of the wound and suture it immediately after ensuring that no fragment remains. If you find that a fragment of the sow's bone remains.
It is advisable to aim for cutting at its root and base, and use suturing as we have mentioned. For those swine that contain moisture, lightly bandage it where you see the signs of its maturation, and make the bandage towards the lower side as we said.
Then after the bandage, use winding with Egyptian ointment or similar to consume any remaining corruption until you see the wound is clean, then treat it with ointments that promote flesh growth until it heals.
Chapter Forty-Three.
On incising the throat for a swelling that occurs inside the neck.
The ancients mentioned this incision in the throat, but I have not seen anyone in our country perform it, and this is the order of their words. As for those with goiter, they should avoid incising the throat as they would not benefit from it.
Because all the veins and lungs are diseased, as for those who have a hot swelling in the mouth or throat or tonsils, if there is no issue with the trachea, it is necessary to use incising the throat to avoid the damage that results from suffocation.
If we intend to do this, we should incise the throat below three or four rings of the trachea with a small transverse cut between two rings, similar to the incision in the peritoneum and not in the cartilage. This location is appropriate for the incision.
For it is devoid of flesh and its blood vessels are distant, if the surgeon is timid, he should stretch the skin of the throat with a speculum then cut the skin until he reaches the trachea, avoiding the blood vessels if he sees any.
Then he cuts the peritoneum that we described, and determines the incision of the trachea from the phlegm that comes out with what is ejected, and the cessation of sound. The wound is left open for a while, and once the time when choking was feared has passed, the edges of the wound are sutured together from the skin.
And he sutures it alone without the cartilage, then uses medications that promote flesh growth until it heals. The author of this book says, the explanation of this statement we have narrated is that if they see the patient has one of these tumors mentioned blocking his throat.
When the patient is near death and his breath is about to cease, they proceed to incise the larynx so that the patient can breathe through the wound and be saved from death. The wound is left open until the course of the disease ends, which usually lasts for about three days or so.
Then they ordered the wound to be sutured and treated until it heals. What I witnessed with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and directed it at her throat, cutting part of the trachea. I was called to treat her and found her gasping like a slaughtered animal, so I exposed the wound.
I found that the blood coming out of the wound was minimal, so I was certain that no artery or vein had been cut. The air was escaping from the wound, so I immediately sutured it and treated it until it healed. The servant did not suffer anything except a hoarseness in the voice, nothing more.
And after days, it returned to its best condition, so from this we say that incising the larynx has no danger.
Chapter Forty-Four.
On incising the tumor that appears in the pharynx from the outside, which is called pharyngeal elephantiasis.
This tumor, which is called pharyngeal elephantiasis, is a large tumor of the body's color and it is common in women. It comes in two types.
Either it is natural or accidental. As for the natural one, there is no remedy for it. As for the accidental one, it comes in two types: one similar to fatty tumors, and the other similar to the tumor that occurs from the entanglement of the artery, and incising it is dangerous. One should not touch it with iron at all, except for the small ones. If you probe and examine it with a probe and find that it resembles a fatty tumor and is not attached to any veins, then incise it as you would a fatty tumor. Extract it along with the cyst if it is in a cyst, otherwise remove all of it, then treat the area as appropriate with the necessary treatment.
Chapter Forty-Five.
On incising various types of tumors.
Tumors have many types, and I have mentioned all their types in the classification. It is necessary to explain here the difference between a tumor and an abscess, as it can be confusing. I say that an abscess is accompanied by heat, fever, and alarming pains until the inflammation subsides. The infection completes, then the fever and severity subside, and the swelling does not have any heat, fever, or pains. It is contained in a serous sac which is its special container, and it takes on the color of the body. Its beginning is like a lentil and becomes like a fig, larger and smaller.
It is of two types, either fatty or it contains moisture. The colors of the moisture are diverse as mentioned in the classification. Therefore, when you proceed to treat the swelling, you should first probe and examine it with an instrument called the mads, whose image will come in the section after this one.
Measure the size of the swelling, then remove the mads and look at what comes out in its trace. If moisture flows out, regardless of its color, make a slight incision as mentioned in the other swellings. If no moisture comes out after the mads, know that it is fatty.
Make a firm incision on it in this form as I have informed you, suspend it with forceps, and gently peel the skin from all sides while being cautious with the sac so that you can remove it intact along with the swelling.
If the sac is ruptured during the procedure and you cannot remove it intact, then it often happens that way. Remove it piece by piece until nothing remains of it, for if any part of it remains, whether little or much, the swelling will return most of the time.
If it overcomes you and a little of it remains, then enlarge the incision at the end with some sharp corrosive agents, suture the wound, and apply something to reduce the hot swelling above it. Treat it with other treatments until it heals. If the swelling is large, sew its edges and treat it with methods that promote healing.
If a vein, whether prominent or not, is encountered and bleeding occurs, immediately apply powdered zadj to the area and leave it tightly for two or three days until the wound becomes putrid and the blood's boiling subsides. Then return to cut what remains of the tendon.
Chapter Forty-Six.
On the Forms of Machines.
Those that deal with cutting and punching are the forms of hammers, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small.
Image of a Large Hammer:.
Image of a Medium Hammer:.
Image of a Small Hammer:.
It is made from steel, square-ended, and sturdy to facilitate quick entry into tumors. These are the forms of the lancets, which are also called blades, and they come in three types as well: large, medium, and small. Image of a Large Lancet:.
Image of a Medium Lancet:.
Image of a Small Lancet:.
It is suitable for examining tumors, wounds, and abscesses to determine what is inside them, such as bones or other materials. It is made round, polished, and smooth like probes from Chinese brass or espadrouse, or from brass, iron, or silver. The best are those made from espadrouse.
Lancets can also be made from black lead and are suitable for probing abscesses that have curved depths, as they can bend smoothly to follow such curves. They also come in three types: long, medium, and short.
According to what is needed, each probe is shaped and its thickness is adjusted according to the width or narrowness of the hernia: a large probe made from lead.
A medium probe made from lead:.
A small probe made from lead:.
Images of the probes, which are of various types, for there are simple ones, meaning those with a single prong, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small. There are also blind probes, which come in three types, and there are two-pronged probes, which also come in three types, and there are curved two-pronged probes. They come in three types, and there are probes with three prongs, which also come in three types. All of these types are needed for their specific purposes. Image of a large simple probe:. Image of a medium simple probe:. Image of a small simple probe:.
Image of a large blind probe:. Image of a medium blind probe:.
Image of a small blind probe:.
Image of a large two-pronged probe:. Image of a medium two-pronged probe:. Image of a small two-pronged probe:.
Image of a large trephine with three prongs:.
Image of a medium trephine with three prongs:. Image of a small trephine with three prongs:.
And these are the images of the scalpels used to cut and excise tumors and swellings, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small. Image of a large scalpel:.
Image of a medium scalpel:.
Image of a small scalpel:.
Its edges used for cutting are limited, while the other ends are not limited. This design is made so that it can be relied upon to excise swellings without fear of cutting an artery or nerve, and to provide some comfort to the patient, reducing the pain felt during the excision of a tumor.
And these are the images of the forceps, which come in three sizes: large, medium, and small. Image of a large forceps:.
It is made from brass that is almost pure, similar to what is used for kohl. On one end, it resembles a wide spoon with two layers, and at its head, there is a hidden scalpel blade that resembles a bird's tongue, able to slide in and out as desired, as you can see.
Images of the instruments which are placed between the fingers when treating swellings; the patient does not feel them, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small. Image of a large instrument:.
Images of the bloodletting instruments used to cut off blood flow, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small. Image of the large instrument:.
They are made of copper or china, rounded and slightly long as you see, and should be thin. These types of bloodletting instruments should be available in large and small sizes to quickly cut the blood when necessary and when medicine is not available.
However, they should not be used to cut blood from every part of the body, but only from fleshy areas such as the thigh muscles, calf, arm muscles, breast, abdomen, armpit, and other moist fleshy parts.
And from these, smaller instruments can be made that resemble pistachio shells, as shown in this image:.
It is used to cut the blood if it flows from the circumcision area or when cutting a vein or artery. They can also be made rounded, as shown in this image:.
Chapter Forty-Seven.
On treating male breasts.
When the breasts of men swell to resemble those of women upon reaching puberty, remaining as an unsightly bulge, if one finds this displeasing, it should be cut with a crescent-shaped incision in this manner.
From line ~B~ to line ~C~:. Then remove all the fat, fill the wound with healing medicine, then sew the edges of the wound together and treat it until it heals. If the breast sags downward and becomes lax due to its bone, as may occur in women.
It should be cut on its upper sides with two crescent-shaped incisions that connect to each other at their ends, so that the larger line surrounds the smaller one, as in this figure:. From line ~B~ to line ~C~, then peel the skin between the incisions, remove the fat, and use what we have mentioned of suturing, cauterization, and any other treatment needed until it heals.
If you cannot remove what needs to be removed due to the patient's distress or excessive bleeding, it should be filled with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and left until it consumes the remaining fat, then treat it until it heals.
Chapter Forty-Eight.
On treating tumors that appear under the armpit.
These tumors that appear under the armpit are of a solid type enclosed in a sac, and some contain moisture. For those that contain moisture, it should be incised with a crescent-shaped cut as follows.
From line ~B~ to line ~C~. If you have emptied all that is in the tumor of the pus, then stuff it with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove the cotton.
It is treated with the appropriate ointment until it heals. If the tumor is of the type of sow's knots, then incise it as we mentioned in the incision for sows' knots. If the wound persists to the extent that pus flows, then use cauterization as we described previously.
Chapter Forty-Nine.
On incising the tumor that appears near the artery or vein, which is called aneurysm.
If the artery is cut and the skin above it heals, a tumor often appears as a result. Similarly, the vein may also swell and become tumorous.
The signs by which one can determine if the tumor and swelling are due to an artery or a vein: if the tumor is due to an artery, it will be elongated and concentrated deep within the body. If you press the tumor with your finger, you will feel a rustling sensation.
The tumor caused by a vein will be round and on the surface of the body. Incising these tumors is dangerous, especially those in the armpit, groin, neck, and many other parts of the body where they can be extremely severe. Treatment with instruments should be avoided.
Those that are also in the limbs or head should be avoided. For those that are caused by the dilation of the artery's opening, make a longitudinal incision on the skin, then open the incision with forceps, and then dissect the artery and free it from adhesions.
Until it is exposed, then you insert a needle under it and pass it through to the other side and tie the artery with a doubled thread in two places as I informed you regarding the threading of the arteries that are in the cheeks. Then you incise with a scalpel the area between the ligatures until all the blood within comes out.
The swelling will dissipate, then use treatment that promotes the formation of pus until the ligaments fall off, then treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals.
If the swelling is due to splitting of the vein, you should grasp as much of the swelling with its skin as you can with your hand, then insert a needle below the area you are holding and pass it through with a doubled thread until it emerges from the other side. Then bind the swelling tightly with the thread as I have described to you in binding a tumor on both sides with the ends of the thread. If you fear that the threads may slip, insert another needle with another thread under the entire swelling at the intersection of the first needle.
Tie your threads in four places, then incise the swelling in its center until what is inside comes out. Cut off the excess skin and leave what was tied. Then apply a pad that has been soaked in a decoction and oil. Then use treatment with bandaging and ointments until it heals.
Chapter Fifty.
On the swelling that occurs from nerve torsion.
As the tumor appears in the artery and vein, so does the tumor appear in the nerve if it is struck or occurs due to excessive fatigue or the like, and this is more common in the areas of the wrists and ankles.
In every place where the joints move, it is a stiff tumor that resembles the color of the rest of the body and is mostly painless. If pressed hard, the patient feels a slight numbness, and the tumor does not gather in the depth of the body.
Rather, it is under the skin and can move in every direction without going forward or backward. Of what is in the joints, it should not be treated with iron, for it may cause gangrene. What is in the head or forehead should not be treated this way either.
Incise the skin with a scalpel. If the tumor is small, grasp it with forceps and cut it out from the root. If it is large, attach it with a hook, peel it off, then remove it, and缝合伤口，然后继续治疗直到痊愈。
Chapter Fifty-One.
On removing the warts that appear on the abdomen.
Warts, called fungal warts due to their resemblance to mushrooms, often appear on people's abdomens and other parts of the body. Their base is thin and their head is thick, sometimes with a curled edge. They can be small or grow very large.
I have seen a man with two warts on his abdomen that resembled mushrooms the most. They had white edges, thin bases, curled lips, and were cracked, with moisture constantly flowing from them. I cut them out, and one weighed about eighteen ounces, while the other weighed around six ounces.
The procedure for cutting it is that you should look, and if the patient is moist and the color of the wart is white, moist, and has a thin root, then cut it with a wide scalpel and have the cautery ready in the fire, as often much blood will gush out when cutting it.
If the blood overpowers you, then cauterize it. If you see that the patient is timid and afraid of cutting with iron, take a thread of lead and tie it to the wart with this description, leave it for two days, then increase the tightness of the lead thread, continue tightening the lead.
Tie it tight enough to affect the wart until it断掉并自行脱落，无需用力。如果疣的根部较厚，则切割时会有些危险和不确定性，尤其是长在腹部的疣，但可以尝试切掉它的一半或部分。请注意，为保持忠实于原文，最后一句的开始似乎在翻译过程中出现了格式错误，正确的翻译应保持连贯。正确版本应该是：“紧到影响疣，直到它自行断开并脱落，无需用力。如果疣的根部较厚，则切割时会有些危险和不确定性，尤其是长在腹部的疣，但可以尝试切掉它的一半或部分。”
Then cauterize it so that it does not return, then treat it until the wound heals. Beware of cutting a wart that is dark in color, has little sensation, and has an ugly appearance, for it is cancerous. We will discuss cancer after this.
Chapter Fifty-Two.
On the Treatment of Umbilical Hernia.
Umbilical hernia can result from various causes: either from a裂腹壁的破裂，导致肠子或其他肠道内容物突出，或者从血管或动脉中流出的血液，如前所述，或者是由于积聚在内的气体。请注意，为了保持忠实于原文，在翻译过程中出现了一处格式错误。正确的翻译应为：“Umbilical hernia can result from various causes: either from a裂腹壁的破裂，导致肠子或其他肠道内容物突出，或者从血管或动脉中流出的血液，如前所述，或者是由于积聚在内的气体。”为了避免混淆，这里提供了直接的英文翻译：“Umbilical hernia can result from various causes: either from a rupture in the abdominal wall through which the intestine or other bowel contents protrude, as seen in other hernias, or from blood that emanates from a vein or artery, as mentioned before, or from air that becomes congested there.”
If it occurs before the splitting of the peritoneum and the protrusion of the hernia, then the color of the swelling resembles that of the body and it is soft without pain and appears different in position. If it occurs before the intestine protrudes, its position differs more from what we described. When you press it with your fingers, it disappears then returns. It may be accompanied by rumbling and becomes significantly larger when entering a bath or experiencing severe fatigue. If it occurs due to moisture, then it will be soft.
It does not disappear when you press it with your hand and does not increase or decrease. If it occurs due to blood, then the swelling appears black along with these signs. If it is due to growing flesh, the swelling will be raised, hard, and remain constant in size.
If it is due to gas, touching it will be soft. In such cases, you should examine whether the protrusion of the navel is due to blood from an artery or vein or gas. You should refrain from treating it as there is fear and risk involved, as I have informed you in the chapter where I mentioned the swellings that occur due to arteries and veins.
If the protrusion of the navel is due to the intestine or a hernia, you should instruct the patient to hold themselves and stand upright extended, then mark with ink around the entire navel. Then, you should order him to lie down in front of you on his back. Then, incise with a wide scalpel around the navel at the place you marked with ink. Then, pull the center of the swelling upwards with a large forceps, then tightly tie the incised area with a strong thread or silk.
The knot of the band should be made loose, then the middle of the swollen tied area is opened and insert your index finger to seek the fluid; if you find that it has been taken by the bandage, loosen the knot and push the fluid back into the abdomen; if you find a hernia, extend it with a speculum.
Cut its excess, and if an artery or vein obstructs you, tie it securely and return to your work. Take two needles and put strong threads in them, then insert the two needles into the tie you made around the swelling, piercing through, then tighten the swelling at four points on the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the area until the tightened flesh rots and falls off by itself or cut it when it has thinned and rotted, then treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals. If the nodule in the navel is from grown flesh there.
Or if it is due to moisture, you should incise the swelling as we said and remove the blood or moisture found there, then treat it with something that will heal the area.
Chapter Fifty-Three.
On the Treatment of Cancer.
We have mentioned in the classification the types of cancer and how to treat it with medicines, and warned against treating it with iron so that it does not ulcerate. We have also mentioned the cancer that develops in the uterus and warned against its treatment.
The ancients mentioned that if the cancer is in a place where it can be entirely excised, such as cancer in the breast or thigh and similar organs that allow its complete removal, especially if it is newly developed and small. However, if it has advanced and become large, it should not be approached for removal.
For I have not been able to cure anyone of it, nor have I seen anyone before me achieve that. The treatment, if properly applied as we have said, is to first ease the patient from the black bile several times, then to purify it if there is a clear fullness in the veins.
Then place the patient in a position that allows for the procedure. Then apply the appropriate poultices to the tumor, then cauterize it from all sides along with the skin thoroughly until none of its roots remain and let the blood flow without quickly stopping it.
Squeeze the areas and completely drain all thick blood by hand or with any available instruments. If during the procedure, a great bleeding obstructs you due to cutting an artery or vein, cauterize the vessel until the bleeding stops, then treat it with the rest of the treatments until it heals.
Chapter Forty-Four.
On the treatment of hernia.
We have discussed in the classification the types of dropsy, how the accumulation of water occurs, the signs of each type, and their treatment with medications. The type that is treated with iron is solely the serous type; iron should not be used at all for the pleuritic type or the sarcocele type.
For that is dangerous, if you have treated this serous type of hernia with medications and your treatment has not been effective, then assess whether the patient has become excessively weakened or has another illness besides the hernia, such as.
If the patient has a cough or diarrhea, or something similar, do not treat him with iron, for it would be risky. If you see that the patient is strong, has no other illness besides the hernia alone, and is neither a child nor an elderly person, then the procedure should begin by having the patient stand in front of you. His servant presses his abdomen with his hands and directs the water downwards towards the groin, then take a spiked tenaculum like this:
Long and sharp at the end like a scalpel, but it has a slight blunt part so that it does not go through to the intestines and harm them. Then examine if the hernia developed from the side of the intestines.
It is advisable that the incision be made three finger widths below the navel, above the groin. If the hernia has developed due to liver disease, your incision should be three finger widths to the left of the navel. If it has developed due to spleen disease, the incision should be on the right side, three finger widths away.
It is also not advisable for the incision to be on the side that the patient wishes to lie on, so as to prevent the excess fluid from flowing to that weak area. Then pierce the skin entirely with the instrument and insert the instrument into the incision and raise your hand.
With the scalpel, separate the skin from the peritoneum as if you are flaying it, and the area you flay should be about the size of a fingernail or so. Then pierce the peritoneum until the scalpel reaches an empty space, which is where the water is, then remove it and insert the instrument that looks like this into the hole.
It is a tube made from a thin reed, crafted from silver or copper or smooth and polished spathewood. It has a small hole at the bottom and three holes on its sides, two on one side and one on the other, as you see.
And he may place its tip, sharpened like the point of a pen, as shown in this illustration:.
At its upper end, there is a loop so that when the machine reaches the water, it descends immediately with the machine, thus discharging a moderate amount of water at a time. For if you discharge more than necessary at once, the patient may die from the dissolution of his vital spirit.
or he may faint to a state near death, but discharge from him according to his strength and what the patient's condition indicates regarding the strength of his pulse and the good color. Then remove the machine and retain the water, for it will be retained from that moment.
Due to the skin that holds the hole on the peritoneum which I informed you to cover in that manner, then repeat the procedure another day if you see the patient capable of enduring it.
And you also gradually remove the water over several days while being careful and cautious to avoid errors until only a small amount of water remains. If you are concerned about the patient and leave a considerable amount of water, then treat it by burying him in hot sand.
And excessive sweating in the bath and sun, make him endure thirst, and treat him with drying medicines until he recovers. Apply cauterization to the stomach, liver, and spleen after removing the water as described previously.
Chapter Fifty-Five.
On the treatment of children who are born with unperforated urinary openings or when the hole is narrow or misplaced.
Sometimes children may be born from their mother's womb with an unperforated anus, so it is necessary to puncture it immediately upon birth.
With a very thin scalpel on this image:.
Then place a thin lead nail in the hole and secure it, keeping it in place for three or four days. When urination is needed, gently move it aside to allow urination, then return it to its position. If you do not use the lead, the urine that flows over the area may prevent it from closing.
And for those whose hole is narrow, it is treated with lead as we said for many days until it widens. Among them are those who have the hole in the wrong place, meaning some are born with the hole at the end of the anus and cannot urinate forward.
Until the urethra is lifted by hand upwards, and he cannot be born this way because semen cannot reach the womb straight, which is a very ugly defect. The procedure involves the patient lying on his back.
Then stretch his anus tightly with your left hand and cut the tip of the urethra with a blade or a sharp instrument like a penknife, or as if you were carving something to make its middle protrude similar to an anus, and place the hole in the center as it should be.
Be cautious during the procedure to prevent bleeding, as it often occurs. Address it with methods that stop the blood and treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-Six.
On the abscess that occurs in the membrane and kernel and corruption and adherence of the membrane to the kernel.
This abscess often appears in the urethra, it is a smelly fleshy growth and can be malignant or non-malignant, the non-malignant should be treated by suspending it with a delicate forceps.
Cut it until you cleanse it all, then apply cotton soaked in the Egyptian ointment, then treat it with the pine resin ointment until it heals. If the abscess is malignant and smelly, it should be cauterized after cutting and stripping it.
If the abscess is in an uncircumcised foreskin, and part of the abscess is inside the foreskin and part is outside, you should first remove the part that is inside until it heals, then treat the external part.
For if you treat both together, you cannot be sure that the foreskin will not rupture. It may also occur in the labia and the foreskin, with corruption and decay, so you should excise all that has turned black or is about to decay or has already decayed.
Then apply honey with ground and sifted pomegranate peel and alum, then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals. If bleeding occurs, use cauterization with a crescent-shaped cautery in this manner:.
For cauterization is beneficial for both conditions, I mean bleeding and a wound that has become corrupted. If the kernel has rotted entirely at any time, it is advisable to insert a lead tube into the urinary passage so that the patient may urinate through it. As for the adherence of the membrane to the kernel.
This adhesion only occurs in those whose foreskin is intact and has not undergone circumcision. It may also occur due to a wound or swelling; therefore, it should be separated with a blunt probe until the ligament loosens and the band is freed on all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish during examination, then some of the band and foreskin should be separated. The foreskin is thin and may tear quickly due to its delicacy. Then, separate the foreskin from the band with a thin linen cloth that has been soaked in cold water so that they do not stick together again.
Then it should be treated with a constricting potion until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-Seven.
On cleansing children and treating what errors befall them.
Circumcision is nothing more than separating the connection like other surgeries. However, since it is performed by our will and specifically used for children, we must establish the best method of performing it.
And the easiest way leading to safety is this: I say that the earlier scholars did not mention circumcision in any of their books because it was not used in their practices; rather, it is something we have acquired.
Through experience, I have found that the majority of craftsmen and barbers use purification with a scalpel and scissors, they use cups and binding with thread, and cutting with nails. I have tried all these methods.
I have not found anything better than purification with scissors and binding with thread because purification with a scalpel often adheres to the skin, as the foreskin's skin has two layers, so it may cut the upper layer while leaving the lower layer intact.
He will have to cut another part and the pain will recur, and cleansing with a probe does not guarantee that the end of the urethra will not be cut because it might enter its hole. As for cleansing with a fingernail, the skin might tear and spoil your work, or the foreskin of the boy is naturally short.
For often they are born in such a way that they do not need cleansing, and I have seen this. As for cleansing with scissors and suturing with thread, experience has shown me its advantage because the scissors are suitable for cutting since the blade on top is like the blade on the bottom.
When you squeeze your hand with the blades in harmony, you cut evenly and simultaneously, so the thread becomes like a wall around the urethral skin on all sides, with no error at all. The first step of the procedure is to anesthetize the boy.
Especially if he understands a little that you are only suturing the thread to his urethra and will leave it for another day, then cheer him up and please him in every way you can with what he can comprehend. Then, have him stand upright between your hands.
He should not be sitting. Hide the scissors in your sleeve or under your foot so that the boy does not see them at all, nor any of the instruments. Then insert your hand into his urethra, inflate the skin, and lift it up until the head of the urethra comes out.
Then clean it from any accumulated dirt. Then tie the marked area with a doubled thread, then tie a second knot slightly below it. Then grasp the lower tied area firmly with your thumb and forefinger and cut between the two knots. Then lift the skin up quickly and pull out the head of the urethra, then let the blood flow a little as it is better and causes less swelling in the urethra. Then dry it with a moist cloth, then sprinkle on it some burned dried gourd ash as it is the best I have tried or wheat flour, which is also good.
Then lift the skin up quickly and pull out the head of the urethra, then let the blood flow a little as it is better and causes less swelling in the urethra. Then dry it with a moist cloth, then sprinkle on it some burned dried gourd ash as it is the best I have tried or wheat flour, which is also good. Then place on the area a cloth with the amount of an egg dipped in rose water mixed with soft good-smelling rose oil and leave it on until the next day, then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
And this is an image of the scissors that are suitable for cleansing:.
It should be straight and sharp, with no bend, and the nail should be well-fitted. The length of the blades should be equal to the length of the handles. As for the mistakes that occur during cleansing, it might happen that you turn all or part of the inner skin when cutting, so you should stretch it with your fingernail right away before the area swells.
Cut it evenly. If you cannot hold it with your fingernail, pull it with a forceps and cut it. If three days have passed and the area under the head of the urethra is still swollen and inflamed, leave it until the inflammation subsides and then gently remove it.
Cut it according to what seems appropriate to you, but be careful with the head of the urethra. If you cut a part of the head of the urethra, it will not cause harm. Treat it with what helps heal the wound from the powders we described in the section on powders.
And if a part of the skin above the measure is cut and it shrinks upwards, this does not harm much either; treat it as we have described until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-Eight.
On the treatment of urine retention in the bladder.
Urine retention in the bladder occurs due to obstruction by a stone, congealed blood, pus, or grown tissue, and the like. If you treat that with the types of treatment described in the division as we have mentioned.
If the urine does not flow and you find that its retention is due to a stone stuck in the neck of the bladder, it is advisable for the patient to be on their knees, sitting back. Then have someone sit on the patient's back, extending the patient’s belly towards their back, while the patient holds themselves as much as they can.
At that moment, the neck of the bladder will be forced to push the stone backward, allowing the urine to flow. If the urine does not flow as described and the condition worsens for the patient, it is advisable to use an instrument called catheter, which looks like this:.
It is made of silver and should be thin, smooth, and hollow like the quill of a bird, about a span and a half in length, with a delicate spout at its tip. To use it for drawing urine, take a bent thread and tie a piece of wool or cotton firmly to one end.
Insert the end of the thread into the bottom of the catheter and use a cutter if any part of the wool remains so that it enters the tube and plugs it like a stopper. Then grease the catheter with oil, butter, or egg white, and seat the patient on a chair.
His bladder and urethra should be lubricated with moist ointments or oil and lukewarm water, then the catheters are gently inserted into the urethra until they reach the base of the urethra, then the urethra is bent upwards towards the navel, then the catheters are pushed inside.
Until when the urethra is bent, then the catheters are pushed inside until they reach near the rectum,倾斜阴茎向下，将导管推入其中，然后继续推进直到到达膀胱，病人会感觉到已到达空腔。
This procedure is carried out because the passage through which urine flows has a bend. Then, the thread is inserted with some wool tightly so that the urine follows the wool, then it is removed and the urine flows out, and the catheter is replaced.
Continue doing this until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relief.
Chapter Fifty-Nine.
How to instill medicine into the bladder.
The designs of the instruments suitable for this purpose are made of silver or ivory, hollow with a long tube as thin as a pus thread. If you want to drip water and medicines, it is done with an instrument called an irrigator, and here is its design:.
It is made of silver or ivory, hollow with a long tube as thin as a thread. The entire tube is hollow except for the end, which is sealed and has three holes, two on one side and one on the other, as you see.
The hollow place in which the syringe is fitted should be of such size as to fit it without any excess, so that when you pull with it some moisture is drawn, and if you push with it, it thrusts outwards like a device with which oil is thrown in sea battles.
If you want to introduce moisture into the bladder, insert one end of the catheter into the moisture and pull upwards with the syringe, then the moisture will be drawn into the interior of the catheter. Then insert its end into the urethra as we described in the section on catheters, and then push the moisture with the syringe.
That moisture will reach the bladder in this manner until the patient feels it. This is also a depiction of a gentle syringe with which the bladder is infused.
It is made from silver or espadrille, with its upper end resembling a small funnel, and below it there is a groove where the tie goes. Then you take a camel's bladder, put in it the moisture you wish to infuse into the bladder, and then tightly tie it between the grooves with a doubled thread.
Warm that moisture slightly over fire, then insert the end of the syringe into the urethra. Then firmly press your hand on the bladder with the moisture until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
If a bladder is not available, take a piece of leather, make a circle from it, and pierce it all around its edge. Then insert a tight thread into those holes as you go around, then gather the circle like you would fold a cloth after placing in it what moisture, oils, or water you desire.
Then tie it to the machine and treat it as you did with the bladder by squeezing it with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter Sixty.
On the Removal of Stones.
We have mentioned in the classification the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and I have described the difference between stones generated in the kidney and those generated in the bladder, and the signs of all of this. I also mentioned the stone where manual intervention and incision are required.
It is the stone generated in the bladder specifically, which pierces the urethra. I will describe this with clear explanation and brevity.
I say that the stone generated in the bladder most often affects young boys, and one of its signs is that urine comes out of the bladder resembling water in its thinness.
Sand appears in it, and it irritates the penis, causing discomfort and fidgeting. It often hangs down and spreads, and diarrhea commonly accompanies it. Young boys are more susceptible to this until they reach fourteen years of age, while it is more difficult for the elderly. As for young adults, their condition is somewhere in between.
Those who have larger stones tend to have easier treatment, while smaller stones are the opposite. When it comes to treatment, the patient should first be given an enema to expel all waste in his intestines, as its presence may hinder the detection of the stone.
Then, the patient should be taken by his legs and shaken downwards to move the stone to the neck of the bladder. Alternatively, he can jump from a height several times. Then, sit him upright between your hands with his hands under his thighs so that the bladder tilts downward entirely, and then examine it.
You should examine it from the outside; if you feel the stone in the space, then immediately incise over it. If it does not fall under your touch at all, it is appropriate to smear the index finger with oil from the left hand if the patient is a child or the middle finger.
If he is a mature boy, insert it into his perineum and search for the stone until it falls under your finger, then gradually move it towards the neck of the bladder. Then press on it with your finger and push it outwards toward the place where you want to make an incision.
You order a servant to squeeze the bladder with his hand and command another servant to lift the testicles upward with his right hand and pull the skin below the testicles away from the incision site with his other hand. Then you take the scalpel which looks like this:.
You make the incision between the perineum and the testicles, not in the middle but towards the left side. The incision should be made directly over the stone, with your finger in the perineum pressing it outward, ensuring that the incision is wider externally and narrower internally to allow the stone to pass through.
Do not make it larger, for the finger in the perineum may press the stone during the incision, causing it to exit without difficulty. Know that some stones have angles and edges, which can make their removal difficult.
Some are smooth, resembling a chestnut, and round, making them easy to extract. For those that have angles and edges, you should slightly enlarge the incision. If it still does not come out, you must use a trick, either by grasping it with a tightly held instrument whose end is like a file.
To secure the stone so it does not slip from it, or insert a delicate curved instrument beneath it; if you cannot manage that, widen the incision slightly; should any blood overpower you, cut it with the lancet.
If there is more than one, first push the larger one to the mouth of the bladder, then incise for it; afterwards, push the smaller one. Do this similarly if there are more than two. If it is extremely large, it would be ignorant to make a large incision for it, as it exposes the patient to one of two dangers.
Either he dies or he suffers continuous dripping of urine because the place does not heal at all. But try to push it out or use forceps to break it and remove it in pieces.
When you are done with your work, cleanse the wound with camphor, storax, and turpentine, then bandage it tightly. Place a cloth soaked in oil or drink or rose ointment and cold water above it to cool the hot swelling. Then have the patient lie on his back, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
When it dissolves, wash the area with plenty of water and oil, then treat it with the nukhay ointment and the balsam ointment until it heals. If there is an additional hot swelling, pus, or similar in the wound, such as blood coagulating in the bladder and obstructing urine, which can be known from blood coming out with the urine.
Insert your finger into the wound and remove that blood, for if it remains, it will lead to corruption and infection of the bladder. Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and treat each type accordingly with similar treatments until it heals.
It is necessary at all times of treatment to bind the thighs and bring them together to stabilize the medicines that are placed on the area. If the stone is small and has entered the urethra and stuck there, preventing urine from passing, treat it with what I will describe before it necessitates incision.
For often I have dispensed with incision using this treatment, as I have tried it. It involves taking a bifurcated iron instrument, which looks like this:
Sharpen the tip to a triangle and fix it on a handle. Then take a thread and tie the penis below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder, then gently insert the bifurcated iron into the urethra until the forks reach the stone itself.
Rotate the fork with your hand around the stone little by little, aiming to pierce it until you penetrate from the other side, at which point the urine will flow. Then grasp what remains of the stone outside the penis with your hand; it will crumble and come out with the urine, and the patient will be healed.
If this treatment is not possible due to some obstacle, tie a thread below the stone and another above it. Then make an incision on the stone in the penis between the two threads and remove it.
Then loosen the tie and clean the clotted blood that has formed in the wound. The thread is tied below the stone to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other above it so that when the thread is loosened after the stone's removal, the skin returns to its place and covers the wound.
Therefore, you should, when you tie the upper suture, raise the skin upwards so that it returns upon your completion and covers the wound as we have said.
Chapter Sixty-One.
On Removing Stones from Women.
Gallstones rarely develop in women. If one of them does have gallstones, treating it is difficult and often impossible for various reasons: one being that the woman may be unmarried, and another being that you may not find a woman who allows herself to be examined by a doctor.
If she is chaste or related by kinship, and thirdly, you may not find a woman skilled in this craft, especially the manual work. The fourth reason is that the incision site for the stone in women is distant from the stone's location, so it requires a deep incision.
This carries a risk. If necessity dictates otherwise, you should seek a skilled female doctor, though they are rare. If one cannot be found, then ask for a chaste and gentle male doctor, or have a skilled midwife present, or a woman who can offer some guidance in this craft.
You should have her present and command her to perform all the examinations required for the stone, starting with checking if the woman is a virgin, in which case you should insert a finger into her rectum to examine the stone. If she finds it, she should press it under her finger.
Then you should order her to make an incision. If she is not a virgin but married, you should instruct the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's vagina to examine the stone after placing her left hand on the bladder and pressing it firmly.
If you find it, you should insert it from the mouth of the bladder downwards to its fullest extent until it reaches the root of the thigh. Then make an incision opposite the middle of the genitals at the root of the thigh from whichever side is most accessible and feel for the stone in that area.
And her finger should not move from the stone, pressing under it, and let the incision be small at first, then insert the forceps through that small incision. If she feels the stone, increase the size of the incision according to what you know the stone can come out from, and know that types of stones are many.
Some are small and large, smooth and rough, long and round and branched, so recognize their types to guide you in what you wish to do. If the blood overpowers you, sprinkle powdered zadj in the area and hold it for a while until the bleeding stops, then return to your work.
Until the stone is removed, prepare the instruments I mentioned for removing stones from men to assist you in your work. If bleeding overpowers you and you know by the pulsation of blood that an artery has been cut, apply the cautery to the area.
Tie it tightly with bandages and leave it without repeating the procedure, and leave the stone without removing it as the patient might die. Then treat the wound; if the intensity of the bleeding subsides after a few days and the area becomes clean, return to your work until you remove the stone.
The Sixty-Second Chapter.
On Incising the Watery Adrenal Gland.
Hydrocele is the accumulation of moisture in the white membrane that lies under the skin surrounding the testicle, which is called the scrotum. It can also be enclosed in a special sac prepared by nature on one side of the testicle.
Until it seems like another testicle, and it is located between the scrotal skin and the white membrane we mentioned. This does not occur except rarely. This hydrocele results from a weakness affecting the testicles, causing this material to form, or it may result from a blow to the testicles.
This moisture can have various colors; it may be yellowish, or reddish like blood, or blackish dark, or whitish like water, and the last is most common. These are the signs by which it is recognized.
Where water accumulates, if it is in the white membrane we mentioned, the swelling will be round and slightly elongated like the shape of a testicle, and the testicle will not be visible because the moisture surrounds it completely from all sides.
If the moisture is in a special sac for it, then the swelling will be round on one side of the testicle.
For this reason, a person may imagine that it is another testicle. If the moisture is between the scrotal skin and the white membrane, it can be felt. If you want to know the color of the moisture, press the swelling with the square probe previously described. What comes out in the probe's impression will indicate its contents.
When we come to treatment with iron, you should order the patient to undergo bloodletting if possible and if his body appears full. Then he should lie on his back on something slightly elevated, and place many cloths under him. You should sit to his left.
He orders a servant to sit to his right, extending his penis to one side of the scrotum skin and towards the flank of the abdomen, then he takes a wide scalpel and cuts the scrotum skin lengthwise from the middle nearly to the groin.
The incision should be straight, parallel to the line that divides the scrotum skin into two halves until it reaches the white covering, then you peel it off and be careful not to cut it. Your peeling should be more on the side attached to the testicle and extend the peeling as much as you can.
Then, you widen and stretch the fluid-filled sac and remove all the water. Then, you separate the edges of the incision with forceps and pull the sac upward without touching the scrotal skin covering it, and cut the sac as much as possible, either in one piece or in segments.
Especially the thin side, for if you do not cut sufficiently, you cannot prevent the fluid from returning. If the testicle protrudes out of its skin while you are working, then when you finish cutting the sac, replace it and缝合阴囊皮肤的切口。
Then treat it as you would any other surgery until it heals. If the testicle is found to be diseased from another illness, you should tie the vessels in the spermatic cord to prevent bleeding, then cut the scrotum and remove the testicle, and treat it as previously mentioned.
If the fluid has collected on both sides, know that both are affected. Incise the other side in the same manner as the first. If it is feasible to perform the procedure in one operation, do so, then clean the blood.
You insert into the incisions wool that has been soaked in oil or in rose fat and you cover from outside with other wool that has been soaked in wine and oil and you spread it over the testicles and the abdominal fluids and place above it folded cloths which are the dressings. And you tie it from above with the six-ended band in this manner:.
Then, two cloths are taken, sewn, and filled with fluffed wool as in this example, and the ends which are to be tied are made of cotton or wet wool, gathered by pulling into the belt of the pants, and one end is placed on the buttocks towards the back.
The second is taken towards the groin, with the two ends on the thighs below and the remaining two ends on the buttocks, and all the pulling is gathered into the belt of the pants. This bandage can also be made by ironing instead of cutting with iron.
It involves taking a slender iron that is smooth and cutting with it the skin of the scrotum while it is hot, as described, until the white membrane containing the fluid is exposed. Take another iron in this manner:.
It resembles a Greek eye, then you press it against that membrane while it is hot until all the moisture comes out. Then stretch the membrane with probes and peel off with the iron the layer containing it, cutting as much as possible until you excise all of it, being careful not to let the fire touch the testicle.
Know that this procedure is safer, involves less bleeding, and is better than incision. If during the process of cutting or ironing, a hot swelling or bleeding or anything else obstructs you, then you should treat whatever impedes you with the appropriate treatment as previously mentioned.
If the patient is cowardly and cannot endure this procedure due to its ugliness, then use the cautery as I will describe it, if it is valid for you based on what we have provided of evidence.
The urine is watery, so the patient should sit on a high chair, then cauterize the swelling at its bottom with a wide instrument and make the cautery along the body. The incision should be wide enough for all the water to flow out, then put cotton on the area and tie it up.
Leave it to drain the remaining water, then treat it until the wound heals. If the water does not come out when you cauterize it, this is due to the white membrane blocking the mouth of the wound, preventing the water from coming out.
At that time, it is appropriate to insert a goose feather or the instrument used to extract water from the blisters, which has been described earlier, or slightly enlarge the incision.
Know that the water may return and accumulate after about six months. If it accumulates, cauterize it in the same manner, and the patient should endure for a few days.
Chapter Sixty-Three.
On Incising the Fleshy Urinary Stone and Its Treatment.
Know that incising this type of stone is very risky and often leads to death. Therefore, we advise leaving it alone for safety. I will mention the procedure and types of swelling related to it.
I say that many swellings may occur in the parts that make up the testicles, and this can be due to various causes: either from hot residue that settles in the testicles or from a blow. The color of the swelling is like the color of the body, and it does not contain water.
The swelling is spreading, and sometimes the swelling is hard in color like a scar and has no sensation. It may be due to the complication of arteries and their inflammation as previously mentioned or from the inflammation of veins. What is due to the inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the swelling.
If you press it with your fingers, it should not be subjected to it at all. As for what is due to the inflammation of veins, nothing disperses when pressed with fingers, and this type may affect it and other muscles.
It involves incising the scrotal skin, then elevating the testicle and extracting it from the white tunica vaginalis, freeing the spermatic cord from vessels, ligating the vessels, and cutting the spermatic cord after freeing it from all sides of the testicle. If the testicle has adhered to the surrounding tissues.
It is necessary to remove and cut the testicle. If there is adhesion between any of the tunics or among the vessels, it is necessary to free all such adhesions and cut them in a circular manner.
If the growth of flesh is in the area of adhesion that is at the back, it is necessary to cut all of it and remove the testicle as we have said. Once your work is complete, clean the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and drink, then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter Sixty-Four.
On the Treatment of Adrena with Dalia.
Dalia is a twisted swelling, somewhat like a cluster, with relaxation of the thighs, making it difficult for the patient to move, exercise, or walk. The treatment of this condition is similar to what has been previously mentioned.
But it is necessary to mention the procedure as the ancients did. I say that you should make the patient sit on a high chair, then push the testicles downward with forceps, and hold the skin of the scrotum with your fingers along with the vessels near the penis.
And another servant holds them and stretches them tightly, then you cut with a wide sharp scalpel close to the vessels until they are exposed, then peel from each side as I mentioned to you in the sectioning of the arteries in the thighs, then sew them with a needle containing a double thread.
Tie it at the first places where the ligament is exposed, and also tie it at the end. Then cut it in the middle with a vertical incision along the length of the body, and remove what has gathered in it of corrupt, impure moisture.
Then treat the wound as you would other wounds, allowing a period for healing so that the vessels nourishing one of the testicles may fall off. If the ligament is exposed to all the vessels, it is necessary to remove one of the testicles along with the vessels so that the sperm does not lack nutrition. If the vessels are cut beforehand, they will wither and be of no use.
Chapter Fifty-Five.
On the Treatment of Urinary Incontinence.
This incontinence occurs due to a rupture that appears in the abdominal fascia extending towards the groin from the abdomen's rings, causing urine to leak through the hernia into one of the testicles.
This hernia is either from cutting the fascia or from its extension, and these two types occur due to many causes, either a blow or a jump or a shout or lifting something heavy and so on. Its sign, if it is from the extension of the fascia, is that it occurs little by little over a long period of time.
And it does not happen suddenly, the swelling is even to a certain depth because the fascia compresses the intestine. Its sign, if it is from cutting the fascia, is that it causes great pain all at once from the beginning, and the swelling appears differently under the skin nearby.
That is the intestine coming out and moving outside the fascia. Sometimes the bladder may come out with the intestine, hence this hernia is called intestinal and vesical, and it might occur with gas. Excrement may also flow into the intestine and be trapped there, leading to the patient's death.
For it causes severe pain and rumbling, especially when compressed. Treating these conditions with iron is dangerous, so you should be wary of it. The method involves ordering the patient to push the intestine back into his body if returning it is possible.
Then he lies on his back in front of you and raises his legs. You then stretch the skin next to the groin upwards and cut the skin of the scrotum entirely lengthwise, then insert retractors into the edges of the incision as needed to open it up.
The incision should be large enough for the testicle to come out. Then peel back the fascia under the scrotal skin until the hard white fascia is exposed on both sides. At this point, insert your index finger next to the testicle.
Between the white membrane under the scrotal skin and the second membrane, the adhesion behind the testicle is separated, then the right hand folds it inward toward the scrotal skin, while the left hand pulls the white membrane upward and lifts the testicle with the membrane towards the incision.
You order the servant to pull the testicle upward and you completely separate the adhesion behind it, then examine with your finger to ensure there is no twisted intestine in the tough white membrane; if you find any, push it into the abdomen below.
Then take a needle with a thick thread that is made from ten threads, and insert it at the end of the membrane under the scrotal skin that adjoins the incision, then cut the ends of the twisted thread until there are four threads. Then you arrange them one over the other in a solid manner and tie the membrane that we mentioned is under the scrotal skin tightly from two sides, then also wrap the ends of the threads and tie them tightly so that nothing from the vessels that nourish it can reach it. To prevent a hot swelling from occurring, and also to create a second tie separate from the first by less than two fingers. After these two ties, leave of the membrane under the scrotal skin an amount equal to the size of a finger bone.
To prevent a hot swelling from occurring, and also to create a second tie separate from the first by less than two fingers. After these two ties, leave of the membrane under the scrotal skin an amount equal to the size of a finger bone. Then cut all the rest in a circular manner and remove the testicle with it. Then make an incision on the lower part of the scrotal skin from which blood and pus will flow as described previously, then use wool soaked in oil and place it in the wound, and apply the bandage as described.
And the white membrane that we mentioned is cauterized after cutting it to prevent bleeding, for that often occurs. The ligament is left until it falls off by itself; if its falling is delayed, wash it with hot water and apply something that makes it sweat until it falls off.
Then treat the wound with the rest of the treatments for wounds until it heals.
Chapter Sixty-Six.
As for the windy hernia, I have not seen anyone dare to treat it with iron. The ancients mentioned that it should be treated as we described for the hernia with a dartos muscle, which involves tying the vessels gently below after making an incision.
Then it is cut in the middle, and the swelling is treated with what opens it until the vessels fall off. The wound is treated as mentioned until it heals.
Chapter Sixty-Seven.
On the hernia that occurs in the armpit.
A hernia may occur in the armpit as we have said, where the area bulges but nothing of the intestine descends to the thighs; if it does descend, it is minimal and returns at all times.
However, if the condition persists over time, the tear in the membrane may increase until the intestine and scrotum descend into the thighs. This occurs due to the extension of the membrane that is in the armpit, as we have said. The membrane extends, then relaxes and bulges in the area. Its treatment is by cauterization, as I have described previously.
And it is treated with iron in this manner: the patient lies on his back before you, then you incise the site of the swollen hernia transversely to the width of three fingers, then you spread out the fasciae that are beneath the skin.
Until the white fascia beneath is exposed, then you take a tube and place it on the protruding part of the fascia, pressing it to the depth of the abdomen, then you sew the two protruding parts at the end of the tube from the fascia, attaching one to the other with sutures.
Then insert the end of the tube without cutting the fascia at all, and do not touch the testicle or anything else as I informed you in the treatment of urinary retention, then treat it with the treatment for wounds.
When the sutures are removed, clean the wound and keep it until it heals, for the fascia will contract and the hernia swelling will not increase.
And cauterization is better in this area because it is closer to safety.
Chapter Sixty-Eight.
On the Relaxation of the Scrotal Skin.
The skin of the scrotum often relaxes in some people without the inner flesh relaxing, which makes its appearance unattractive. It is appropriate for one who wishes to treat it to have the patient lie on their back.
Then cut all the relaxed skin on the thick skin, and then bring the edges together. If you wish, first sew the excess relaxed skin with three or four sutures and secure the sutures tightly, then cut what is between the sutures.
Then treat it with the treatment of other surgeries until it heals and the stitches fall off.
Chapter Sixty-Nine.
On castration.
Castration is forbidden in our Sharia.
For this reason, I should not have mentioned it in this book of mine. However, I mentioned it for two reasons: the first is so that it may be known to the doctor if asked about it and to know how to treat someone who has undergone it. The second reason is that we often need to castrate some animals for our benefit.
Like lambs, goats, cats, and other such animals. I say that castration is of two types: either by compression or by cutting. The one done by compression is performed by placing the animal in hot water until its testicles relax, soften, and hang down.
Then compress them with your hand until they dissolve and are no longer discernible to the touch. As for castration by cutting, you should hold the animal, grasp the skin of its testicles with your left hand, then tie the foreskin and make one incision on each testicle.
Until the testicles protrude, then cut them after peeling them and do not leave any membranes on them except for the thin membrane that covers the blood vessels. This method of castration is better than the one done by compression.
Because compression may leave some of the testicles, causing the animal to desire mating. Then treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Seventy.
On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two types. The first is when, below the pubic area or on the scrotal skin between the two testicles, a form resembling a female genital appears, with hair, and urine may flow from that which is on the scrotal skin.
As for women, there is one type, and it appears above the vagina on the pubic hair area, resembling small male genitals coming out externally, one of which resembles a man's penis and the other two resemble the female genitals. The treatment for the three types.
The two types in men and the one type in women should have the excess flesh cut until its trace is removed, then treat it like other surgeries until it heals. As for the second type in men from which urine flows and is located on the scrotal skin, no action is needed, and it will not heal at all.
Chapter Seventy-One.
On the removal of the clitoris and the protruding flesh from women's genitals.
The clitoris may sometimes increase in size beyond the natural state until it becomes ugly and its appearance is displeasing. It may also enlarge in some women to the point that it spreads like a male's and becomes suitable for intercourse.
It should be grasped with your hand or a forceps, and the excess clitoris should be cut. Do not cut excessively, especially at the depth of the base, to avoid causing bleeding.
Then treat it with the treatment of wounds until it heals, and as for the grown flesh, it is flesh that grows in the mouth of the womb until it fills it.
And it may come out to the outside like a tail. And for this reason, some of the early scholars named it the tail disease; you should cut it off as you would the clitoris and treat it until it heals.
The Seventy-Second Chapter.
On the treatment of hernia.
Hernia is when the woman's vagina is not perforated or the hole is small, and this can either be natural, with which she is born, or acquired. The acquired condition results from a previous illness and may be due to excess grown flesh.
Or it may be thin or thick membrane and this can either be in the depth of the womb, its sides, its top, or bottom, preventing intercourse, conception, childbirth, and sometimes menstruation. Knowledge of this is determined by the examination of a midwife.
If the obstruction is visible and close, if it is not visible, examine it with your fingers or a probe. If the obstruction is from thin membrane and is close to the lips, promptly pierce it by placing something like forceps on the lips, then place your thumbs of both hands together.
The woman should lie on her back with her legs apart, then stretch the lips forcefully until you pierce the thin membrane and open the obstruction. Then take some wool, soak it in oil, and place it on the area. Have intercourse with the woman every day so that the area does not close again.
If the peritoneum is thick and dense, you should cut it with a wide scalpel resembling an iris leaf. If the obstruction is from grown flesh, fix it with retractors and cut it off; have medicines that stop bleeding without stinging such as oak bark, shian, and frankincense mixed with egg white.
Then use a wide lead tube to prevent the wound from closing quickly, keep it in place for days and use a wick of dry linen, then treat it with all treatments for inflammation until it heals. Sometimes other fleshy growths may appear in the uterus; they should be cut according to this method.
Unless it is a cancerous tumor, for a cancerous tumor in the uterus should not be treated with iron at all.
Chapter Seventy-Three.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, warts, and red blisters that appear in women's genital areas.
As for hemorrhoids, they are the swelling of vein openings until much blood flows from them continuously. When hemorrhoids worsen, they become warts. I have mentioned their types and signs in the classification, and we will mention them here.
What can be treated and what cannot be treated: I say that if the hemorrhoids and warts are deep inside the uterus and not perceptible, they should not be treated with iron. What is perceptible in the opening of the uterus and can be felt is what should be treated.
It is advisable for the woman to enter a cool room, then stretch the warts with a tweezers or a coarse cloth and cut them from their roots. Then, apply one of the blood-stopping agents that do not cause irritation when bleeding occurs.
Like scammony and sycamore fig and mastic and the like, then raise her legs to the wall for an hour, then let them hang in cold water. If bleeding persists, sit her in a decoction of buckthorn and pomegranate peel and colocynth and the like, then take barley flour and knead it with honey and vinegar.
And dress it on her back, if the blood stops, otherwise persist with strong cupping of the breasts without restriction. Then take a wad of wool and soak it in the juice of bindweed or the juice of bistort or the juice of heather branches mixed with colocynth drink and apply it to the area.
When the swelling subsides, treat the area with ointment until it heals. As for the red boil, it resembles the heads of herpes, rough in appearance. It should be cut off as much as appears, according to what was mentioned regarding warts, and treat it until it heals.
Chapter Seventy-Four.
On the growth that occurs in the uterus.
Various types of growths may occur in the uterus, such as cancer, hard tumors, ulcers, leucorrhea, corrosive sores, polyps, hemorrhoids, fissures, warts, and hot tumors. I have mentioned all these diseases, their types, and their symptoms in the classification.
It is appropriate to mention in this article the hot tumor that occurs in the uterus, if it is one of the tumors that gather over a period, how it should be cauterized with iron. One should observe if the pain of the tumor at its onset is sharp with palpitations, inflammation, and fever.
I have seen it red when sensation falls upon it; do not hurry to bandage it, treat it with what aids maturation until these symptoms subside. Then it is appropriate for the woman to sit on a chair with two seats and lean on her back.
She should bring her legs together towards the lower abdomen, with her thighs spread apart, and place her arms under her knees and bind them with a suitable strap.
Therefore, the midwife sits on the right side and uses the instrument that opens the mouth of the womb, whose image will be shown later. If you wish to use this instrument, you should estimate with a probe the depth of the woman's womb so that the part of the instrument that enters is not deeper than the womb.
It injures the patient if the instrument extends beyond the depth, so pads should be placed on the edge of the cervix to prevent the entire instrument from entering the depth of the womb. The spiral that runs through the instrument should be from the upper side.
You hold the instrument and the servant turns the spiral until the cervix is opened. When the pus appears and you touch it with your hand and find it soft and thin, you should cut it at the head with a broad scalpel. Once all the discharge has been expelled, you stop.
A soft wick should be placed in the wound, soaked in rose oil or green oil that has some astringent properties. The wick should extend out from the incision in the cervix. Outside, on the womb and pubic area, clean wool soaked in water boiled with alum should be applied.
Then treat it with the ointment suitable for that after two days until it heals.
The womb and the wound may be washed by injecting water and honey, then with water in which the root of sus or long zeraunjan has been boiled, then return to the ointment. If the pus is hidden inside the womb.
It is necessary to abstain from treating it with iron, but it should be treated with what we mentioned in the classification.
Chapter Seventy-Five.
On instructing midwives how to treat live fetuses if they come out in an unnatural position.
The midwife should first know the form of a natural birth. Among its signs are when you see the woman bending downward and longing to breathe in air, and her labor becomes easier for her.
The fetus will come out quickly, so know that this birth is in the natural form and it comes out head-first with the afterbirth attached or hanging from its navel. If you see these signs, you should press her abdomen so that the fetus comes out quickly.
For if it descends head-first, the afterbirth comes with it and is cleansed well of those superfluous materials. Any birth that does not follow this pattern is unnatural and undesirable, for the fetus may come out feet-first or hands before head and feet.
Or one hand or one leg may come out, or its head and hand, or it may come out folded, or it may turn onto its back, and other such undesirable forms. The midwife should be skilled and delicate in all these matters and beware of mistakes and errors.
And I clarify each of its forms and how to handle it so that you may understand and be aware. When the fetus comes out head-first in the natural manner, and this becomes difficult for the woman, and delivery is hard on her, and you see that her strength has weakened, then seat her on a chair and have women hold her steady.
Bandage her womb with cooked fenugreek and moist ointments, then the midwife inserts a small forceps between her fingers to cut the placenta or she cuts it with her fingernail until the moisture inside flows out and press the woman's abdomen until the fetus is delivered.
If it does not come out, the woman should be irrigated with fenugreek juice mixed with ceratum ointment. Then after the irrigation, she should be told to bear down and sneeze with wild celery, and her mouth and nose should be held so that the fetus is delivered immediately. If the hands of the fetus come out first, they should be gently pushed back little by little.
If entry is not possible, place the woman on a stool and raise her legs upwards, then shake the stool on the ground while the woman holds on so she does not fall during the shaking. If the hands do not enter and the fetus has died, cut them off and pull out the rest of the fetus.
Or tie his hands with a cloth and pull them gently, for it will come out. The fetus coming out feet-first: if the fetus comes out feet-first, you should push them upwards then turn the fetus little by little until it is aligned, then take one of its legs and stretch it little by little.
When they emerge to the thighs, order her to bear down and tickle her with hellebore, for it will come out. If it does not come out as described, then gently return the fetus little by little until you restore it to its natural shape, for it will then come out smoothly. If all of the above fails and it still resists.
Take the saliva of the chickpea and the saliva of the fenugreek, and the fat of the styrax, and a dissolved gum, then pound all together in a mortar well. Then apply it to the woman's vagina and lower abdomen, then seat her in lukewarm water until it reaches the navel.
When you see that the lower part has softened, make her a suppository of honey and have her hold it. If she retains the suppository for an hour, then seat her on a chair, tickle her, close her mouth and nose, and gently press her lower abdomen; the fetus will then be born at once, coming out on its knees and hands.
If it comes out in this manner, gradually insert your hands little by little. Then the woman should lie on her back with her legs hanging down below while lying on a bed, clasp her hands, and then gently press above her abdomen little by little. Then remove the pillows under her legs until the lower part is raised. If the fetus does not come out, take both of her legs and move them with a strong motion, then gently press above the navel little by little until the fetus rises upward, then the midwife should insert her hand and gradually adjust the fetus.
And order the woman to strain until the fetus comes out, the fetus coming out with one of its hands extended, hold onto withdrawing its hand, if she cannot withdraw it then raise the woman and make her walk, if she cannot walk then lay her down.
And shake her legs heavily, then use the levers which I described from the leashes. If labor seizes her, sit her on a chair, then treat by withdrawing the hand and aligning the fetus to its natural form, make the woman sneeze and order her to strain until it comes out.
The fetus coming out on its back, extending its hands, with its face towards the mother's back, the midwife should grasp the fetus' hand then turn it little by little and align it gently. Once aligned, apply what we described of oils and leashes to its front.
Then have her move little by little, once she does that, sit her on the chair and order her to lean to the right side, then have her strain and make her sneeze with cundus, for it will come out, the fetus coming out standing on its side.
If it descends to the mouth of the womb in this manner with the afterbirth, cut the afterbirth with your fingernail until it is drained of moisture. If it clings to the face and neck of the fetus, cut it from the navel so that it does not suffocate and die. Then push the fetus inside until it is positioned as it should be.
And order the woman to strain several times, for it will come out easily. The birth of twins or multiple fetuses: know that twins are often born, and three or four may be born and survive, though this is rare. As for five, it is something against nature and they do not live at all.
And they are surrounded by a single placenta, and they separate from each other with membranes between them attached to the navel of each one of them, and they may be born just as a single fetus is born in a natural and easy delivery, or they may be born in an unwanted manner as we have described.
If some of them are difficult to deliver and become in the unnatural forms we mentioned, treat them as described. Let the midwife be gentle and do what she does with tenderness and caution, and adapt to each form with the cunning that leads to safety.
What may be conceived in the womb and then abort, there may be conceived in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten. It has been confirmed to me that a woman aborted seven, and another aborted fifteen, all of them having been conceived.
By the wisdom of the All-Knowing, all of this should be within the knowledge of the midwife, for such occurrences may fall upon her one day, and she should meet them as is appropriate.
Chapter Sixty-Seven.
On the Extraction of a Stillborn Fetus.
If you have treated the stillborn fetus with what I mentioned in the section on treatment and it has not been expelled, and circumstances compel you to use manual intervention, then you should assess whether the woman is strong and free from any symptoms that might cause harm. If so, the woman should lie down on her back on a bed.
Her head should be tilted downward and her legs raised. A servant should hold her on both sides or she should be tied to the bed so that her body does not move when extracting the fetus.
Then moisten the mouth of her womb with moist ointments, along with the saliva of Al-Khutami and Al-Hulbah and flaxseed. Then the midwife anoints her hand with these ointments and salivas, then she inserts it into the womb gently, then she seeks a place to pierce with the instruments from the fetus, and the appropriate places for that.
If the fetus is in a position to descend head first, then pierce with the instruments in its eyes or at the back of its head or in its mouth or in its palate or under its chin or in its nape or in places close to the ribs or below the cartilages.
And if it descends feet first, then pierce in the groin and the middle ribs. It is advisable to hold the instrument with the right hand and place its bend between the fingers of the left hand, then gently insert the hand and pierce with the instrument in some of those places we mentioned.
Until you reach an empty space, then pierce another or a third instrument opposite it if needed so that the pulling is even and does not lean to one side. Then pull steadily, and the pull should not be straight only but moved in every direction.
To facilitate its exit, as is done with a tooth when extracted. Between these actions, the pulling should be relaxed. If one part is held up, the midwife should anoint some fingers with ointment and insert them from that side to rotate what is stuck. If part of the fetus comes out, then move the instruments to other positions.
She does this, raising it slightly, until the fetus is completely out. If a hand comes out first and cannot be returned due to compression, it should be wrapped with a cloth, then pulled until it is all out, then cut off.
Either in the wrist joint or in the elbow, and so it should be done in the other hand and in both legs. If the fetus's head is large or faces pressure during delivery or if there is collected water in its head, you should insert between the fingers a spiky forceps.
With it, you cut the head so that the water comes out or you crack it with an instrument called the mashdakh, whose image comes with the images of other instruments in the chapter that follows this.
Likewise, if the fetus naturally has a large head, you should split the skull or crush it with the mashdakh as mentioned, then extract the bones with forceps. If the head comes out but is compressed at the clavicle, cut it until the moisture in the chest flows out.
Then the chest will contract. If the chest does not contract and delivery is not possible, cut it as much as you can. If the lower abdomen is swollen or has a tumor, you should puncture it so that the moisture flows out.
If the fetus is positioned head-down, pulling it out will be easy and aligning it to the mouth of the womb will be simple. If it gets compressed at the abdomen or chest, you should pull it with a cloth wrapped around your hand and cut the abdomen or chest until what is inside flows out.
If you have extracted all the limbs but the head has retracted and is stuck, the midwife should insert her left hand. If the mouth of the womb is open, she should insert her hand into the cervix, search for the head with her fingers, and pull it to the mouth of the womb. Then she should insert forceps or two forceps and pull it out with them.
If the mouth of the uterus has closed due to a hot tumor, it should not be forced. Instead, at that time, the application of moist and fatty substances should be used, and bandages should be applied, and she should sit in waters that relax and moisturize.
And if the fetus is on its side, then if it can be aligned, use what we mentioned for a living fetus. If that cannot be done, then it should be cut and removed. It is essential that nothing of the afterbirth be left inside at all. Once you have finished your treatment, apply what we have mentioned for treating hot tumors that occur in the wombs.
If bleeding occurs, she should bathe in constricting waters and use the rest of the treatment. I have witnessed a woman who had been pregnant, then the fetus died inside her, and afterwards, she became pregnant again.
Then the other fetus also died. After a long time, a tumor appeared in her lower abdomen, swelling until it burst and began to discharge pus. I was called to treat her, and I treated her for a long time, but the wound would not heal, so I applied some of the strong pulling ointments to it.
A bone came out of the site, then after some days, another bone came out. I was amazed by this because the abdomen is a place without bones, so I concluded that they were bones from the dead fetus. I examined the wound and extracted many bones from the fetus's head.
I continued this process until I extracted many bones, and the woman was in the best of health. She lived for a long time with only a slight discharge of pus from the site. I relate this rarity here.
For it contains knowledge and assistance for what the skilled physician attempts to treat with his hands.
Chapter Seventy-Seven.
It contains images of the tools needed for delivering the baby.
An image of a dilator used to open the cervix:.
This clamp, with which books are aligned, has two dilators at the ends of the two pieces of wood; however, this dilator should be finer than the clamp and should be made either from ebony or boxwood, and the width of each piece of wood should be the thickness of two fingers.
And their width is about the size of a finger, and their length is one and a half fingers. In the middle of the two pieces of wood are two guides made of the same type of wood, firmly attached to them. Their length should be about half a finger or slightly more, and their width should be around two fingers or slightly more. These two guides.
They are the ones that enter the cervix to open it when you turn the dilators. An image of another tool for the same purpose, finer and lighter:.
It is made from ebony or boxwood in the shape of forceps, except that it has two guides at the end, as you see. The length of each guide is about one finger, and their width is two fingers. When you want to open the cervix with it.
So seat the woman on a bed with her legs dangling and spread apart between her thighs. Then insert these two guides together into the cervix, while you hold the end of the tool between her thighs. Then open your hand with the tool as you would with forceps, to the extent you desire to open the cervix. Until the midwife makes what she wants, a picture of another coil mentioned by the predecessors:.
Image of the instrument used to expel the fetus:.
Image of the instrument used to soften the baby's head:.
It resembles scissors with teeth at the end as you see, and it can be made rectangular like forceps, as shown in this image, with teeth like a saw's to cut and scrape:.
Image of another instrument:.
Image of forceps:.
This forceps should be slightly thick to avoid breaking when pulling the fetus with it, image of two-pronged forceps:.
Image of two wide knives for cutting the fetus:.
All these instruments, the more their types and the better they are prepared by the maker, the faster he can work and the more respected he is among people for his skill. Do not disdain any instrument from being prepared, as there will inevitably be a need for it.
Chapter Seventy-Eight.
On the Removal of the Afterbirth.
If the afterbirth is retained after delivery, it is advisable to instruct the patient to hold herself and then tickle her nose with cinders. Place your hand over her mouth and nostrils. If it comes out by this method, otherwise take a quantity [of another substance].
Make a hole in the lid and place there herbs that open the uterus, such as fennel, hyssop, dill, chamomile, thyme, southernwood, and centaury. Use all of these medicines or some of them, immerse them in water, and heat it over fire. Then place a silver tube on the hole of the pot lid with the other end in the mouth of the uterus.
Hold it until the steam reaches the bottom of the uterus, then sneeze as we said, for the afterbirth will come out quickly. If it remains after this treatment and does not come out, order the midwife to dip her left hand in bear's fat or assafoetida's juice.
Then insert it into the vagina and search for the afterbirth with it; when you find it, grasp it and pull it out slowly. If it is attached deep in the uterus, insert the hand as described until you find the afterbirth, then pull it out little by little gently.
So that the uterus does not fall out due to strong pulling, it should be moved gently to the sides, right and left, then increase the amount of pulling, for it will respond at that time and become detached. If the opening of the uterus is closed, we have described the treatment with sneezing and the treatment with the speculum and herbs.
If it does not come out with all that has been described, do not be forceful in attempting to pull it out again. Instead, tie what has come out to the opening of the uterus and to the woman's thigh, then inject her with the quadruple ointment, for it will cause it to detach after a few days.
It will dissolve and come out, but if it becomes putrefied, a bad smell will rise from it to the stomach and head, which can harm the patient. Therefore, appropriate fumigation should be used.
For this reason, some of the early practitioners have tried the fumigation of colocynth and dried figs. Here is the description of the apparatus used to fumigate a woman when menstruation or afterbirth is retained, and so on:
It is made from lead, resembling a funnel, or it can be made from brass. The thin end is placed in the wound and the wide end over fire with incense prepared on embers. Hold it until that incense disappears and repeat with more.
Chapter Seventy-Nine.
On the treatment of unperforated hemorrhoids.
Many boys may be born with their anal passages unperforated, blocked by a thin membrane. The midwife should pierce this membrane with her finger; otherwise, she should use a sharp lancet. She must be careful not to touch the muscle.
Then place wool soaked in the decoction and oil on it, and treat it with ointments until it heals. If you fear it may close up, insert a lead tube into the opening for many days, removing it only when the child needs to defecate.
The anus may also become blocked due to healing of a wound or swelling. It should be incised where it has healed, then treated with the treatments we have mentioned, including the use of lead.
Chapter Eighty.
On the treatment of abscesses that occur below.
Abscesses that occur below are a complex and thickening that happens near the anus externally or in the space from one of the sides, and the abscess can be singular or multiple.
If that complex persists for a long time, it may open and discharge a white watery fluid or thin pus. Some of these abscesses may penetrate to the rectum and intestines, while others do not penetrate. The penetrating ones can be identified by the stool and gas that may come out when the patient defecates.
And perhaps worms may emerge from it, and abscesses may form if they are in the space penetrating to the bladder and the urethra, and some may penetrate to the hip joint and to the tailbone. What distinguishes the penetrating abscess reaching the buttocks is also different from those that do not penetrate.
Insert your index finger into the buttock and insert a thin probe made of copper or iron into the abscess if there is no bend in it. If there is a bend, then insert a thin lead probe or a horsehair into it.
Until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger. If you do not feel it at all, and nothing comes out of the hole, no feces, no smell, nor worms as we said, then know that it is not penetrating, so proceed with the treatment.
And if the abscess penetrates to the bladder or the urinary tract, the evidence is the discharge of urine from it and its resistance to healing with medications. As for if it penetrates to the hip joint or the tailbone, its sign is the probe reaching there.
If there is no bend toward the bone, and pain persists in one area, and pus continually discharges from it, and no treatment works, nor does it heal with ointment, then know that these penetrating abscesses will never fully heal.
Treating them is a vain effort for those physicians who improperly attempt to deal with it. As for those that are not penetrating and not chronic, there is hope for their cure with iron as I will describe and what I have tested, which is to lay the patient down in front of you on their back.
He should lift his legs upwards and his thighs inclined towards his abdomen, then insert a copper or lead probe if there is a stricture, gently until you know where the probe ends. If the patient feels it near the anus, you should insert your index finger into the anus.
If you feel the probe pass through on its own, clearly visible without sensing any intervening fascia or flesh between your finger and it, then be certain that it has passed through. Do not exert further effort as there is no healing benefit from it, as we have said.
They have said that it may heal in some people, though rarely. Among the treatments that may be beneficial is to heat a thin iron on according to the size of the stricture as was mentioned before, and insert it hot into the stricture until it reaches near the anus, then repeat this two or three times.
Until you know that all the excess flesh that has formed, resembling a bird feather tube, has been burned off, then treat it with a cloth soaked in fat until the burned flesh is removed, then treat it with healing ointments, and if it heals.
Otherwise, it will never heal with any other treatment. If you insert the probe and it does not reach your finger in the anus, and there is a thick barrier of flesh or fascia between them, and you see the stricture near the surface of the skin, then incise the skin from the beginning of the stricture at that time. You should pass the probe through the incision while it is in the stricture until the incision reaches where the tip of the probe ends, and then the probe is removed and falls out. Then clean the excess flesh that has formed, resembling a bird feather tube, leaving nothing of it behind.
Then treat it with healing ointments until it heals. If the blood overpowers you and prevents you from completing your task of cutting those flesh pieces, then the best thing to do and what is most beneficial is cauterization with fire or a sharp medicine, for cauterization with fire combines two good conditions: burning off that excess flesh.
And stop the bleeding and dry out the moisture, then treat it with linen soaked in fat or sulfur powdered with oil until pus forms and the burned flesh comes out with the pus. Then treat the wound with healing ointments that promote the growth of solid flesh.
These are medicines that constrict and dry. For if it heals, it is cured, and there is no fear of recurrence. If the fistula has reached the depth of the anus and is away from the surface of the body, insert your finger into the anus and explore with it.
If you feel with the probe that there is a barrier of membrane or flesh and it is close to being penetrated, then the treatment should only be attempted with hope and optimism. This can be done in one of three ways: either by cauterizing it as we mentioned.
Or you may cut it open until you reach its base so that you can effectively introduce linen and treatment close up, but do not overextend the incision lest you cut the muscle surrounding the anus, causing the patient to involuntarily release feces. Then treat it as we have mentioned; perhaps it will heal as we said.
Or you may penetrate that barrier and pierce it after cutting it close to the anus, as we mentioned, either with a probe or another sharp instrument. Then thoroughly clean all the clotted flesh in the incision as much as you can.
Then, set the fracture of the entire wound with the incision and the upper opening until it is sealed, and leave the fistula open inside the rectum to be lighter on the patient, and sometimes the fistula may perforate in this manner.
It is when the probe is inserted into the fistula and it is on one side of the rectum towards the surface of the body with the skin and the anus ring, then take at that time a perforated tip probe like a cobbler's needle in this form:.
And insert a braided thread of five threads or so, then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until it reaches the bottom, if it is perforated on the edge of the rectum from the inside nearby.
Then, pull the thread out from that hole by inserting your finger into the rectum and pulling out the end of the thread, gather both ends together, and tighten them. Leave it for a day or two; every time the thread cuts into the flesh, tighten it well until the flesh between the ends of the threads breaks and falls off. Then treat the wound until it heals and is cured.
If the mouth of the fistula is not perforated, perforate it however you can, except if it is very deep, in which case you should not do so to avoid cutting the muscle. Then treat it as mentioned until it heals.
A picture of the saw-shaped surgical instrument used to split fistulas, where the cutting edge is very sharp and the other side is not sharp so as not to cut what is not needed, as you see:.
Chapter Eighty-One.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids that bleed and their removal and the healing of fissures.
Hemorrhoids are of two types: either they are inside the rectum, resembling red blossoms or like grape bunches, and they vary in size, small and large, and blood flows from them constantly.
They can be singular or numerous, and they can be outside the rectum at its edges. However, those that are outside the rectum are usually less moist, with yellow water or a little blood flowing from them constantly, and they are of the color of the body.
The treatment for those inside the rectum is to order the patient to defecate and strain until the rectum protrudes, and the warts appear before you. Then quickly grasp them with forceps or hold them with your fingernail and cut them at their bases. If they do not hold in the forceps due to their moisture and laxity.
So scrape them with a coarse cloth or a piece of rough bread, or pull them out with your fingers, then cut them. Then sprinkle some sharp powders on them after cutting to serve as cauterization, or cauterize them as previously described in the section on cauterization.
Then treat it with the rest of the treatments until it heals. If the rectum does not come out, administer an enema with a slight irritant to wash out its contents and make it easier to protrude when the patient strains. As for the warts that protrude from the rectum, their treatment is easy and simple.
It is that you take it with your fingernail or hook it with a forceps and cut it, then treat it as we have mentioned until it heals. And for those who dislike cutting with iron, it is advisable to use puncturing in this manner: take a twisted thread and insert it into a needle.
Then pull the wart upwards and pierce it with a needle at its base from the other side, and wrap the ends of the thread under the needle while it crosses and tighten the wart firmly, then tie the thread and remove the needle. Do this to all warts except leave one that you do not puncture.
Let the blood residue flow out, then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or cerotic on the hemorrhoid and put it over the hemorrhoid and instruct the patient to rest, then leave it until it falls off. Once the warts fall off, treat them with ointments and other treatments until they heal.
As for the treatment of fissures, they often result from dryness and constipation. If it persists and medication does not work, it should be shaved with a scalpel or your fingernail until it becomes moist and the upper layer that prevents healing is removed.
Then treat it until it heals properly. If it does not heal, repeat the procedure with a more severe shaving until it bleeds well and peels off, then treat it, for it will heal.
Chapter Eighty-Two.
On the treatment of reversed and unreversed nails, dry warts, and molluscum contagiosum.
The nail is a round knot on the color of the body, resembling a nail head. It occurs all over the body, especially in the soles of the feet and the fingers, and walking causes pain from it.
It should be cut around the nail, held with forceps or a pincette, and removed from its root. Then treat it; if you wish, cauterize it as previously described in its chapter. As for dry warts, each one is a small, rough, covered, round protrusion on the surface of the body.
Warts often appear on children's hands, and their treatment is to stretch the wart, cut it, or prick it with a silk thread or a hair until it falls off. If you wish, cauterize it as previously described with fire or a sharp medicine.
Inverted and non-inverted warts can be removed with the instrument I mention in the treatment of the ant hill. As for the ant hill, it is also a small, covered, thick protrusion on the surface of the body that goes very deep, and if it gets cold, one feels a sting similar to that of an ant there.
It appears all over the body, mostly on the hands. Its treatment is to take a tube from a duck feather or a strong eagle feather and place that tube over the ant hill until the tube's circle surrounds it completely. Then rotate your hand with the tube until you cut around the ant hill.
Insert it into the depth of the flesh and remove the ant hill from its root. If you wish, you can do this with a copper or iron tube in this manner:.
The top of the tube to the thinness is sealed and twisted to make it easy for the fingers to control and twist it, and if you want, cauterize the wart as was mentioned in cauterizing warts in the chapter on cauterization.
Chapter Eighty-Three.
On the forms of the instruments used for injections in diseases of constipation, diarrhea, and colic.
The syringe may be made of silver, or of china, or of drawn or beaten brass, and this instrument may be made in small and large sizes according to the users. Those used for treating small children should be small, and for those with narrow or painful bowels, their syringes should be very gentle. Image of a large syringe:.
The upper tube where the nozzle is attached should be wide, with a barrier where the nozzle is tied as you see. Its lower end, which enters the rectum, should be sealed and very smooth to thinness. On one side there are two holes, and on the other side, there is one hole.
The size of the hole should be as thick as a needle or slightly thicker. The nozzle where the medicine is placed should be made from an animal bladder or lamb skin, shaped like a small funnel, with a diameter of one finger-breadth.
It should be pierced with many holes as it turns, with each hole spaced a finger's thickness apart. Then, a thin thread made of ten or so twisted threads is inserted into those holes to tie the nozzle together like a funnel. Then place the medicine in it, tightly secure the tip of the syringe between two stones, then inject with it. This is the image of the circle of the flask and the hole:.
The method of instillation is to fill the bladder or pouch with medicine while it is warmed to the patient's tolerance; be cautious that it is not too hot or too cold. Then the patient lies on their back and lifts their legs up.
It is placed on a pillow or cloth, then the tip of the syringe is lubricated with oil or egg white or fenugreek juice or similar. Then it is gently inserted into the anus. The servant then takes the flask in both hands and squeezes it forcefully until all contents of the syringe are emptied into the intestines.
Then the syringe is removed and the patient lifts his legs against the wall. If the medicine induces a need to expel, he should hold it back as much as possible; even if he sleeps all night, it will be more effective for retention. If used for diarrhea conditions and he hastens its exit, then repeat the enema until he is healed.
If there are hemorrhoids or painful tumors in the anus, then the syringe should be very gentle and smooth, like those used for children. This is the image of a gentle syringe with its skin tightly stretched:.
Chapter Eighty-Four.
On the Treatment of Wounds.
I have mentioned in the division the treatment of what resembles cauterizations, and here I will discuss their treatment by hand and with medicines in completeness. I say that wounds differ according to the thing by which the wound is caused and according to the location where the cut occurs.
The things with which surgeries are performed are numerous, such as a stone strike or sword cut or knife slash or lance, stick, or arrow puncture and other similar numerous things.
As for surgeries according to the body parts, it is like a wound that occurs on the head or neck or chest or abdomen or liver and other similar organs.
And I describe the treatment of some wounds to set a standard and rule for all other wounds, and I begin with simple head wounds in particular because the complex ones will be mentioned in the third chapter of this book.
I say that if a simple wound occurs on the head and there is no bone fracture, I examine it. If it was caused by a stone strike or something similar and only the skin has been cut and the wound is large and I fear swelling in the patient, then immediately treat it with a scalpel on the spot. Do not delay this, and let blood according to the patient's strength if there is no reason preventing leeching, especially if the blood coming out of the wound is minimal. The leeching should be done on the opposite side of the wounded area.
Warn the patient against overeating and drinking, and against heavy foods. If there is something preventing leeching, reduce their food intake, avoid meats and drinks. If a hot swelling occurs on the wound, apply cotton soaked in rose oil alone or mixed with an astringent beverage.
If there is no fear of hot swelling, apply to the fresh wound its own blood if it has not been altered by the atmosphere, which I will describe to you shortly. If the air has altered it, then apply some ointments to it.
Until the pus flows out, then treat it until it heals. If the wound is large and is from a sword cut or similar and its edges do not come together with bandages, sew it up as I will describe in缝合腹部伤口。
If the skin is exposed to the bone and hangs without attachment except for a small piece, cut it off, then treat the wound with medicines that promote the growth of strong flesh instead of the skin, and advise the patient to nourish themselves with foods that are strengthening, such as heads and trotters and the like.
If gangrene occurs in the skin and it does not adhere to the bone, cut off all the gangrenous part and discard it, then treat it. If there is an artery or vein that bleeds in these wounds and the bleeding does not stop with medicines, search for the artery.
If you hit it and it does not stop, cut it with a lancet and tie it off. If necessity calls and what we mentioned does not help, cauterize it until the bleeding stops. If these wounds are small and simple, their treatment is easy; it suffices to sprinkle this powder on them while they are still bloody.
Before the air alters it, the recipe for the powder is to take one part of gum, two parts of scamony, and three parts of slaked or unslaked lime. Crush everything, sieve it, and pack the wound with it, binding it tightly so that it adheres well.
It凝固后，用绷带从上面绑紧，如果不肿胀就不要解开，直到完全愈合。如果手中没有乳香和 scamony，单用石灰也能达到同样的效果。
And this action can also be done with two plasters in many major surgeries if he masters placing them and tightening them, and the wounds are fresh with their blood, unless the air has changed it; however, if the air has slightly changed it, especially during summer time.
There is no effective meaning in placing this cautery; treat it as we mentioned, by applying some mature ointments to it or apply to it a porridge made from barley flour with water and honey until the pus discharges, then continue treating it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If a fracture occurs in the bone along with the wound and it is minor, treat it with a splint. I have described the treatment of skull fractures in what follows, in the surgery of the neck. If the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment between a simple neck wound and a head wound.
And if a nerve or an artery in the neck has been cut, then if it is a nerve, there is no remedy other than to avoid treating it with things that cause severe constriction, such as cantharides and zinc, and the like, because they harm the nerve and constrict it.
Nothing cold should be applied to the wound at all because the essence of the nerve is cold, and its connection to the brain, which is the noblest of organs, should be treated with soft medications such as washed cotton soaked in fresh water several times, moistened with oil or rose and tuta oil.
It should also be washed with fresh water and other metallic stones of this description, and moist ointments. If the wound is large, use sutures or bring its edges together with bandages, then treat it until it heals.
If the wound has depth and pus has gathered in a hidden place at its bottom, line it with a drain in the lowest part of it. If an artery was cut off in the wound and you see blood flowing out, then sever it or tie it up or cauterize it if necessity demands that.
If the wound has cut some or all of the rings of the trachea but the vocal cords are intact, then suture the skin edges over a tracheal tube. Do not touch the trachea itself, but align it and return it to its natural shape, then secure it tightly and leave it for several days.
Then treat it with ointments that have astringent and drying properties until it heals. If the wound has affected the bone, examine it; if there are bone fragments in it, remove all of them or as much as possible, and leave what cannot be removed until the wound becomes septic and heals, making their extraction easier.
If the wound is suppurative, sprinkle on it the powder we have described. If bone becomes septic in the wound and turns into a sinus, treat it with the methods that will be mentioned in its section, in the surgery of the chest and what is between the shoulders.
If it is a stab from a lance or knife and you see that it has depth, examine it. If air comes out when the wounded person breathes, know that it is a fatal wound. If it does not have depth and is suppurating with blood, do not apply powder to it at first and do not bandage it tightly so as not to trap the blood in its depth.
It can lead to the heart and kill the patient. However, apply an attractive ointment to it and change it twice a day. If you do not have ointment, place old cotton in the mouth of the wound to absorb any moisture that comes out, and let the patient sleep on the side of the wound.
To liquefy what accumulates therein, even if three days or more have passed since the wound occurred and there has been no spasming in the patient nor poor fluttering nor constriction in the breath, and you see that all his conditions are sound, then know that the wound is healthy, so treat it with lint and the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If it is difficult to see and the discharge continues constantly, then know that it has become a fistula; treat it from its opening. If there is a wound on the chest or back, treat it with what was previously mentioned of suturing to liquefy what accumulates therein.
If it is large, cauterize it; if it is small, ligate it. If it has affected the bone and broken fragments from it, examine the wound and promptly remove those fragments if they are loose. If they are not loose, leave them until they become so.
If the wound putrefies, it becomes easier to remove [the debris]. As for other wounds occurring in other organs, their treatment follows the same principles as what we have mentioned.
Chapter Eighty-Five.
On abdominal surgery, the protrusion of the intestines, and their suturing.
The wound that occurs in the abdomen may be large, small, or medium. A large wound may cause one or several intestines to protrude, making their reinsertion and suturing more difficult and challenging.
A small wound may also present other difficulties, as returning it to its place can be more challenging. If you do not promptly return the intestine to its position, it may swell and become thick, making reinsertion difficult. For this reason, a medium-sized wound is often preferable because returning the intestine to its place is less difficult compared to the other two types.
And know that stitching the abdomen has four aspects. The two general methods are suitable for stitching the abdomen and for stitching all other body wounds, while the other two specific methods apply to all injuries but are more particularly specialized for stitching the abdomen.
And I will describe them to you one by one with explanation and clarification. So, I say that if the wound is small and part of the intestine protrudes and it is difficult to replace it, this is due to one of two reasons: either the incision is too small as we said, or the intestine has been inflated due to the cold air.
If that is the case, it should be warmed by soaking a sponge or a wet cloth in lukewarm water alone or in which aqyl, sa'di, and sunbul have been boiled, and then apply it to the intestine until the inflation subsides.
This can also be done with a decoction that has constrictive properties, which is better than water alone for reducing inflation. When you see the inflation has subsided, moisten the intestine with water in which hameham or khubbaz has been boiled, as this will facilitate its easier replacement.
If it is still impossible for it to return after this treatment, slightly enlarge the incision with the instrument used for abscesses. The first treatment is preferable if possible rather than making an incision. Incision is only resorted to as a last necessity when other methods fail. This is the image of the instrument:
One of its curved ends is limited while the other end is not limited. The thin edge should not be as sharp as a scalpel but slightly blunted. This instrument resembles a small probe, as you can see. If the wound expands and the intestine enters, it should be replaced in its natural position.
And if you can place it in its specific location, that is best. And if the incision is wide and is in the lower abdomen, the patient should lie on his back and raise his legs above his head; and if it is in the upper abdomen, he should raise his head and chest above his lower body.
And similarly, if the incision is on one side of the abdomen, your constant aim and purpose should be to have the side with the surgery higher than the other side. This should thus be applied in major surgeries and in moderate surgeries.
And as for minor surgeries, place him according to what is feasible for you. Then have a gentle servant ready who holds the entire incision with both hands and brings its edges together, then gradually reveals it bit by bit to the person doing the suturing.
And this is the description of a common suturing method, which is to take one needle or several needles according to the width of the wound. Then leave a length equal to the thickness of the little finger from the edge of the incision and pierce one needle without inserting thread into the edges of the skin. And pierce through both edges of the peritoneum underneath the skin from inside until it comes out from that side, having brought together the edges of the skin and the edges of the peritoneum, making four layers. Then tighten with a doubled thread around the needle several times from both sides until the edges of the wound come together firmly.
Then leave a length equal to the thickness of the finger again and pierce another needle, then secure it with thread as you did with the first needle. Continue doing this with however many needles are needed until the entire wound is sutured. The needles should be of moderate thickness, neither too thick nor too thin.
For the very thin needles quickly cut the flesh and the thick ones also have difficulty entering the skin; therefore, they should be of moderate thickness. The needle should not be inserted at the edge of the skin too closely.
So that the flesh does not tear quickly and the wound does not open before healing, nor should the suturing be too loose so that the wound cannot close. Then, cut the ends of the needles so they do not harm the patient while sleeping, and make loops from cotton fabric on each side to hold the ends of the needles.
Leave it until you know that the wound has healed. This type of suturing with needles is most suitable for small surgeries, as they may only require one or two needles or so.
As for the method of common suturing, it involves bringing together the four edges, that is, the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the peritoneum, in one stitch with a needle threaded with moderately thick twine. Once this needle has passed through the four edges, return the needle from the side where you started.
So that the thread crosses over the top of the wound, making the suturing similar to the way a sack is sewn to hold belongings. Leave between each stitch a space as wide as the thickness of the little finger. This type of suturing is known by all people.
With this suturing method, a surgery was performed on a man's abdomen that had been cut by a knife. The wound in the surgery was more than a handspan wide, and about two handspans of the intestines had protruded. The tear was in the middle of the abdomen.
I turned it after its moisture had exited the wound for twenty-four hours, and the wound healed in about fifteen days. I treated him until he recovered, and he lived many years afterward, managing all his affairs. The physicians had ruled that he would never recover at all.
It is surprising that I did not treat him with ointment because I was in a place where there were no medicines at all. I would put old cotton on the wound twice a day and attend to washing it with honey water until it healed.
As for one of the types of special suturing, I mention it as per Galen's words: you start suturing from the skin, and insert the needle from outside to inside. Once the needle is passed through the skin and the muscle going straight along the entire length of the abdomen.
I left the edge of the peritoneum on the side where I inserted the needle and passed the needle through its other edge from inside to outside on the other edge of the intestine. Once you pass it, pass it again in this same edge of the intestine from outside to inside.
Leave the edge of the peritoneum on this side and pass the needle through its other edge from inside to outside. As you pass it through the peritoneum, go to the edge of the intestine on its side until you pass through all of it.
Then begin again from this same side and suture it with the edge of the peritoneum on the other side, and exit the needle from the skin near it. Then reinsert it into that skin and suture the edge of the peritoneum on the other side with this edge of the intestine.
Extract it from the skin on its side, and do this once again and do it repeatedly until you sew the entire surgery in that manner, and the description of this sewing is to sew like sewing fur for skins.
That you sew the peritoneum once from one side with the edge of the skin and leave it once from the other side until you finish, and as for the second type of special suturing that Galen also mentioned, this is his exact words.
It is that you sew it in the manner that some healers sew it, by bringing each part to its corresponding similar part naturally, joining one edge of the peritoneum to the other edge and one edge of the diaphragm to the other edge, which is done as I describe to you.
You should prick the needle into the edge of the diaphragm that is nearest to you from the outside and insert it inside by itself, then leave the edges of the peritoneum. Then return the needle and insert it from the outside to the inside in both edges of the peritoneum, and then return it again.
And insert it from the inside to the outside in the other edge of the diaphragm which is on the opposite side, and this type of suturing is better than the general simple suturing which was mentioned earlier. This is Galen's exact words. Some have said that the abdomen can be sutured with two needles. This is done by inserting a single thread into both and beginning by piercing the needle from your side and passing it to the other side, then inserting the other needle from the opposite side and passing it back to your side, just like the suturing used for garments.
And know that if the wound is in the center of the abdomen, then缝合它比腹部其他部位更难。至于伤口的治疗，其处理方式与其他创伤相同。即，如果你在血液未被空气改变前及时接触到新鲜伤口，复位内脏并妥善缝合，然后使用促进愈合的药物。
If the wound has been altered by air, then apply some ointments that you prepare until it suppurates and the threads fall off, and the peritoneum and intestines heal. Then treat it as you would other wounds until it heals.
If you do not have medicines, then apply old cotton when it begins to suppurate and change it twice a day as I have informed you until it heals. For in most cases, you will not need other treatments if the wounds are simple. If you fear that the wound may cause pain to the major organs.
It is advisable to dip a soft wool in moderately warm oil or in rose fat and place it around the areas between the armpit and the groin. If he feels pain or putrefaction in his intestines, which often happens, inject him with a mild, lukewarm astringent decoction.
Especially if the putrefaction has reached the intestines and become a perforating wound to its cavity. Know that what is thick among the intestines is easier to heal, and what is thin among them is harder to heal.
As for the intestine known as the duodenum, it does not heal at all from any surgery due to the abundance and thickness of its vessels, the delicacy of its wall, and its proximity to the nature of the nerve. However, if what protrudes from the wound is fat and you encounter it fresh, then replace it as you would with the intestine itself.
If time has passed and it has turned green or black, you should tie a thread above the place where it has turned black to prevent bleeding, for there are veins and arteries in the swelling, then cut what is below that ligature.
You should make the ends of the thread hang down from below the surgery, protruding out to make it easier for you to pull and remove them when the swelling subsides and the wound discharges pus. Regarding the wound that occurs in the intestine, if there is a small tear in the intestine.
It may heal in some people, for I have seen a person who was stabbed in the abdomen with a spear, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach. The wound became chronic and turned into an opening from which feces and gas were discharged. I treated him, although I did not hope for his recovery. I continued to treat him until he healed and the area closed. When I saw that the area had closed, I feared for the patient that some misfortune might occur in his interior, but no such misfortune ever happened to him, and he remained in the best of health. He is healthy, eating, drinking, engaging in intercourse, taking baths, and serving in his duties. Some experienced people have mentioned that if there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be sutured in this manner.
It involves taking large-headed ants, then bringing the edges of the wound together, and placing one of these ants, with its mouth open, on the edges of the wound. When it bites down and tightens its mouth, cut off its head; it will stick and not come undone. Then place another ant close to the first one.
And continue doing that with several ants according to the size of the wound, then return them and suture the wound, for those heads will remain attached to the intestine until it swells and heals, and it does not cause any harm to the patient at all; the intestine can also be sewn with fine thread.
That which is used from the viscous animal substance after it enters into a needle is to take one end of this thread from the substance and make it smooth, then tie a thin, twisted cotton thread at its end, then insert that thread into the needle. And in it, the thread of the adhesive substance is used to suture the intestine, then it is returned to the body cavity. This method of suturing with ants and adhesive substance is done out of hope and expectation.
But if the tear is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, there is no remedy for it and it will not heal at all.
Chapter Eighty-Six.
On the Treatment of Cold and Nasal Polyps.
Know that every wound or swelling, if it becomes chronic and prolonged and turns into an ulcer and does not heal, and continuously discharges pus without ceasing, is generally called a naysoura in any part of the body, and we call it zakama, the naysoura.
It is truly a hardened, white mass that forms without pain and has a hollow like the hollow of a bird's feather.
For this reason, some have called it a feather. It can be moist at times and continuously discharge pus; sometimes the moisture may cease. This moisture can be abundant or scarce, thick or thin.
I have presented in the section on incision when mentioning surgeries that every ulcer which does not heal and in which flesh does not grow is due to one of nine causes: one of them is either a lack of blood in the body or its poor quality, or there is hard flesh inside it and on its edges which prevents the growth of good flesh. Or that it is abundant in pus and dirt, or the ulcer itself is putrid and the material supplying it is of poor quality, or the treatment used for it is inappropriate, or due to corruption that has occurred in the locality similar to an epidemic, or due to a specific characteristic of the locality.
Or that it is abundant in pus and dirt, or the ulcer itself is putrid and the material supplying it is of poor quality, or the treatment used for it is inappropriate, or due to corruption that has occurred in the locality similar to an epidemic, or due to a specific characteristic of the locality. As observed in the city of Zaragoza, where the maturation of diseases is difficult and the healing of tumors is slow by nature, or because there is one bone or several bones [involved]. I have explained all these causes, their signs, and their treatments with medicines in the section on incision.
It is fitting for me here to inform you of the treatment of fistulas and rhinitis which is performed through manual manipulation. Know that fistulas may occur in all parts of the body; some may extend to large veins or arteries, or to nerves.
or to the peritoneum or to the intestines or to the bladder or to a rib or to a vertebra of the spine or to a joint of the complex joints such as the hand and foot, and some extend near a major organ and so on.
Those fistulas that have such characteristics are among the difficult-to-heal diseases that do not respond to treatment, and working on them is laborious and requires knowledge. If there are fistulas that have not reached the areas I mentioned and you hope and have confidence in treating them.
And if you wish to ascertain that, take a probe of copper or iron if the sinus runs straight and examine it with it. If there is a bend in the sinus then examine it with a lead probe because lead softens its body.
It narrows at the entrance and bends towards the curve. If the sinus has many mouths that you cannot determine with a probe, inject one of its mouths. The moisture you inject will go towards the other mouths and flow out.
Then thoroughly examine in whatever way you can to determine if there is any bone or nerve, or whether the depth of the sinus is far or near, or if it is a single sinus with many mouths. Ascertain all this to the best of your ability through careful inspection and the pain felt when you gently touch the area with your hand.
And similarly regarding the signs and causes leading to the swelling. If you have ascertained all of this accurately, then proceed with confidence to the treatment by considering whether it is.
If the sinus is clearly close to the surface or in a safe location far from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or any of the places mentioned to you, then incise the sinus as described previously and remove what is inside it of pus, rotten flesh, and excess tissue.
And what grows in its mouth of flesh or polyps and the like, treat it until it heals. If the sinus is deep seated and runs straight, you should incise it as deeply as possible and then clean it thoroughly of all rotten flesh.
Then use the soaked lint in sharp medicines and insert it to the bottom of the fistula which you reach with iron, do that to it several times until that sharp medicine eats all the corruption remaining at the bottom of the fistula.
Then treat it with ointments that grow healthy flesh until it heals. If it does not heal thereby, cauterize it as previously described. If the cause of the fistula is bone and this is confirmed to you, then incise and split it as I have informed you, unless there is a hindrance preventing you.
If a vein, nerve, or major organ, as we have said, is exposed to you and there is some corruption and blackening in the bone, then scrape it until its corruption is gone, then treat it with what heals it until it heals. If it does not heal and the pus continues to flow as before.
Know that you have not reached the complete removal of the corruption, so reveal all that is on it again and thoroughly scrape and cleanse it with your utmost effort, then treat it. If it heals, otherwise know that this corruption is in a deep and distant place, so reveal all that is on it again.
Thoroughly scrape and cleanse it with your utmost effort. If the corrupted bone is a small bone and you can extract it, then pull it out with delicate forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
If there are many bones, then thoroughly extract them all and do not leave any behind to the extent of your effort. If something like ligaments obstructs you and there is no danger in cutting them, then cut those ligaments and flesh if there is any, and free the bones.
If you are unable to extract the bones at your time, apply to the wound what prevents putrefaction and leave it for days until the flesh and ligaments around those bones rot. Protect the wound so that the incision which you made during your work does not heal.
Rather, if you fear that, place cotton soaked in powdered sulfur with oil or cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment or one of the green ointments. For if those ligaments rot and the bones are cleaned, extracting and pulling them out will be easy.
If it is a single large bone, such as the leg bone or thigh bone or the like, and only its surface has rotted, then scrape it thoroughly until that black decay disappears, then set the wound. If a large part of it has rotted and the decay has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to spread it open.
Cut it all until the decay ends. Then treat it until it heals. I inform you of a case of gangrene that affected a young man's leg to serve as an example and aid in your treatment. This man was young in age.
About thirty years old, he experienced pain in his leg due to a cause that moved within the body until it reached the leg, causing severe swelling and a large tumor, with no external cause. Then time progressed along with the mistakes of the physicians until the tumor ruptured.
A lot of material flowed out of it, and his treatment was mismanaged until gangrene set in the leg, and many openings developed, all discharging pus and bodily fluids. A group of physicians treated him for about two years, but none of them were skilled in surgical practice.
Until he came to me and I saw his leg, and the materials flowing from those openings in great abundance, and the man had become emaciated and his color turned yellow; so I inserted the probe into one of those openings, and the probe reached the bone, then I examined all the openings.
And I found them communicating with each other from all sides of the leg, so I decided to incise one of those openings until I exposed some of the bone, and I found it rotten, decayed, blackened, putrefied, and perforated until the holes extended to the marrow. I then spread out what was revealed to me.
And I removed the decayed bone, and I assume that there is no other decay in the bone besides what I have cut and spread out, and that I have completely excised it. Then I proceeded to close the wound with healing medications for a longer period, but it did not heal. So I returned and exposed the bone again beyond the first exposure.
And I found the decay connected to the bone, so I spread out what of that decay was revealed to me as well. Then I tried to close it, but it did not heal or join. So I exposed it again and kept cutting the bone piece by piece and attempted to close it, but it would not heal until I had cut off about a handbreadth of the bone.
And I removed it along with its marrow, then I closed it with medications and it healed quickly and was cured. The repeated operations and incisions were necessary due to the patient's weakness, his low tolerance, and my fear for him of death, as he would often faint from excessive vomiting. He was completely cured.
And flesh hardened in the place of the bone and its condition improved in his body and its strength decreased and it functioned in its states and no harm that could hurt him at all was encountered in his walking, then if a bone protruded in a part of the body it had fractured.
It should be treated in this manner, which is to take a bandage and tie it at the end of the protruding bone and have someone pull it upwards, then make another bandage from coarser wool than the first one.
Then bind it to the flesh beneath the bone and extend its end so that the flesh is pulled down, and you expose the flesh from the area you want to spread so that the saw does not harm the flesh, and place a piece of wood or board tightly under the bone from below.
For if you do this, the saw will not be prevented from cutting the rotten bone, and it should be spread slightly above the place of decay so that there is no corruption inside the bone cavity that does not appear on its surface to the senses, thus forcing you to spread it again.
If the bone is rotten but not protruding, and instead is connected to each other with the decay in its center or in part of it, then expose the flesh from all sides, then place the board from below, then spread it from the first side where the decay is.
When you are finished spreading it, then spread it from the other side, and let the spreading be slightly away from the decay as we said. If the decay is in a joint, cut the rotten joint itself and spread the bone where it connects from the other side.
If the corruption is in the connection of two joints, there is no remedy but excision. If the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, treating it is extremely difficult, but you should peel off the corruption as you see fit and cleanse it thoroughly.
And by what means can you proceed when a vein or nerve is not in your way? Know that the saws and cutting implements for severing these bones are numerous according to the position, setting, thickness, thinness, size, smallness, hardness, and looseness of the bones. Therefore, it is necessary to prepare for each type of work an instrument suitable for that work.
Know that the works themselves may guide you to the type of instrument you need if you have long practice and knowledge of the arts of this craft, for skill in the craft comes from seeing various kinds of diseases. For one may devise for themselves instruments suitable for each disease, and I have illustrated several instruments for you at the end of this chapter.
Make them examples to follow and standards to measure others by, if God wills. Image of a saw:.
Image of another saw:.
Image of a small saw:.
Image of a large saw:.
The head of this template should be in the shape of a screw head and its design should resemble that of a rasp. It is suitable for scraping joint heads if they are corrupted or wide large bones. Image of another small template:.
A wide schematic figure:.
Its upper arch and blade are made of iron, and its handle is from a well-fitted conical wood, with a schematic figure showing a hollow:.
Another elegant schematic figure:.
Another schematic figure with curved ends:.
A small schematic figure resembling a probe:.
Another small cross-sectional figure:.
And its end is like a file, used in many places for scraping bones, a schematic figure suitable for scraping perforated bones:.
Its end is a sharp triangular blade made from Indian iron, and all the mentioned schematic figures and cross-sections should be made in the same manner, a schematic figure:.
Chapter Seventy-Eight.
On Amputating Limbs and Spreading Bones.
Limb tissues may become gangrenous either due to an external cause or an internal one. If you treat this corruption with medication and the treatment is ineffective, and you see that the decay is spreading throughout the organ without being stopped by anything,.
you should amputate the limb where the corruption has reached to save the patient from death or a greater calamity that is worse than the loss of the limb. A sign of this condition is that the limb turns black until it seems as though fire has burned it.
Or it may become putrid after blackening until that putrefaction spreads to the adjacent parts of the body and affects the whole body; hence, you should promptly amputate it. The same applies if the cause of corruption is due to the bite of some venomous creatures such as the sea scorpion or snake or lizard or the like.
If the corruption or bite is at the tip of the finger, cut off the finger and do not delay lest the corruption spreads to the hand. And if it has affected the hand, cut it from the base of the wrist and do not delay until the corruption spreads to the arm's wrist.
And if it has affected the arm, cut off the arm at the elbow joint itself. If the corruption spreads further and you see it approaching the shoulder, do not cut off the shoulder under any circumstances, for that would lead to the death of the patient; instead, use other treatments as much as possible.
You should do the same for the foot; if the corruption affects the toe, cut off the toe at one of the phalangeal joints. If it affects the instep, amputate the entire foot. If it ascends to the knee, amputate the leg at the knee joint.
If the corruption has spread above the knee, there is no remedy but to leave it and resign the patient to death. The method of amputating or incising a limb is to bind a strap below the place you intend to cut and another strap above that place.
One servant extends the lower strap downward, and another servant extends the upper strap upward. You should peel away the flesh between the straps with a broad lancet until all the flesh is exposed, then proceed to cut or incise. You should apply linen cloths from all sides.
So that the saw does not touch the correct place and cause additional pain and hot swelling to the patient, if bleeding occurs during your work, quickly cauterize the area or apply some hemostatic agents, then return to your treatment until you finish.
Then bandage the injured limb with a suitable bandage and treat it until it heals. I inform you of an example that occurred to a man in his leg, this very condition I am describing to you, which is that there appeared on his leg a blackening accompanied by a burning sensation resembling fire.
That corruption first occurred in his toe until it affected the entire leg. The man amputated his leg himself when he saw the corruption spreading through the limb, along with the intense pain and burning sensation he was experiencing. He cut it at the joint and healed.
After a long time, that same corruption appeared in his index finger. He came to me, and I treated it with medications applied to the hand after cleaning his body, but the corruption did not stop and began to spread to the other fingers.
The corruption spread to his hand, so he asked me to amputate it, but I refused, hoping to stop the corruption. I also feared for him that cutting off his hand might lead to death since the man's condition was on the decline. When he despaired of me, he returned to his hometown.
I was informed that he amputated his hand entirely and healed. I relate this story to assist in dealing with cases of this disease and to provide a reference for guidance and action.
Chapter Eighty-Eight.
On the treatment of abscesses and how to inject them with medicines.
If a swelling occurs in some fleshy organs and the duration of the swelling extends until it gathers pus, then it bursts or breaks and all the pus inside comes out, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel.
And the skin on it is like a cloth that has become thin and was not so corrupted as to affect the bone, nerve, or ligament. From this, it deserves to be called an abscess and would not be named a fistula unless its duration extends until the corruption affects any of these organs.
Then it is called a fistula or sinus. Its treatment is to cut all of that skin around it, especially if it has become thin and like a cloth, and you are sure that it will not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
If you hope that the skin will adhere and the corruption has not reached that extent, and there is a thickness of flesh in the skin, then treat it with injection. This means you should examine the abscess; if it is large and the pus coming from it has a foul smell, inject it with Egyptian medicine.
It is a mixture of vinegar, oil, honey, and zincir in equal parts, combined in a vessel and cooked over fire until the medicine curdles and becomes as thick as honey. Then take what you need, dilute it with water and honey, inject it into the abscess, close its opening, and leave the medicine inside for about two hours.
Then extract it at sunset. Do this for days until the wound is clean and the stench disappears. It may be irrigated with lye water if this medicine is not available, which is to take the ashes of vine wood or oak wood and pour water over it.
Then filter it and irrigate with it until you are certain that the wound has been cleaned. If the patient cannot tolerate Egyptian medicine or lye water, then irrigate it with a mixture of water and honey in which some powdered zanjabeel has been mixed.
Or irrigate it with a mixture of honey and wine, for honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and wine adheres to the wound, especially if the wine has some astringent and drying qualities. If you do this several times and are certain that the wound is no longer corrupted, then irrigate it with something that promotes flesh growth.
For example, take some of the dough ointment and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine, or irrigate it with other medicines and ointments whose properties we have described in the chapter on ointments. If the mouth of the wound is narrow and does not accommodate the irrigation tube.
Then widen it slightly with iron or place a wick dipped in Egyptian ointment or sericium ointment until it widens. Similarly, if the opening is also wide, then bring its edges together with sutures and leave enough space for the irrigation tube to enter without excess.
And if the opening from which pus flows is raised upward, then cut it at the lowest point so that the pus flows downward. For if the pus accumulates in the depths of the wound, it prevents flesh from growing there.
And if you cannot make an incision in the abscess as desired towards its lower part, arrange the limb in a position where pus can flow out easily according to what is feasible for you, ensuring that no pus remains in it at all.
And as for the adhesive medications that are applied to the abscess from the outside and how to apply them, it is to take one of the adhesive ointments similar to what you desire and spread it on a piece of linen cloth, and let the cloth be the size needed to cover the entire abscess. Then, with scissors, cut a hole opposite the mouth of the abscess, slightly wider than the mouth of the abscess. Then spread one of the soft ointments on another piece of cloth according to the size of the hole and place it over it, spaced apart from the mouth of the abscess to facilitate the outflow of pus. Do not remove the large cloth until afterwards.
For several days, and as for the one on the mouth of the abscess, it is to be removed every time to let out what has accumulated in it of pus and to know how much or how little, or whether what comes out of it is ripe or not.
And also, examine the site of the abscess itself to see if its owner feels pain there or not, and whether there is swelling or no swelling. If your treatment continues this way and you see that the material coming out is minimal at the mouth of the abscess.
Know then that the abscess has adhered or is close to adhering. In this case, release it the next day or on the third day. Whenever you release the wound, replace the cloth and renew the ointment. If thin pus comes out of the abscess after a long period, do not despair of its adhesion.
Its healing is swift, for there are those among people in whom the growth of flesh in their surgery is slow, and there are others to the contrary. If after many days pus that is not ripe comes out from the wound, know that the wound has not adhered; if the adhesion of the wound is delayed.
If his condition persists, increase the drying of the medications. The medicines should be moist in their consistency but dry in their strength, like the palm ointment if an excess amount of colocynth has been added. What is most effective for treatment is to take the palm ointment.
It can be treated with rose oil, and sprinkle on it a moderate decoction that is balanced in its consistency. Then knead it with it and use it. This can also be done if the palm ointment is not available: take honey, boil it until it becomes irritating, and use it. Or you can take pepper, aconite, and costus, grind them all together, and sprinkle the powder on the honey while it is over fire. Then apply it to a cloth and bind it over the wound, or apply the honey that you boiled until it thickened, sprinkle the medicines on it, place the cloth over it, and bind it tight.
Zaranj, long susan root, asmonian lily base, carrot seed flour, and hellebore can be used individually or in combination. Grind them, sieve them, and sprinkle the powder on the honey described and use it. If the wound persists and does not heal with this treatment, know that there is corruption deep within it.
If it affects the bones or other solid nerves or ligaments, treat it as you would treat a fistula as previously described.
Chapter Eighty-Nine.
On the treatment of corns and ingrown nails and the amputation of excess fingers and the splitting of webbed fingers.
A corn is an excess of flesh that grows under the nail of the thumb or toe and may grow on other fingers as well. If it persists and its treatment is neglected, it swells into a hot swelling.
Or it becomes infected until it eats away the root of the nail and may spoil it entirely, and the infection might reach the bone causing a foul smell, and the tip of the finger becomes widened with a bruised color. If you treat it with what we mentioned in the section on incision and your treatment does not work.
You should cut with iron all the excess that grows from the nail, then cauterize the wound. Cauterization is very beneficial in this case. If the bone is healthy and the nail is also healthy.
And if the corner of the nail has pressed into the flesh, causing it to become inflamed and painful, you should place a thin wedge under the corner of the nail that is pressing into the flesh, lift it up, and gently remove that part of the flesh.
You should apply caustic and corrosive medicines to the remaining flesh until it is all removed, then treat it with ointments until it heals. If the infection has affected the bone, you should cut out and remove that bone, for it will not heal as long as there is infected bone present.
If you see erosion and decay spreading in the finger, cut it at one of the joints as previously mentioned, then treat it until it heals. If the nail is hit or crushed and severe pain occurs, it should be slit open first.
Then, cut the nail with a sharp instrument diagonally from top to bottom and be careful not to reach the flesh beneath the nail with your cut, for that will cause severe pain to the patient and may lead to excessive flesh growth in the area. Then treat the area with what soothes the pain.
As for the extra finger that develops in some people's hands, it may be entirely fleshy, or it may have bones in part of it, and it might also have a nail. Its growth often occurs at the base joint of one of the fingers.
Or its growth may occur in some joints of the finger. Those that grow in some joints of the finger do not move, while those that grow at the joint of the finger might move. What is entirely fleshy is easy to cut; you should cut it at its base with a broad instrument.
As for those that grow at the base of the joint, their treatment is difficult, so avoid cutting them. As for those that grow on the finger at one of the joints, you should first cut its flesh in a circular manner down to the bone, then use one of those appropriate saws to remove the bone.
Then treat it until it heals. As for the webbing that occurs between fingers, this often happens and can be something a person is born with or can occur after the healing of a wound or a burn from fire or similar. You should slit open this webbing.
Until the fingers return to their natural form, then place between them felt or patches soaked in rose oil so that it does not heal quickly and separate them, or put a thin sheet of lead between them until the area heals properly.
And if the fingers adhere to the palm, then cut that adhesion according to what seems appropriate and suitable for the shape of the limb.
Chapter Ninety.
On Cutting Boils.
Varicose veins are twisted, thick vessels filled with black superfluous blood; they occur in most parts of the body but more frequently in the legs, especially in the legs of farmers, carpenters, and carriers. Firstly, it is appropriate to use friction on the body with black salt several times with strong friction.
Then, let the patient fast for a while. As for treating it with iron, it is done in two ways: one is to cut and remove the black blood, and the other is to extract the vein entirely. If you are going to cut it, first wash the leg thoroughly with hot water.
Until the thick, turbid blood dissolves, then bind the patient's leg from above the thigh to below the knee with a cloth, then cut the vein in one place or in two places or in three wide cuts.
Then, squeeze the black blood with your hand from the lower part of the leg upwards and from above downwards until the amount of blood that you deem sufficient or what the patient's strength can tolerate is removed. Then bind it and order him to avoid foods that generate black bile, and repeat vomiting and bleeding.
When the veins are filled to the point that it harms the patient, as for sweating, it should be done in this manner: shave the leg of the patient if there is a lot of hair, then immerse him in the bath and wash his leg with hot water until it reddens and sweat pours out, or he exercises vigorously.
If a bath is not available, warm the limb, then make an incision in the skin opposite the vein longitudinally, either at its end near the knee or at its bottom near the heel. Then open the skin with forceps and peel off the vein from all sides until it becomes apparent to touch.
When it appears, you will see it red and prominent. Once freed from the skin, it resembles a tendon. Then insert a thread under it until it is raised and protrudes from the skin, then secure it with a smooth, blind clamp. Then make another incision near that incision, about three fingers wide.
Then peel the skin off the vein until it appears, then raise it with thread as you did before and secure it with another clamp as you did first. Then make another incision or several incisions if needed.
Then sweat it and cut it at the end of the incision near the heel, then pull it out and sweat it until it comes out from the second incision. Then pull it to the upper incision and do this until you pull it out from the third incision, the highest of all, until it is completely out, then cut it.
If it does not respond to pulling and sweating, insert a needle with a strong doubled thread, tie it, and pull it. Insert thread under it and twist it with your hand in all directions until it comes out, being careful that it does not break, for if it breaks, extracting it will be very difficult for you.
It is harmful to the patient, so if you remove it all, place on the site of the wounds wool soaked in a drink of rose oil or olive oil and treat it until it heals. If the hernia is contracted with folds that twist in various directions.
And if it is not straight as we said, it should be cut at every direction of its folds and places where it twists, then hang it with clips until you remove all of it. Be careful when cutting not to sever or injure the vein, for it will be difficult for you to remove it, so be cautious in your efforts.
Image of the instrument with which you cut the hernia:.
Image of the blind forceps:.
It should not have a curvature like other forceps and the ends should not be sharp so as not to injure the vein. It should be thick and smooth in its bend because if it is thin, it will cut the vein with its thinness. Rather, it should have the advantage of thickness as we said.
Chapter Ninety-One.
On the removal of the civic vein.
This vein develops in the legs in hot regions such as Hijaz and the lands of Arabs, and in hot, dry, less fertile countries. It may also develop in other parts of the body besides the legs, and its development is due to corruption that occurs under the skin.
It occurs inside the bodies as worms and other parasites, and like the maggots that develop between the skin and the flesh. The sign of the beginning of this vein is that there is a severe inflammation in the leg, then the area suppurates, and then the vein begins to emerge from where the suppuration occurred.
It is as if it were the root of a plant or animal, and when its tip appears, it should be wrapped around a small piece of lead weighing from one dirham to two dirhams, tied up, and the lead left hanging from the stalk.
Every time something comes out from it to the outside, wrap it in the lead and tie it. If it becomes very long, cut part of it and wrap the remainder. Do not cut it from its root before all of it has come out because if you cut it, it will retract into the flesh and cause a tumor and putrefaction in the area and an ugly ulcer.
Therefore, it should be managed and drawn out little by little until it is completely out and none remains in the body. Sometimes from this duct there may come out in some people something that can be five or ten cubits long.
I have been told that for a man, it extended to twenty cubits. If it breaks while you are treating it, insert a probe into its hole and pack it with a long plug along the body until all its material is discharged, and try to clear any putrefaction in the area with medicines for several days.
Then treat it with the treatment for tumors. This duct may have many branches, especially if it appears in a joint of the leg or in the leg itself, causing it to have many openings and a branch coming out of each mouth. Treat it as we mentioned in the division and with what has been previously stated.
Chapter Ninety-Two.
On incising the worm generated under the jaw, which is called the cattle disease.
This disease is called in some countries among us the cattle ailment because it often afflicts cattle; it is a small single worm that breeds between the skin and the flesh and moves throughout the body, ascending and descending.
It becomes apparent to the sense when it moves from one organ to another until it breaks through the skin where it penetrates, forming due to the putrefaction of some mixtures, as is common with worms and snakes and melon seeds in the abdomen.
It is anticipated that her harm occurs when she moves within the body, rises to the head, and reaches the eye; she may open it and come out, thus destroying the eye, which happens frequently. If you wish to treat her and remove her, it can only be done when she moves and becomes apparent to the senses.
It is necessary to bind what is above and below her tightly with a band, then cut over her and remove her. If she sinks into the flesh and you do not find her, apply cauterization with fire to the area until you burn her. The greatest damage she can cause is to the eye, as we have said.
If you see her in the head near the eye, bind tightly below her on the forehead, then cut over her and remove her. The patient should be treated by purifying the body with laxative medicines that clear the putrefied mixtures and by avoiding foods that generate putrefaction.
Chapter Ninety-Three.
On Incising the Disease Known as Nafir.
This disease which is called in our country naffir is a pain that occurs in some organs then moves from one organ to another and I have seen it as I describe it to you.
I was called to a sick woman in some villages. She uncovered her arm and showed me slight swelling in the vein of the arm. After staying for an hour, I saw that swelling moving towards the elbow like a worm climbs, ascending to her shoulder as quickly as possible, like mercury.
If it flows from one place to another, the pain leaves that place and settles in the shoulder. Then, after sitting for an hour, it spreads throughout the body until it reaches the other arm. She told me that it moves through her entire body as I witnessed.
I was amazed by the speed of its movement from one organ to another, and I had not seen this disease with my own eyes in such a manner before. However, I have seen groups of people who feel pain moving from one organ to another, but I have not seen it with my own eyes as I saw it in this woman.
I could only attribute this to the fact that the woman was from the countryside, with a dry body and visible veins. This is why such movement was perceptible, whereas it would not be so apparent in people of affluence with moist bodies and hidden veins.
If you wish to treat it and the patient feels pain, and if it appears visibly as we mentioned, then bind above and below it tightly, incise it until that congested air comes out, and cauterize the area.
And if you do not see it with your eye, treat it with body powdering and what expels gases and releases them, such as stinking seed and spikenard seed and the like of medicines.
Chapter Ninety-Four.
On the Extraction of Arrows.
Arrows differ according to their types and according to the places where they enter the body. As for their difference according to their types, some are large and some are small, and among them are hollow glass arrows and solid glass arrows, and there are those that have three angles and four angles.
And there are those that have barbs and those that have splinters. As for those that occur according to the organs they enter, they are of two types: either the organs are major hollow organs such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and the like. When an arrow falls into one of these organs and signs of death, which I will describe to you later, become apparent, you should avoid extracting that arrow, for death usually follows the owner of such a condition. And if these bad signs do not appear to you and the arrow has not hidden deep within the organ, then extract it and treat the wound. Among the signs of an arrow piercing the brain, penetrating the bone, and injuring the membrane covering the brain is severe headache, fainting, and dizziness.
And if these bad signs do not appear to you and the arrow has not hidden deep within the organ, then extract it and treat the wound. Among the signs of an arrow piercing the brain, penetrating the bone, and injuring the membrane covering the brain is severe headache, fainting, and dizziness. And redness in the eyes, a red tongue, convulsions, confusion of mind, vomiting, and sometimes blood coming from the nostrils or ears, speech becoming interrupted, loss of voice, and a white moist substance resembling porridge oozing from the site of the wound, similar to the fluid of flesh.
If these signs appear to you, stop treating the patient and do not remove the arrow if it has not been removed. As for the signs of the arrow when it affects the heart and is close to the left breast, he feels as though it has embedded into something solid rather than something hollow.
And perhaps the arrow may move in a way that resembles the pulse, and black blood flows from the wound, followed by coldness in the extremities, cold sweat, and loss of consciousness; then know that death is inevitable. The sign of the arrow if it wounds the lung is the流出伤口的血呈泡沫状。
And the vessels near the neck swell, the color of the patient changes, and he breathes heavily, seeking to inhale cool air. If the arrow reaches the membrane in the chest, it is close to the lower ribs, and breathing becomes labored with severe pain.
He sighs, and all the parts of the shoulders move. If the arrow reaches the liver, severe pain follows, and blood that resembles the color of the liver comes out of the wound. If the arrow reaches the stomach, undigested food may come out of the wound.
His condition is evident. If the arrow pierces the abdomen and protrudes, and feces or pus or intestines come out of the wound, there is no hope for treatment or removing the arrow. If the arrow reaches the bladder and urine comes out.
And if something protrudes from the wound and the pain intensifies for the patient, then know that he is doomed. As for other organs such as the face, eye, throat, shoulder, arm, spine, collarbone, thigh, leg, and similar parts, they are often spared.
When the arrow has not encountered a vein or nerve and is not poisoned, and I inform you of some of what I have witnessed regarding these arrows so that you may infer from it your treatment, which is that an arrow had struck a man in the nasal root near his eye socket.
I extracted it from the other side under the earlobe and he recovered without any harm to his eye. I also extracted another arrow for a Jew that had struck below his lower eyelid into the eye socket, where the arrow was concealed and I only reached its small end that attaches to the wooden shaft.
It was a large composite arrow with a smooth, square iron head without barbs, and the Jew recovered without any mishap to his eye. I also extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian, and this arrow was Arabic.
It had barbs, so I made an incision between his jaws as it had penetrated his throat. I gently manipulated it until I extracted it, and the Christian was saved and recovered. I also extracted another arrow for a man who had been struck in his abdomen, and we feared he would die from it.
After he remained for about thirty days without any change in his condition, I made an incision to reach the arrow and carefully extracted it. He recovered without any complications. I also treated a man who had been struck by an arrow in his back, and the wound had healed around the arrow.
After seven years, the arrow emerged at the base of her thigh. I also treated a woman who had an arrow in her abdomen; the wound had healed around it, and the arrow remained without any change in her condition or causing any harm to her natural functions.
I saw another man who had been struck by an arrow in his face, and the wound had healed, leaving him with little pain, and there are many similar cases. I extracted an arrow from a commander of the sultan's army; it had penetrated the middle of his nose, slightly leaning to the right side.
The arrow had entirely disappeared, and I was called to treat him three days after the arrow struck. I found the arrow wound extremely narrow, so I probed it with a thin probe but could not feel anything. He was experiencing swelling and pain under his ear on the right side.
I suspected that the swelling might be due to the arrow's tip, so I dressed the area with a bandage containing a drawing force and left it, hoping that the area would swell and reveal the arrow's mark. However, nothing happened at the site to indicate that the arrow had reached that spot.
I continued to apply the bandage for many days, but nothing happened. The wound eventually closed during that time, and the patient despaired of its extraction for a long period until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and informed me. I then applied a sharp, corrosive medicine to the wound for many days.
Until it opened up, and I probed it, feeling the thin tip of the arrow that was embedded in the bone. Then I continued to widen the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow became visible to us. It took me about four months to do so.
Then, when the wound widened and allowed me to insert forceps, I pulled and moved it, but it did not respond to being removed. I continued to manipulate it and try various tools until one day I grasped it firmly with a pair of forceps, as depicted at the end of this chapter.
And the doctors ruled that his nasal cartilage would not set, but I set it and the wound healed and the patient recovered completely, without any harm at all. I inform you of the method of extracting some arrows so that you may use this as a measure and guide for what I have not mentioned.
For the parts of this craft and its details cannot be grasped by description nor can a book encompass it. Rather, the skilled craftsman measures the little with the much and what is present with what is absent, and deduces new work and new tools for strange occurrences.
If I speak of this craft, I say that arrows are extracted from the parts in which they have penetrated in two ways: either by pulling them out from the place where they entered or from the opposite side, and those that are extracted come out from where they entered.
Either the arrow is protruding in a fleshy area, it should be pulled out. If it does not come out at the time it was embedded, you should leave it for days until the flesh around it putrefies, making it easier to pull out. Similarly, if it has lodged in bone.
If it does not come out, leave it for days and attempt to pull and move it every day until it comes out. If it still does not come out after days, you should pierce around the arrow in the bone itself from all sides with a fine drill until you widen the area for the arrow, then pull it out.
If the arrow has penetrated into one of the ventricles of the brain and some of those symptoms I have mentioned appear in the patient, refrain from pulling out the arrow and leave it until the condition improves after days.
Be careful in pulling out the arrow, for if it is deeply embedded and does not yield to pulling, use drills around the arrow as described to you, then treat the area until it heals. If the arrow has become hidden in a part of the body. And if it is not felt, probe for it with a probe. If you feel it, pull it out with some tools suitable for pulling. If you cannot do so due to the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein in that place.
Make an incision to widen the wound and gain control of the arrow until you can remove it. If it has two wings, grasp them and free the flesh embedded in them from all sides with any means possible. Be cautious if you cannot free the flesh by breaking and twisting the wings to release it.
And if you attempt to remove the arrow from any location, use your fingers to twist it in all directions until you free it, being as gentle as possible so that the arrow does not break, which would make it difficult for you to pull and extract it. If you cannot manage it at the time.
Leave it for days until the flesh around it becomes putrefied, then try again as it will be easier at that time. If bleeding obstructs you, use the treatments we have mentioned. Be careful not to cut a vein, nerve, or tendon and use all your ingenuity.
In every way, you can extract the arrowhead, and it should be done with gentleness, patience, and steadiness as I have described to you. It is advisable that when you pull out the arrow, you position the patient in the same manner he was in when the arrow struck him, for this is most appropriate.
If you cannot do that, use whatever shapes you can. As for the arrow that exits from the opposite side, either some part of it has protruded outward or you will find the tip of the arrow by touch above the skin nearby and you will see it protruding.
Make an incision over it, and let the incision be large enough to accommodate forceps. Then pull it out, for it will come out easily. If it gets stuck in the bone, rotate your hand around until the arrow affects the bone and widens its path, then pull it out.
Otherwise, leave it for days then return to it until it comes out. If the arrow shaft is in it, push it out with it. If the shaft has fallen and you want to use pushing, insert a hollow instrument into it so that its hollow part enters the tail of the arrow, then push it out with it.
If the arrow is hollow, push it out with an instrument that can enter that hollow part, for this will make the arrow come out easily. If the arrow is poisoned, you should excise all the flesh into which the poison has penetrated if you can, then treat it with what is appropriate for such a condition.
If the arrow is in the chest, abdomen, bladder, or flank and is close enough to be examined with a probe and you can make an incision over it, then do so. Be careful not to cut any artery or nerve, and remove it.
Then draw the incision if it needs suturing, then treat it until it heals, image of the forceps which you use to extract arrows:.
Its ends are like a bird's beak, made as if it were a file; when it grasps the arrow or anything else, it does not let go. Varieties of large, small, and medium sizes can be made according to the size of the arrow and the width and narrowness of the wound.
Image of the hollow cannon:.
Image of the silenced cannon:.
This is blunt-ended like a probe to easily enter the hollow arrow and push it.
Chapter Ninety-Five.
On bloodletting from veins.
The veins that are commonly bled from in the body are thirty veins, including sixteen veins in the head: the two pulsating veins behind the ears, known as the hassasin, and the two visible arteries on the temples, and the two veins at the corners of the eyes, known as the nazeerin.
And the vein standing in the middle of the forehead, the vein at the tip of the nose, the two veins on the sides of the neck, the two veins on the upper lip, and the two veins on the lower lip, these known as al-jaharik, and the two veins under the tongue.
As for the veins that are bled from in the arm and hand, they are five veins. One of them is the cephalic vein, which is on the ulnar side, and the common people call it the head vein. The median vein, known as the axillary vein, is composed of branches of the basilic and cephalic veins, and the common people call it the body vein.
And the basilic vein, which is located on the inner side of the arm and is also called the axillary; the common people call it the abdominal sweat or the arm rope. And the cubital vein, which is located above the elbow joint, to which bloodletting adhesions occur, and it clearly appears above the thumb. And theasilim.
It is the vein between the little finger and the ring finger, which has two branches; in the leg and foot, there are three veins: one under the patella on the outer side, the second is the saphenous, located at the ankle on the inner side, and the sciatic vein, located at the heel on the outer side.
And in the other leg, there are three similar veins. As for the two veins behind the ears, their benefit lies in tying them for chronic catarrhs, migraines, tinea, and chronic bad sores on the head. The method of tying them is as I describe.
It is to shave the head of the patient and rub its back where the two veins are with a coarse cloth well. Then, have the patient constrict his neck with a turban until the veins appear and their location behind the ears in the two lower areas of the head. Grasp them with your finger where you feel their pulse under your finger, and mark that spot with ink.
Then take a lancet, which is known as the nashl. Insert it under the vein in the skin until the lancet reaches the bone. Then raise your hand with the vein and skin upwards and cut off the vein along with the skin in one amputated piece. The length of the cut should be about two fingers clasped together.
Or the amount of blood to be let is determined, then they are tied with bandages until healed; their cutting and cauterization was mentioned earlier in the book. As for the two arteries in the temples, their compression is beneficial for chronic migraine, difficult headache, persistent inflammation, and acute tearing discharge directed towards the eyes.
And the way to compress them as I describe to you is for the patient to tighten his neck with a turban until the veins appear clearly, and their pulse becomes evident under your finger. Then mark with ink, and then lift the skin above the vein slightly with your index finger.
You insert the scalpel from below, lift the vein upwards, and cut it as you did with the other veins. Let blood according to your need, then loosen the patient's neck and place your finger on the vein for a while.
Then place cotton and a bandage on it and tightly secure it from above, leaving it until healed. Their use and cutting was mentioned earlier in the book. As for compressing the forehead vein, its benefit is after compressing the temporal veins for chronic facial ailments such as psoriasis, sores, and thick redness.
And the way to compress it as I describe to you is for the patient to tighten his neck with a turban until the vein appears. Then take the tool called the axe, and this is its image:.
Place the protruding spike at the end of the axe on the vein and strike from above with a comb or something similar. Let the blood flow in the amount you desire, then loosen the patient's neck and bind it until healed.
And it may be opened with a broad lancet, except that the lancet should not be sharp-pointed like other lancets, but rather should have a slightly wide point, and it is sharpened obliquely because the bone is close, so the lancet might break if it were thin.
As for the two veins at the inner corners of the eyes, their benefit is for eye ailments such as scabies, redness, weeping, and facial diseases. As for how to lancet them, the patient should tighten his neck with a headscarf, then you lance them while standing at his head, and let the lancing be oblique towards length slightly with a small, somewhat broad lancet.
For if there is no flesh in the area, then if the lancet is thin at the tip it might break. Then let out as much blood as you need, put cotton on them, and bind them for one night, then remove the bindings. As for lancing the nasal vein, it is beneficial for acute fever.
And severe headache and facial diseases such as the red splay that appears in the nose, especially if it is chronic. The way to lance it is to have the patient tighten his neck, then hold his nose with your left hand and take a thin long lancet.
And pierce it in the center of the nasal tip itself between the nostrils straight because the vein does not appear there to the touch, then blood will flow immediately. You should keep your hand with the lancet steady for a little while, let out as much blood as you need, then bind it for one night, for it heals quickly.
As for the cheeks, lancing them is beneficial for shortness of breath, the onset of leprosy, and black ailments that appear on the surface of the skin, such as black leprosy, smallpox, and bad sores and ulcers. The way to lance them is to have the patient tighten below them in his neck with a bandage, and the surgeon stands at the head of the patient.
The patient sits on a chair, then the vein is incised lengthwise with a relatively wide incision. Then, let blood flow until a moderate amount has been released or as much as you deem necessary for the condition. Do the same to the other vein and then loosen the bandage.
The two veins are tied moderately so that the patient does not suffocate, and leave it until the next day, for the wound will heal. As for the veins of the jaw, their incision after the temple’s vein is beneficial for ulcers in the mouth, decay of the gums, bad sores, splitting of the lips, and severe sores.
Those that are in the nose and around it, and how to incise them: have the patient sit in front of you and tie his neck with a turban, then pull his lips apart and look at the two veins which you see one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left, identifying them by their darkness.
Also, around them are thin black veins which you should cut off short. If it is difficult for you and you do not know which they are, aim to cut the larger and clearer ones. Do the same with the two veins in the lower lip.
As for the two veins under the tongue, their incision after the temple’s vein is beneficial for tumors in the throat due to scrofula and mouth diseases. To incise them, have the patient sit before you facing the sun, lift his tongue, and look underneath it where you will find one vein on one side and another on the other side, both of a dark color.
Incise them but be careful not to cut deeply as there are arteries underneath, and excessive cutting might cause bleeding from those arteries. As for the three veins that are incised in the elbow, these are the ones commonly incised in all people, and their incision is done in two ways.
Either with a wide, basil-like scalpel or olive-shaped to thinness, or by incision with a knife-like scalpel, which is the nishl [and this is its image], the image of the wide basil-like scalpel:.
It should be wide as you see, suitable for opening hollow, full, prominent, visible vessels that contain thick blood like tar, and this is the image of the olive-shaped scalpel:.
This scalpel is narrower and has a sharper tip, suitable for incising thin vessels that contain thin, bile-like blood, and this is the image of the nishl scalpel:.
This nishl, which is suitable for incision, comes in various types, wide and thin, according to the width and narrowness of the vessels. This can be inferred for other uses as well, and it is well-known among craftsmen.
As for the basilic, which is one of these three vessels, the benefit of incising it is that it draws blood from ailments that are under the throat and neck, towards the chest and abdomen. The person performing the incision should be cautious and hold steady, for beneath it are arteries; if he errs and advances the scalpel too deeply, he may cut those arteries.
Bleeding may occur, so it is advisable not to puncture it with a stitching scalpel but to incise it with the nishl. If the basilic vein does not appear clearly, it should be avoided and another vessel sought or one of its branches should be found.
Or incise the arm tendon in its place, as it is distinct and should be cut with the nishl scalpel as mentioned. If you wish to incise it specifically, before stretching the arm, you should palpate the area until you identify the pulse location, then mark it with ink.
Then bind the arm and make a transverse incision along the vein with the lancet as we said, and be careful that the cut falls away from the position of the artery. And when you see swelling in the place where you marked with ink while tightening the bandage, know that this swelling is the distention of the artery; so avoid it.
If you see the blood when bleeding spurting as a boy's urine would spurt and the blood is thin and red, then know that it is from the artery. In this case, quickly place your finger on it for a long moment, then remove your finger. If the blood stops, it often stops; then tighten the arm.
Leave it, and warn the patient against neglecting it. It should be on the neck and not moved for days until it heals. If the blood does not stop and overpowers you and there is no medicine at hand, then cut the artery if it appears to you, for its ends will contract and the blood will stop.
Or take the shell of a pistachio, split it, and take one half. Bind it tightly to the site of the vein with bandages and ligatures until the next day. If the blood stops, otherwise treat it as previously mentioned by applying hemostatic agents. Stopping its flow is not difficult in most cases.
This is due to the small size of the wound and the effectiveness of the bandage on the arm, so be aware. As for the blue vein, the benefit of bleeding it is that it draws blood from the top of the head and the lower body because it is composed of a branch of the basilic and a branch of the cephalic as we said.
It is necessary for the operator to be on the neck of the one being circumcised, for underneath are nerves. If he increases in piercing with the lancet and touches the nerve bundle, numbness occurs which is difficult to heal, and sometimes does not heal at all, and this nerve bundle often becomes noticeable by sensation.
If it is hidden in some people and is thin and not noticeable, then you should make his circumcision a split with the knife and avoid the nerve bundle as much as possible. If the vein is between two nerve bundles, then cut the vein longitudinally. As for the temporal vein, the benefit of its circumcision is that it draws blood from the head.
It is beneficial for eye diseases, and in this vein especially, if you want to circumcise it; you should use an olive-shaped lancet or a broad basil-shaped lancet for stitching because it is safer than all other veins as there is no artery or nerve beneath it.
However, you should avoid the head of the muscle with the lancet when circumcising and seek a soft spot. It does no harm if it is not hit in the first attempt and circumcision is repeated, except that it may swell in some people if it is not cut in the first attempt.
But that swelling does not harm it at all. As for the manner of circumcision and its consequences, and what should precede its correction, the first thing you should know is that circumcision is either used solely to preserve health.
Or it is used for diseases. What is used to preserve and sustain health and to prevent the occurrence of diseases is that circumcision be performed on one of the three veins in the elbow, namely the temporal, the ulnar, and the brachial, and that circumcision be done at the beginning of spring when the signs of fullness appear.
Bleeding should be done on Sunday or Tuesday after three hours have passed since daybreak. As for bleeding that is used for treating illnesses, it does not have a specific time limit but rather is performed whenever necessity and need arise, whether at night or during the day.
And at every hour and at all times, children should not be bled until they reach fourteen years of age, nor should the elderly who have exceeded sixty years be bled. When anyone intends to bleed for any reason, it is as such.
It is advisable to cleanse his bowels before bleeding with a mild enema if there is a large amount of retained feces, so that impurities from the intestines do not enter the blood vessels during bleeding and harm the vital organs. One should not bleed someone who is pregnant, drunk, or intoxicated until those conditions have passed.
Bleeding should also be avoided after sexual intercourse, vomiting, defecation, excessive sexual activity, fatigue, exercise, sleeplessness, fasting, and anything that weakens the body or mind. Then, one should consider thinning the humors beforehand if the blood is thick.
Through foods, drinks, and medications if possible, then he should take a bath if there is no impediment or exercise somewhat to thin the blood. His bleeding should be in the middle of the day as mentioned, and he should aim to clear his mind that day from all bad mental disturbances.
Such as worries, anger, fear, and all physical disturbances like excessive fatigue, overexertion, sexual intercourse, and the like. The things that people are accustomed to using, such as perfumes, fragrances, and entertainment, should be present according to each person's ability.
Then the surgeon sits on a pillow that is higher than the pillow on which the patient sits, then he extends his arm and the surgeon scratches it with his hand two or three times, then tightens the bandage with the clamp and twists it two or three times, and let the tightening be moderate.
Because when the tightening is not moderate, either by excessive tightening it prevents the flow of blood, or if it is too loose it also prevents the flow of blood. Then after tightening, the patient should rub both hands together.
Until the veins swell and become visible to the touch, then the surgeon should wipe the lancet with a little of old oil, particularly, then he places his left index finger on the same vein under the spot where he intends to cut slightly so that the vein does not escape and avoids the strike. For there are veins that are like tendons and escape when cut, and some are filled with air so that when the lancet is placed on them, they lower under the lancet and deceive the surgeon, and the lancet does not open the vein; even if it opens it, the opening would be narrow.
Therefore, the surgeon should be certain and take his time with all these matters, then he should lower the lancet; if it opens the vein on that attempt, otherwise he should repeat it slightly below or above that spot quickly if the area does not swell.
If it swells or the patient is distressed, leave it for a day or two and do not tighten the bandage, as it may cause a hot swelling and he should not enter the bathhouse. Then, if desired, the bloodletting can be repeated, but if the lancet penetrates slightly and the opening is small and the flow of blood is thin.
I fear that the amount of blood you wish to let will not come out, so prepare the lancet in the same hole and be gentle on straightness, and increase the opening slightly. Do this quickly before the area swells, for in many people the area may swell at even a small incision.
If you see that it has swollen, do not return to it at all, for it will not help you. Place something with vinegar on it, as it facilitates blood flow and is better in this case than oil itself and other ointments.
Use vinegar in all your bloodletting from veins when the flow of blood is difficult. The Farroq antidote and schizonepetalum can also achieve this if applied to the area; the blood will become thinner and dissolve if it is thick.
If a large swelling occurs at the site of bloodletting, it often happens, especially for those who have not been bled before or if the vein was cut too small. Act quickly and place a sponge soaked in warm salt water on the swelling and bind it for an hour, as it will dissipate.
You should do this after the blood has fully come out from the vein itself or another vein. If there remains any blackness or greenness in the area after a few days, it will not cause harm. If you wish, apply some dissolved aloes and bitterness to it.
Or apply some juice of fuddlej or the like. Swelling and nodules often occur after bleeding the basilic vein, so place your hand on it. If you find it softens when you press it, then it is a bad nodule; be careful not to apply anything we mentioned to it.
For sometimes blood from an artery may flow from it, but dress it with what constricts to solidify the area, then treat him with all treatments until he recovers. It is appropriate to let out blood from every person according to his strength and what appears dominant in the color of the blood.
If the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red. Similarly, if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thin. Likewise, if it is sharp, let it flow until its sharpness subsides. It is appropriate for one who is full and strong and needs to have blood drawn all at once.
One should widen the bloodletting vein and the lancet should be wide. For those who are weak, it is the opposite. It is appropriate to draw the blood in several instances and for the hole to be narrow. The best method for bloodletting is to make a slanted, twisted cut, not stitched.
This method of bloodletting is safe from bleeding and from severing a nerve, and it is better and more secure than bloodletting across the width or length. For those who faint during bloodletting, it is appropriate to give them something to eat before bloodletting, such as bread soaked in pomegranate juice or honey.
If he is feverish, let the blood in three or four times. If his temperament is cold, let him take before bloodletting bread soaked in hyacinth drink or in fragranced honey drink with afavieh or in a good-smelling herbaceous drink.
If fainting occurs during bloodletting and the cause is excessive loss of blood, it is appropriate to give him meat broth and a light herbaceous drink, use fragrant camphor on him, and rub his chest with it. Use all that we have mentioned in the section on fainting.
That which results from bloodletting, and as for he who wishes to refresh his arm and release blood again, it is suitable for him whose vein was opened for much bloodletting and whose strength is weak that the blood be released little by little according to his strength over consecutive days.
And as for he who wishes to refresh his arm and release blood again and whose body is strong, let him do so after seven or nine hours from the first opening. And as for he who wants to attract blood from his body to the opposite side to which it has leaned, it is suitable that he be refreshed on the second or third day.
And as for he in whom the blood is abundant, having become hot and intense and caused fever, it is suitable that the blood be removed all at once and a large quantity be taken out and the incision widened until fainting occurs after you have attended to all the conditions of bloodletting. And place your hand on his pulse while the blood is flowing to prevent death instead of fainting, for that often happens if the bloodletter is ignorant and neglect occurs. And it is not suitable when you want to release the arm and let blood again.
And if the vein's mouth has closed and it is difficult for blood to come out, do not poke it forcefully or twist strongly, as that is very bad. Rather, either leave it until you bleed him again, or use the scalpel blade to remove what of the blood has congealed in the vein's mouth.
Or apply to it some salt dissolved in water, or apply to it some Farouk antidote or chickpea, and poke it gently until the blood flows. If the vein has become swollen, leave it.
Do not touch it until the swelling subsides, but if necessity calls for bleeding again and it is imperative, then either incise above that place or incise in the other arm or in another vein.
As for incising the arm vein, it is used instead of the basilic and cephalic veins if they are not found or are hidden, as it is composed of both. The method of incision is to have the patient immerse their hand in hot water until the joint turns red and the vein becomes clearly visible, then bind above it slightly with a moderate tightness.
Then incise the vein slightly obliquely, neither across nor lengthwise, and let the cut be wide. Your incision should be slightly above the wrist joint. If the blood does not flow out easily, immerse the hand again in a container of hot water and allow the blood to flow into the water.
Until you reach the amount you need. If you are in the summer days, you may not need to reimmerse the hand in hot water. Most often, making the blood flow into hot water is done in winter. Incising this vein is safer than all other veins. Because there is no harmful vein or nerve beneath it. As for incising the basilic vein of the right hand, it is beneficial for liver ailments. The method of incision is to bind the wrist with a bandage or hold it with your hand after immersing it in hot water until the vein swells.
Because there is no harmful vein or nerve beneath it. As for incising the basilic vein of the right hand, it is beneficial for liver ailments. The method of incision is to bind the wrist with a bandage or hold it with your hand after immersing it in hot water until the vein swells. It then becomes very apparent to the touch. Incise it slightly obliquely, and even if you completely cut it off, it will not harm it at all. Be careful not to delve too deeply with the lancet as there is the nerve of the fingers beneath it, and the area is devoid of flesh. Then return the hand to the hot water.
And leave the blood to flow through it, for if you do not immerse it in hot water, the blood will coagulate at the mouth of the vein and prevent its flow. When you have extracted enough blood, apply fat and salt to the vein so that it does not close quickly.
And you should do the same with every narrow branch. As for tying off the left hand, it is beneficial for spleen ailments. Do the same in its ligation as you did with the second one equally. As for ligating the superficial vein, its benefit is for diseases in the lower body, such as uterus ailments.
And for the retention of menstruation, kidney diseases, chronic leg and calf ulcers, and similar ailments, the method of ligating is to have him immerse his leg in hot water and apply massage until the veins dilate, then bind above the ankle joint with a tourniquet, placing it on the vein located towards the big toe.
And it branches out in the foot into many branches, so ligate it in its widest branch or at the ankle where they converge, which is better and safer. If you ligate it in the front of the foot, be cautious of the nerves beneath it in the sole of the foot.
Make the ligation in a way that it is offset as if you were going to amputate it, and let the incision be oblique. If the blood does not flow out easily, have him immerse his leg in hot water and leave the blood to flow until it is drained. If the ligature misses the vein on the first attempt, try again.
Let him try the ligation a little higher up, for the area is safe and nothing harmful should be feared if you are cautious of the nerve as we said. Do the same with the superficial vein of the other leg equally. As for the sciatic vein, its location is as we have said, at the heel on the outer side.
The benefit of cupping for hip pain if it is due to hot blood, and the method of cupping is that the patient enters the bath and hastens, and ties his leg from the hip to above the instep with four fingers' width using a thin long headband, for it will not be apparent otherwise.
When it appears, cup it in whatever condition you find it, either by displacement which is better, or cut it off entirely or split it open, for its location is healthy. It is very slight in most people, so if you do not find it.
If it does not appear at all to the sense, then cup some of its branches, which appear on the back of the foot towards the little toe and the ring toe, and be careful of the nerves, and let out as much blood as you desire.
Then loosen the tie and place cotton on the cupping site, and bind the area tightly, for it will heal quickly.
Chapter Ninety-Six.
On cupping and how to use it.
Cupping vessels may be made of horns, wood, copper, or glass. Cupping can be performed in two ways: one is cupping with bleeding and the other is cupping without bleeding.
And this cupping without bleeding can be performed in two ways.
The leeches for the two cheeks, which are both sides of the neck; the leeches for the chin, which is below the lower jaw of the mouth; the leeches for the shoulders; the leeches for the heels at the end of the buttocks; the leeches for the hips, which are the middle of the arms; the leeches for the legs; the leeches for the calves.
Cupping only attracts blood from the thin veins spread in the flesh, and for this reason, it does not weaken as bleeding does. It is not appropriate to use cupping, whether with fire or without, in any of the diseases that result from fullness until the body has been completely purged.
If there is a need for cupping due to illness or as a routine practice, we use it at any time, whether at the beginning of the month, at the end, in the middle, or at any other time.
This is because there are people for whom when the blood increases to the point where it needs to be released through cupping, they feel heaviness and headache in their head. Some feel fullness and redness in their face, head, and neck. Others feel itching on their face and sides, and darkness and irritation in their eyes. There are also those who scratch the area that was cupped.
Some laugh excessively, some find the taste of blood in their mouth and their gums bleed, spitting out blood. Others sleep a lot, and some see blood, redness, killings, wounds, and similar things in their dreams. Whenever we observe any of these symptoms...
Especially if it is in the middle third of the month, we recommend cupping after two or three hours have passed since noon. As for the benefit of spot cupping, it helps with heaviness in the head and fluid running into the eyes.
But it should be done after completely purging the body. This cupping can substitute for bloodletting from the temple. It is warned against using it by one who has a cold brain or has had an apoplexy, as it would greatly harm him.
Therefore, it should not be used by the elderly and those who have cold diseases in their heads, and those who are addicted to it may develop forgetfulness.
Therefore, it is advisable to instruct the cupper to lower the cup slightly downward to avoid causing forgetfulness. As for the cupping of the shoulder area, it can substitute for bloodletting from the pterygoid and basilic veins.
Therefore, it is beneficial for asthma, shortness of breath, respiratory distress, coughing, and fullness. The cupping of the shoulder area should be slightly raised because if it is placed lower, it may cause weakness in the heart and stomach.
As for the cupping of the axillae, it is beneficial for headaches, eye diseases, migraines, throat constriction, and toothache at the roots of the teeth. It can substitute for bloodletting from the basilic vein. You should instruct the cupper not to insert his hand deeply with the lancet so as not to cut an artery and cause bleeding.
As for the cupping under the chin, it is beneficial for mouth ulcers, gum diseases, and other similar ailments in the mouth. It can substitute for bloodletting from the veins in the lips. As for the cupping of the shoulders, it is helpful for palpitations caused by fullness and heat.
As for the cupping of the two sides below the ribs, it is beneficial for what bloodletting from the three veins—basilic, pterygoid, and temporal—can treat, because it draws blood from all those thin veins in the flesh, which in turn draw from thicker veins until the suction reaches the three major veins.
It is necessary to instruct the cupper not to be excessive in cupping because the area is devoid of flesh and beneath it are nerves and blood vessels. As for the single cupping which is performed on the coccyx, it is beneficial for hemorrhoids of the rectum and sores below.
It is necessary to instruct the cupper that the cup should be large and made of brass because the area requires strong suction and perhaps a glass cup might break and require much cupping. As for the cups on the legs, they notably reduce swelling.
Because it attracts blood from all over the body and is beneficial for chronic pains in the kidneys, uterus, and bladder, it induces menstruation and helps with boils and abscesses, and serves as a substitute for bloodletting from the veins and arteries. However, it greatly weakens the body and causes fainting in most people. The benefit of cupping the veins is similar to the benefit of cupping the legs.
The method of placing the cups is to first place the cup empty and suction moderately. Do not keep the cups in place for long; instead, place them quickly and remove them quickly so that the mixtures can be evenly applied to the area. Continue repeating this process until you see the area turn red and open up.
When the redness of the blood appears, then you should perform cupping and gradually suction again. Then observe the condition of the bodies; for those whose flesh is delicate and pores are loose, it is advisable to perform cupping once only so that the area does not become ulcerated.
You should instruct the cupper to widen the incision slightly and deepen it a little, and to adjust the suction gently with a delicate movement. If there is thickness in the blood, it is advisable to perform cupping twice: in the first instance, to open a path for the thin blood and its fluid, and in the second, to thoroughly extract the thick blood.
If the blood is very turbid, a third leeching should be repeated to reach the limit. In general, if we want to remove a small amount of blood, one leeching suffices; if we wish to remove more blood, we use more leechings. If we determine that the blood is thick.
It is necessary to perform a deep bloodletting, and the moderate limit for bloodletting is only the depth of the skin. What should be used with cupping are ointments, water, and what the person undergoing cupping should avoid. As for those whose skin is thick, hard, dark, and has narrow pores.
It is advisable to anoint the places for cupping with opening, softening, and dissolving ointments. If it is summer, then use ointments like that of khirya, or violet ointment, or sweet almond ointment, or pumpkin seed ointment.
If it is winter, then use ointments like narcissus ointment, lily ointment, chamomile ointment, or colchicum ointment, and the like. If the humors are thick and cold, then the ointment should be mastic ointment, sparrow ointment, cow ointment, cyperus ointment, or similar.
If the person undergoing cupping has wide pores and tender flesh, it is advisable to avoid using ointments. These individuals should wash the cupping marks after cupping with rose water or cold water or wolf grape water or pumpkin water or senna water, and the like. As for those whose blood is very moist.
They should wash the cupping marks with vinegar or water of sage and buckthorn, and the like. As for those whose humors are thick, they should wash the cupping marks with old wine or mastic water or cooked cyperus or chamomile, and the like. It is advisable to avoid cupping in the bathhouse and immediately after bathing.
It should be used after exiting the bath by one or two hours and it is not appropriate for anyone to sleep after cupping. It is appropriate to manage the cupped and bled person before and after cupping.
You should first look if the cupped or bled person is bilious and if his blood tends to be sharp and inflamed, then it is appropriate for him to take cooling things like pomegranate, chicory with vinegar, lettuce, sage, and sherbet, and the like. His foods should be light dishes, sheep meat soups, stews, and similar items.
And if his temperament is cold, it is appropriate to give him honey syrup or sage seed drink and he should take moderate aromatic wine that is between old and new. He should be advised to eat less and his food should be light dishes, quail, skylarks, and young pigeon stews. It is appropriate for the drink on the day of cupping and bleeding to be more than food.
It may be appropriate to give some people in certain times the Farouq antidote or musk medicine or saltha before cupping and bleeding or after it to strengthen the main organs and thin the blood. It should not be given to those who are feverish.
As for the cupping that is done without scarification, it is the cupping placed on the liver, spleen, breasts, abdomen, navel, kidney area, and hip joint because these organs cannot tolerate scarification. It is intended either to draw blood from one organ to another.
Like placing the cups on the breasts for the condition of nasal congestion, or using them to expel a cold air that has settled in an organ, such as placing the cups on the abdomen and navel. This loosens the organ, warms it, and relieves pain by expelling that air.
And it may be placed on the kidneys if there is an obstruction or stone, for by its strength in drawing, it may open the obstruction or remove the stone from its place. It does the same when placed on the liver and spleen at a gas that causes distress within them, and these cupping vessels may be used empty with suction only.
And it may be used with fire, and it may be used filled with lukewarm water for ailments of the eyes. This is done by filling the cupping vessel, let it be large, with hot water alone or with water in which some herbs suitable for this have been boiled.
Then it is placed filled on the area, held in place, removed, and repeated as needed, and this is a picture of the cupping vessel used with fire:.
Its mouth should be two fingers wide when opened as we have depicted, and its depth should be half a finger-breadth. There should be a small hole on its side, about halfway, the size of what a needle can enter. It is made from Chinese brass or yellow brass with thick edges.
It should be smooth, flat, and polished so as not to harm the organ when placed upon it. There should be a transverse tube of brass or iron in its center where the candle for fire is placed. This cupping vessel can also be made larger than described or smaller according to the diseases.
And we will describe its use, for the cupping vessels used for children and thin individuals are different from those used for men and obese bodies. As for how to place this cupping vessel with fire on the organ, light a wick from cotton or a small candle made of wax, and place it on the center of the tube that is in the middle of the cupping vessel.
Let the fire rise upwards towards the bottom of the cupping vessel so that the patient's body does not burn, then place it on the limb with a finger over the hole we mentioned until when we hold the cupping vessel no longer needed, remove the finger.
The steam comes out through that hole and the cupping vessel is dissolved in place, then light the wick as described and repeat if necessary. As for the cupping vessel used for treating hemorrhoids with water, it does not have a solid rod or a hole.
It is used by filling it with water and placing it on the limb only, and this is its shape:.
And this cupping vessel is better when it is large to hold a lot of water.
Chapter Ninety-Seven.
On Attaching Leeches.
Leeches are mostly used in parts where cupping cannot be applied, either because they are too small like the lip and gum, or because the limb is devoid of flesh like the fingers and nose and the like.
The way to use them is to select leeches from clean fresh water free from contamination, then leave them in fresh water for a day and night until they become hungry and there is nothing left in their insides. Then the body is first purged by venesection or cupping, then the affected limb is wiped.
Until it turns red, then place the leech on it; when it is full, it will fall off. If possible, apply cupping to the area, as it is more beneficial. Otherwise, wash the area with vinegar and then with plenty of water, massage it, and squeeze it. If bleeding continues after the leech falls off and this is a discharge, soak a piece of linen in cold water.
Place it from above until the discharge stops, and if the blood flows excessively, sprinkle powdered zaj, or unripe figs, or similar constrictives until the bleeding stops, or apply peeled split fennel to the area.
Leave it until the fennel sticks to the area, for the blood will stop. If leeches need to be reapplied, do not use the same leech if possible to use another one. If the leech refuses to attach, then wipe the area with fresh blood.
Or pierce a needle in the area until some blood comes out, then place [the leech]. For if it senses some blood, it will stick to its place. When you want to remove it, sprinkle some onion, salt, or ash on it, for it will fall off its place.
The Third Chapter.
On Fractures.
This chapter also contains useful information needed in the practice of medicine, and it is about setting fractures and dislocations that occur in bones.
Know, my children, that there are ignorant physicians and laypeople who may claim this chapter, those who have never browsed through the ancients' books on it or read a single letter from them.
Because of this reason, this branch of knowledge has become non-existent in our country, and I have never come across anyone who is proficient in it at all. I have gained what I have from it through prolonged reading of the books of the predecessors and my insistence on understanding them until I extracted that knowledge from them, then I dedicated myself to practice and experience throughout my life.
And I have depicted for you in this chapter all that my knowledge encompasses. And my experience with it has passed after I brought it close to you, freed it from the pitfalls of lengthiness, condensed it as much as possible, clarified it to the utmost, and presented to you many illustrations of the tools used in it.
For it is an addition to the clarification as I did in the previous two chapters, and there is no power except by Allah the Most High, the Great.
The first chapter.
Since there are summaries and essentials regarding the matter of broken bones that should be presented, before we begin to mention the broken and dislocated limbs one by one, it is appropriate to mention some sayings and sections at the beginning of this chapter. They first require you to understand them and grasp their true nature, you and whoever is eager to learn this noble craft besides you.
I say that whenever a fracture, dislocation, swelling, or fall occurs in someone, you should first quickly attend to their bloodletting or purging, or both. Unless there is a hindrance, such as weakness of strength, or if the one who experienced it is a child or an old feeble person, or if the time is extremely hot or extremely cold.
Then, limit their diet to cold legumes, poultry, and goat meat, and avoid drinks, heavy meats, overeating, and any food that fills the veins with blood until you are certain that there will be no swelling and no further accumulation of fluid in the affected area.
Then the patient should return to his initial regimen which he is accustomed to. When the broken bone begins to knit, it is appropriate that the patient be fed foods that are abundant, thick, strong, and adhesive in nature, such as dates, rice, heads of animals, shanks, and the stomachs of cattle. And eggs, soft fish, thick drinks, and the like, for by this regimen the setting of the fracture will be faster and better. Know that broken bones in strong men and the elderly cannot reconnect and heal to their original nature ever.
Due to the dryness and hardness of their bones, they may not reconnect and heal. However, what is extremely flexible, like the bones of small children, can connect and heal. But nature grows something on the broken bone from all sides that resembles glue in thickness, sticking together and holding until they adhere to each other.
It binds them together until it reaches the utmost strength and security as it was initially, so that nothing hinders him in his actions.
For this reason, the patient's diet should consist of foods that are strong, adhesive, and thick, as we have said. Know that fractures vary in type according to the different parts of the body because a fracture of the leg bone is different from a fracture of the skull bone, and a fracture of the rib bone is different from a fracture of the spine.
And similarly, all other parts of the body differ from one another. We will discuss each type of fracture in detail in its own section separately. The type of bone fracture may also vary on its own.
For it may be that his fracture is a splitting without any shards occurring, and it may be that his fracture is along the bone, and its fracture has shards and protrusions, some cleansed and others not cleansed, and the fracture occurs with a wound and perforation in the skin, and the fracture may be a slight crack.
For each type has a specific method in setting it, as will be detailed in its place. Among the things by which bone fracture is recognized are its bending, confusion, appearance to the senses, and its crackling when you touch it with your hand.
When there is no apparent bending, no crackling, and you do not feel disturbance when you touch the bone, and the patient does not experience much pain, then there is no fracture; it could be a sprain or a slight bruise or a minor crack. Thus, it should not be moved by pulling or prodding at all.
Rather, apply to it the medicines that will be mentioned later, which are suitable for the condition, then bind it gently. Know that if the bone is broken and split in two without any shards occurring, each part has moved away from its companion.
You should promptly set it and align it before a hot swelling occurs. If a hot swelling does occur, leave it for days until the hot swelling subsides, then align it as gently and skillfully as you can.
Know that setting and aligning it is easier than with a bone in which shards have occurred. Then, bind it as will be described later. If the bone has shards, it is necessary to pull the broken limb from both sides, whether it is an arm or a leg.
Either with your hands if the member is small, or with two ropes, or with the rope and hand. Place the member on an even surface in its natural form so that when a part of the broken bone extends, then trim those excesses to their places with all the cunning and gentleness you can manage.
Strive your best to not cause pain or suffering to the patient through your actions. Aim to align one of the bones with its counterpart in the best possible form, and during this time, touch and feel them with your hand. If you see anything amiss, correct and adjust it to the best of your ability.
Beware of excessive stretching and strong probing, as many unskilled people do. Often, their actions result in severe swelling or deformity of the member, which I have witnessed from them many times.
After alignment, perfection, and securing, keep that member still and at ease. Instruct the patient not to move it during their waking hours, sleep, turning, restlessness, bowel movements, and all other activities to the best of their ability, and ensure its position is one where pain is avoided.
This is because whenever he feels pain or discomfort in the position of the member, he should move it to another position where there is no pain. At the same time, ensure that its position is level and straight.
So that no deformity occurs in the member when it heals. As for how to secure a broken limb, I will describe it to you. Know that broken limbs differ in size and shape; those that are smaller include the arm, fingers, ankle, and the like.
It is necessary that the bandages be soft and gentle, and for those areas that are tough like the thigh, back, and chest, the bandages should be broad and strong because the wide binding adheres to the large limb and tightens it evenly from all sides without any imbalance.
Then after you finish leveling, you begin to apply the corresponding paint. With a gentle flexing of the area of the fracture, you then begin to wrap the bandage around the fracture itself three or four times, depending on what the limb requires, and you tighten the bandage slightly with your hand, then extend it to the upper part of the fractured area.
With less tension than you applied to the fractured area, you then move the wrapping slightly away from the fracture and gradually loosen the tension until you achieve a suitable position. Then take another bandage and wrap it around the fractured area as well.
Wrap several times, then continue wrapping towards the lower side of the fracture. The tension and looseness of this wrap should be as described for the first upper wrap. Place some gentle flexing material or cloth between the wraps to straighten the deformity of the fracture.
If there is a deformity, place something to correct it; otherwise, leave it empty. Then wrap another bandage over it. Adjust the tight bandages over these wraps immediately if there is no swelling or hot inflammation in the limb.
If there is swelling or hot inflammation, apply something to alleviate the swelling and reduce the inflammation. Leave it for several days, then secure the bandages之后应为：then secure the splints. The splints should be made of broad, wisely carved half-reeds or they can be made from colander wood.
Which is made from pine or palm fronds or reed or linen and the like that are available of these, and let the width of each splint be in this form and exactly this shape.
Unless the splint that is placed on the fracture itself is slightly thicker and wider than the other splints. As for the length of the splint, it is made according to what is appropriate for the size of the fractured limb, whether large or small. The form of the splint:
Then bind the splints with another bandage according to the same tightness as your first binding, then secure it from above with tight threads according to what we mentioned about the tightness, which is that your binding at the site of the fracture should be tighter. And the further away from the fracture, the looser the binding should be.
The threads should be of moderate thickness and fineness, and they should preferably be made of wet linen, because if the threads are too thick, as I have seen ignorant people do when they make their threads from twisted linen strips, it is a great mistake.
Because binding with them falls outside moderation, and very thin threads are also unsuitable because you will not achieve the tightness needed. There should not be less than a finger's width between each splint.
If the patient is bothered by the edges of the splints after they have been correctly tightened, place soft wool or loose cotton under them so that nothing causes discomfort. If the fracture is accompanied by a wound and there is a break in the skin, we will address this separately.
And know that not every broken limb should be bandaged with splints from the first day. For if the limb is large, splints should not be applied to it until after five or seven days or more, according to your assurance against the occurrence of hot swelling.
And this is the description of the bandages that were used by the early practitioners for fractures, dislocations, and contusions. A general brief bandaging method that treats fractures and is suitable for most temperaments, especially children and women, as it does not tend to be excessively hot or cold.
It involves taking the flour dust from the millstone, which adheres to the walls of the mill when the mill is in motion. Knead it as it is without sifting it, using egg whites, and make its consistency neither too thick nor too thin, then apply it.
Description of another bandaging method for setting fractures, dislocations, and contusions: take marsh mallow, resin, aqqaqiya, rasan, mugwast, and sugar—ten drachms of each; also take vinegar and ginger—five drachms of each; from althaea, twenty drachms; and from Armenian or Roman clay, twenty drachms. Grind all the ingredients and mix them with althaea water or egg white if the patient's temperament is hot. Use this bandage, for it is well-composed, quickly sets broken bones, and is suitable for most people due to its balance.
Description of another bandage that is also beneficial for fractures and contusions: take mugwast, marsh mallow, and white chaste tree—ten drachms of each; vinegar and ginger—five drachms of each; aqqaqiya—six drachms; Armenian clay—twenty drachms. Grind all finely, sift, knead with water or egg white, and use it.
A description of a bandage for joints and bones dislocated from their places, which alleviates the pain associated with them, as well as bone fractures, is taken: white wool is dipped in vinegar and cooked oil, then applied to the area. This bandage does not have healing power.
However, it is excellent in reducing hot swelling and alleviating pains particularly. A description of another bandage that mends the broken bone: take dark fig leaves and wild poppy leaves, grind them all together, and apply them moistly. A description of another concise bandage used when setting a fractured bone.
And when you want to reduce the remaining swelling, take equal parts of the root of chicory, camomile, purple foxglove, and ground celery seeds. Grind all together and knead with honey if the limb is not inflamed. If it is inflamed, knead with coriander water or plain water and use it.
A description of another bandage that is stronger in reducing swelling than the first one, used when solid swelling occurs after setting a bone: take equal parts of chicory root, flaxseed, fenugreek, marigold, mastic, purple foxglove, and camomile.
Grind all together and knead with decoction water or fresh water or honey, each according to the heat of the limb and its cooling. As for Hippocrates, he did not mention in his book that anything should be placed on the broken limb when setting it.
Except for the cerate made from wax and oil alone, it should be described as moderate between thickness and thinness. As for Galen, he suggested placing things that are drying with some heat, such as salt, myrrh, frankincense, and the like, on the broken limb when setting it.
A description of a bandage that is beneficial for weakness and pain: take wood ash, chickpeas, human hair or bird feathers, colocynth, and salt in equal parts. Grind them, sieve, knead, and apply as a bandage. As for the amount that the binding should remain.
Then it is undressed, which means you observe; if the injured does not experience pain or itching and the broken bone does not move from its place, do not undress it for many days. If there is severe itching or disturbing pain or swelling in the area, then it should be undressed.
Hasten to undress it at the time and do not delay this at all, remove the bandage, then take a soft cloth or a seaweed sponge that is moist, dip it in lukewarm water, and wash the area with it until the itching and pain subside, then leave the limb to rest for an hour.
Then apply clean wool soaked in vinegar and oil or rose fat, bind it for a night to prevent inflammation and to subdue the swelling and pain of the limb. Afterwards, return it to gentle binding with light bandaging without tightening it as you did initially.
Tenderly care for it until it heals. If you see that the swelling, redness, pain, and all other symptoms have completely disappeared and you need bandaging and binding again, repeat as you did initially. If none of the mentioned issues occur in the limb.
Do not remove it until three, four, five, or seven days have passed; it may even be left for twenty days. All of this depends on the condition of the limb as you observe it, as we have said, until the fracture is secure and the flesh around it is nearly healed.
Also increase the tension at that time more than your first tension altogether, and also increase the thickness of the patient's diet as previously mentioned. If you see that the site of the fracture has dried out and become thin more than it should, then know that the nourishment is prevented from reaching it.
Wash it with lukewarm water every time you change the dressing, and let this be done every three days. Slightly reduce the tension, as this action allows nourishment to flow to the limb, promoting quick healing. As for what the ignorant among the splitters do, which is to break the limb again.
If it does not set properly the first time and sets crooked, then this is an error in their action and a great deception. If it were correct, the predecessors would have mentioned it in their books and practiced it, but I have not seen any trace of it from any of them at all. And the correct approach is not to follow it.
The Second Chapter.
On incidental fractures in the head.
Incidental fractures in the head are varied, their forms are different, and their causes are diverse. Some fractures result from a sword blow and may involve the complete splitting of the bone until it reaches the membrane beneath the bone. Just as an axe does to wood.
For this reason, this type of fracture is called an axe fracture. Alternatively, the sword may cut part of the bone and only split its surface without penetrating to the end, and this type of fracture is called a partial extraction. The wounds of these fractures can be either large or small.
And there are fractures that are comminuted or contused, and their cause is a blow with a stone or falling onto a stone or the like. This type of fracture can either be penetrating, approaching the membrane beneath the bone, or it may occur on the surface of the bone.
And the wound of these two fractures can also be either large or small, and there is a fracture that is hidden in the bone in the thinness of the hair, which is a slight crack.
For this reason, this type of fracture is called hairline. Among them is a fracture caused by a fall or impact with a stone or the like, where the surface of the bone indents inward, making the area concave, similar to what happens to a copper pot when it is struck and part of it indents inward.
This is most common in the soft skull bones, such as the skulls of children. All these types of fractures may have detached fragments that are exposed or not exposed, and we will discuss the treatment of all this in its proper place. We identify all these types of fractures through examination.
And examine it with probes and remove the rotten flesh from it. As for the hairline type, it is identified by examining the bone, rubbing it, and涂上墨水，骨折处会显现出黑色。至于骨折的治疗，首先要观察病人的症状。
If you see symptoms that clearly indicate fear, such as vomiting bile, stretching, loss of consciousness, cessation of speech, fainting, acute fever, protruding and red eyes, and other similar symptoms, then do not approach the patient or treat them, for death is inevitable with these symptoms in most cases.
And if you see symptoms that do not alarm you and you hope for his safety, then at that time begin his treatment. That is, if the wounded person comes to you right after being wounded and this happened in the winter days.
It is necessary to strive to remove the bone before the fourteenth day in any case. And if it is in the summer days, you should hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day so that the membrane under the bone does not spoil, thus causing the symptoms we described.
If the bone fracture has reached the membrane covering the brain and there is fragmentation and crushing, it is necessary to cut off the crushed and fragmented part as I describe to you, which is to shave the head of the injured patient.
And expose the bone in whatever way is feasible for you, according to the shape of the wound and what is easier on the patient. If bleeding or a hot swelling appears when exposing the bone, deal with it as appropriate.
That is, fill the area with cloth soaked in a mixture of wine and rose oil, and clean the wound until the swelling subsides and bleeding is controlled. Then proceed to set and extract the bone, which can be done in one of two ways.
One method is to cut the bone with a fine, narrow-bladed cutter, and this is its form:
Then use another cutter after this one, slightly wider than the previous one, and this is its form:
Then use another cutter, even wider than the second one. It is necessary to have a set of different cutters, some wider than others and some shorter than others, with extremely sharp edges. They should be made of Indian iron or good steel.
Use gentleness when tapping on the fracture to prevent the head from being shaken and thus harmed. If the bone is strong and solid, it should be drilled around before using the saws with drills that are called non-penetrating drills, and they are named non-penetrating drills.
Because it does not exceed the limit of the skull bone to what is beyond it, for the drill has a round edge below its sharp point, similar to a collar or small circle that prevents it from sinking and exceeding the thickness of the bone.
You should have a variety of these drills, with each one suitable for the thickness of that bone, so that you have a drill whose sharp point length and shortness match the thickness of that skull. This is the image of three types. Of the drills, there is a large, medium, and small:
As for the manner of drilling around the broken bone, you place the drill on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated. Then you move the drill to another location and ensure that there is a distance between each hole equal to the thickness of a thread or similar.
Then, you cut with the saw between each two holes and do this with utmost gentleness as we said until you remove the bone either by hand or with some other tool from the instruments you have prepared for this purpose.
Like glue and delicate forceps, you should be extremely careful that the drill or saw does not touch any part of the membrane. If you have removed the bone and it has healed from the membrane, which was attached to it, and you have extracted it, you should then clean it thoroughly.
And smooth out the roughness that remains in the bone with another tool similar to a cutter, except it should be thinner and gentler than other cutters. If any small bones or splinters remain, take them out gently with the tools you have.
Then treat the wound with bandages and ointments which will be mentioned. As for the other aspect of the work, it is extremely simple and far from danger, as Galen mentioned and greatly praised. This is his statement. You should first begin by exposing the part of the bone where the fracture is most severe and prominent. Once you have exposed that part, place the end of this lens-shaped cutter underneath it, and here is its shape:
The lens part of it should be smooth and not cut anything, while the sharp part is on its long sides as you see, so that the lens part rests against the membrane and the sharp face of the cutter is against the bone. Then strike the cutter from one side.
With a small mallet until you cut all the bone gently as it turns, and you are safe from any fearful accident occurring to the membrane, even if the surgeon were the most ignorant and timid of people. Yes, even if he were drowsy.
If any part of the membrane remains attached to the bone in some places, scrape it off with the edge of the lens-shaped cutter itself and remove it gently, for it can be removed without harm or fear.
And if the bone fracture has not penetrated to the membrane and only the surface of the bone is broken, leaving roughness and fine splinters, you should remove that roughness and extract those splinters with delicate chisels that have been prepared in various sizes so that you can use the most suitable and appropriate one for each place according to what the work guides you to.
The nature of the broken bone and its shape, and it is necessary that you first use the widest saw for the bone in your set, then use a finer one after it, and continue doing this gradually until you use the finest and thinnest of them all.
As for other small incisions and delicate fractures, it is necessary to treat each one according to what leads to its healing, which is something not hidden from anyone who has the slightest skill in this craft and understands what we have written and explained about larger fractures.
If the membrane remains exposed when you extract the bone, it is advisable to take a piece of linen cloth according to the size of the wound, dip it in rose oil, and place it on the mouth of the wound. Then take another folded or triangular cloth. Dip it in a mixture of rose oil and place it on the first cloth. Do this as gently as possible so as not to weigh down the membrane. Then apply a wide bandage on top, but do not tighten it beyond what is necessary to hold the wound in place.
Leave it with this treatment for a day or two until you are certain that the heat and swelling have subsided, then remove it. Afterwards, use medications that help dryness, such as hawthorn root, crushed cornsilk, powdered barley, zeraunja, and the like. You should make a powder from these medications.
Sprinkle the dry powder on the wound. In general, use a medication that cleanses without stinging. Strive to keep the wound clean during treatment, free from any grease or dirt, and do not allow pus to accumulate at all.
For pus, when it gathers on the brain membrane, corrupts and spoils it, thus causing great harm to the patient; and it may occur in the skull lining when the bone is exposed, especially if its treatment is neglected.
If there is a blackness on its surface, and you find that the patient exhibits the symptoms we mentioned, then know that he will surely perish. If the blackness occurred due to a medicine applied to it, and if that medicine had the power to cause such blackness.
You should take a portion of honey and three portions of rose oil, mix them well, soak a cloth in the mixture, then apply it to the wound. Treat it with various appropriate treatments until it heals.
Chapter Three.
On the setting of the nose if it is broken.
Know that only the upper parts of the nose, which are bones, can break. The lower part is made of cartilage and does not break, but may suffer from swelling, distortion, and bruising.
If one side of the nose is broken, you should insert your little finger into the nasal opening and align the fracture from inside while using your index finger and thumb to guide it from outside until the nose returns to its natural shape. Do this gently to ensure that you do not cause pain to the patient.
If the fracture is at the top of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, you should align it with a slightly thickened blunt object. If the fracture is on both sides, do the same. It is advisable to set it within the first day of the fracture.
If possible, otherwise after the seventh or tenth day when the hot swelling subsides, then insert into the nostril's hole a wick of linen cloth if the fracture is on one side or insert two wicks if the fracture is on both sides.
Let the wick be thick enough to fill the nostril's hole, and some of the early fixators mentioned that the wick should be soaked in fat and changed every day. I do not agree with that; rather, the wick should be soaked in egg white mixed with millstone dust.
Then leave the wick until the bone heals and the cartilage hardens. You may insert quill tubes of duck feathers into the nose, wrapped in soft cloth, to better hold the nasal fracture in place without obstructing breathing.
This is not necessary if you prefer to make the wicks instead. If a hot swelling appears on the nose during your treatment, treat it with kerotie or cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil or some ointment of diachylon.
If no hot swelling appears, it is advisable to dress it externally with semolina and ground barley mixed with egg white, then place a soft bandage over it without binding the nose at all. If the nasal bones are fractured in small breaks.
Or if they are shattered, it is advisable to incise and remove them with a suitable instrument, then suture the incision and treat it with ointments that promote healing and closing of wounds. If there is a wound inside the nose, it should be treated with wicks and the use of lead tubes is recommended. Until it heals.
Chapter Four.
On the treatment of a broken lower jaw.
If the lower jaw is broken and there is no wound, examine it. If the break is only from the outside and not split into two and has not caved inwards, then its treatment is easier.
If the fracture is on the right side, you should insert the index finger of the left hand into the patient's mouth. Similarly, if the fracture is on the left side, insert the index finger of the right hand and gently raise the bony prominence of the fracture from inside to outside.
Your other hand should control the alignment from outside the bone. If the jaw fracture has split into two, it is necessary to use traction from both sides in a straight line until proper alignment is achieved. If there is any displacement of the teeth, it must be corrected.
Or if they are separated, sew them together with a thread of gold, silver, or silk as much as you hope will remain. Then place turpentine on the broken jaw, and put a folded cloth over it. Place a large, secure bandage or a piece of sole leather equal in length to the jaw over the cloth. Then bind it from above according to what seems appropriate for securing it and keeping it together so that it does not come undone. Instruct the patient to rest and remain still, and provide them with soft, easily digestible food. If you suspect any change in shape has occurred, promptly address it on the third day.
Then bind it from above according to what seems appropriate for securing it and keeping it together so that it does not come undone. Instruct the patient to rest and remain still, and provide them with soft, easily digestible food. If you suspect any change in shape has occurred, promptly address it on the third day. Then, prepare what you bandage with mill dust and egg white or with semolina flour after removing the linen from it, and place a soft cloth over the bandage. As long as that bandage sticks to it and no change occurs in the bone, leave it.
Do not remove it until it heals and the fracture strengthens. This fracture often strengthens in three weeks. If a hot swelling appears during this time, use what we have mentioned repeatedly to alleviate it until the swelling disappears.
And if the fracture is with a wound, examine it. If a fragment or fragments of bone have become detached, gently extract those fragments using whatever method you find suitable for their removal from the site. If the opening of the wound is narrow, widen it with a scalpel as needed.
Then, after you have extracted those fragments and none remain, suture the opening of the wound if it is wide. Otherwise, apply one of the ointments suitable for that purpose. Suture the wound until it heals.
Chapter Five.
On the treatment of a broken rib.
Ribs most often break from the front, near the end of the shoulder blade. The fracture can occur in one of three ways: it may break and snap into two without causing fragments, which is the easiest to treat.
Or fragments may be caused by the fracture, which is more difficult to treat. Or the fracture may occur with a wound. If the fracture does not involve a wound, prepare two assistants: one to hold the arm adjacent to the broken rib, and the other to extend the neck toward the opposite side.
Then align the fracture with your fingers until its shape is as it should be, without any protrusion or indentation. If more extension is needed, you should place a ball of cloth or wool under the armpit of the patient.
The bone should be of the size you need, extend and lift the splint, and press the ball with your hand until the fracture is aligned as it should be. If you cannot pull the end of the splint out because it has gone deep, then the patient should lie on his back.
A moderately firm pillow is placed under his armpit, and the servant presses his shoulder downward until the end of the splint that has gone deep rises up. Then, adjust and align the fracture with your fingers.
If you feel that a splinter of the bone has broken off and is moving, you should make an incision over it and gently remove that splinter. If the splinter is trapped within the bone, you must use one of the cutting instruments prepared for this purpose to extract it. After placing under the splint the device that protects the intestines, which is made of wood or iron, and this is its shape:
It resembles a spoon without any indentation, and its width should be according to the size of the bone, whether large or small. Its length should also be suitable for the task at hand. It should have two ends, one wider and the other narrower, as you see.
If the incision you made to remove the bone fragment is wide and you are not concerned about a hot swelling, then sew the edges of the wound together. If the incision is small or you fear a hot swelling, then pack the wound with cloth and bandages according to the size of the cut.
If a hot tumor appears, then soak the dressing in rose oil and vinegar or wine and apply it. As for setting the bone without any cut or incision, it is done by applying to the bone a poultice made from mill powder with egg white. Place the soft bandage on it, then put a ball under his armpit if needed. Then take a turban that is very long and its width is about a finger's breadth or so. Then apply a folded pad on the bandage and dressing. Then take a splint from a thin board. Its width should be three fingers and the same in length. Then insert it into a cloth, then place that cloth with the splint in the part of the turban that falls over the fracture site, then tie the turban tightly around the fracture as you wrap it. And wrap it around his neck and under his healthy armpit and under his affected armpit, and fold it several times on each side, as you see fit for the tension to secure the fracture firmly, which is not unknown to you.
The goal of all this is to ensure that the splint does not move from the broken bone. Therefore, you should examine the patient every day. Whenever the bandage loosens and you see that the splint has moved, correct it and tighten the bandage. Then make the patient sleep on their back and place a small pillow under their armpit when they sleep at night.
So that his arm is raised from his side, raising the clavicle fracture with the shoulder's elevation, or bind his arm to his neck. Do not remove the bandage unless an event such as itching or swelling occurs at the site, for twelve days.
Then renew the dressing if you see fit to do so. Apply traction and leave it until the clavicle fracture heals and consolidates, and it strengthens more in twenty-eight days. And it may be less than that for some people.
Chapter Six.
On the healing of a shoulder fracture. The shoulder rarely breaks at its wide part, but rather at its narrow sections. Whenever it breaks at a spot or in the middle, it can be identified by touch. The treatment should correspond to the shape and form of the fracture.
Straighten and return it to its natural shape by whatever means possible, then apply the dust of the millstone with egg whites and soft cloth, and place a folded cloth pad on top. Then secure it with a wide board splint.
Make it thin enough to cover the entire shoulder or slightly wider. If there is an indentation under the splint in any part of the shoulder, level that indentation with soft cloth until the splint lies flat. Then secure it from above with a long bandage.
Tie it firmly and ensure the splint does not move from its place. Check the bandage every day; whenever it loosens, tighten it and adjust the splint if it has moved. The patient should lie on their healthy side, and the shoulder will heal in twenty days.
It may take twenty or twenty-five days. Once this period is complete, remove the bandage safely, for it is one of the bones that does not fear fragmentation or collapse. If a bone shard protrudes and pierces under the skin, make an incision over it and extract it. And make what I mentioned for the fracture of the clavicle from soothing the hot swelling if anything of that occurs.
Chapter Seven.
On the treatment of chest fractures.
The chest may fracture in its center, though this is rare. However, its sides are more frequently fractured and shattered. Its symptoms when its center fractures include tilting downwards, severe pain, difficulty in breathing, and coughing.
And sometimes blood may be discharged, and the depression in the fractured bone becomes apparent and is not hidden to the touch. Its treatment involves having the patient lie on their back with a pillow placed between their shoulders. Then press their shoulder blades and gather the ribs from both sides with the hands, carefully aligning them as much as possible.
Continue until the bone returns to its proper shape, then apply a dressing and pressure, and place a splint made from a light plank of poplar or willow or something similar above it after wrapping it in cloth. Then carefully tie it to the fractured bone so that it does not move, and wrap the binding around in a circular manner towards the back several times, securing it tightly. Then check the binding at all times, and whenever it loosens, tighten it.
And if necessity calls for its removal due to infection, pain, or swelling in the area, then promptly remove it, take off the dressing, and treat whatever has occurred with appropriate treatment, then reapply the dressing if you deem it necessary. Bind it and keep it tightly bandaged until it heals.
Chapter Eight.
On the setting of ribs when broken, know that the breakage occurs in the thick parts adjacent to the back, and their ends from the front are subject to compression because they are cartilaginous. The knowledge of this is not hidden when examined by the fingers.
Set it by aligning the fracture with the fingers in the most effective manner until the shape is as it should be, then bandage it and bind the broken bone with a splint if necessary. If the rib fracture leans inward, it will cause severe pain to the patient.
And it swells like the swelling that occurs in those with pleurisy, because the bone swells the membrane, and difficulty in breathing, coughing, and expelling much blood also occur. This is difficult to treat, and early practitioners devised many remedies for it.
Some have said that the patient's diet should include foods that cause inflation and gases so that the belly swells, expands, and pushes the fracture outward. We dislike this so as not to reinforce the occurrence of a hot swelling if it has not already happened; if it has occurred, it will increase and confirm it.
Some have said that a leech should be placed on the area and then suctioned strongly, which seems more appropriate; however, there is concern that the leech might draw too much from the weakened area. Some have also said that the area should be covered with wool soaked in hot oil.
And the padding is placed between the ribs until it fills, so that the bandage lies flat when wrapped around, then treat the patient with the treatment for wounds from food and medicine, if the patient suffers severe distress that he cannot endure. And the bone was piercing the membrane painfully, and we feared for the patient, so it should be that we incise at the location and expose the broken rib, then place under it the device which protects the peritoneum, which has been previously described, and cut the bone gently and remove it.
Then, if the wound is large, we bring the edges of the wound together with stitches and treat it with ointments until it heals. If during this time a hot swelling appears, act quickly, soak the padding in rose oil, apply it to the area, and treat the patient internally with what alleviates the swelling as well.
And he should lie on the side that makes sleeping easier until he heals.
Chapter Nine.
On the treatment of spinal and neck fractures.
As for the bones of the neck, if they are fractured, which is rare, they more often suffer from contusion. The same applies to the vertebrae of the back. If this happens to someone and you want to know whether they will heal or not. Then observe, if you see that his hands have become weak, numb, and lifeless, and he is unable to move them, stretch them, or clench them, and when you pinch them or prick them with a needle he does not feel it and finds no pain in them, know that he will not heal in most cases, and he is doomed.
And if he moves them and feels biting and pricking in them, know that the bone marrow is safe and the patient will recover with treatment. If the same affects the spinal thorn and you want to know if it will also recover or not.
Look at his legs, if you see that they have relaxed and what happened to the hands has occurred in them, then when he lies on his back, gas and feces are expelled involuntarily, and when he lies on his stomach, urine is expelled involuntarily. And if he lies on his back and wants to urinate but is unable to do so, know that he is terminal, so do not bother with his treatment. If none of these symptoms appear, the condition is milder. The treatment for what has occurred is to aim to relieve the hot swelling.
Place on the affected vertebra rose oil alone or mixed with roasted egg yolks. Apply this three times a day until the hot swelling subsides. Then apply one of the strengthening, drying poultices to the area, bind it tightly with a bandage, and order him to rest and stay still.
He should only sleep on the side that does not cause pain until he recovers. If a fragment of bone or something similar has separated within the fracture, it is necessary to cut the skin and extract that bone. Then, if the wound is large, bring the edges of the wound together with sutures, then treat it with unguents that promote healing until it recovers. If the last bone of the coccyx, which is the tailbone, breaks, you should insert the thumb of the left hand into the anus.
And the broken bone is aligned with the other hand according to what can be managed and the alignment is achieved, then apply the bandage and splint if necessary, then secure it.
If you feel a fractured splinter in it, incise over it and extract it, and treat the wound as previously described until it heals.
Chapter Ten.
On the treatment of hip fracture.
The vertebrae rarely break, but if they do break, the fracture occurs at their ends, they split lengthwise, and lean inward. The patient will experience pain in the affected area, swelling, and numbness in the leg on the side of the fracture.
Its treatment is to run your hand over it until you locate the fracture and understand its shape. If the fracture is only at its ends, then align that fracture according to what you can manage in terms of alignment until it resembles its natural shape.
If the fracture is lengthwise or has leaned inward, then lay the patient on their stomach so that you can set the fracture. Once aligned, apply a bandage, then place a splint made of wood or leather over it and secure it tightly.
Do not fear the displacement of the fracture or the shifting of the splint. Fill in the concavities of the ribs to ensure even tension. Instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on their healthy side. If a hot swelling occurs, address it accordingly.
Cease extending and setting it until the hot swelling subsides. Apply what is necessary to alleviate it as previously described, then return to setting and securing it properly. If there are splinters or fragmentation at the ends of the bone, they should not be removed.
And it is not touched but smoothed from the outside as we said and its tension is left until it heals.
Chapter Eleven.
On the setting of a humerus fracture.
The humerus is what lies between the elbow and the shoulder. If it fractures, it should be set in one of two ways. The first is to take a smooth, moderately thick curved stick in this manner:
And you tie two straps at its ends, then hang it from a high place. The patient sits on a chair, then throw his fractured arm over the stick until his armpit is attached to the center of the curvature of the stick. Then suspend something heavy above it.
Or a servant extends his arm downward, then the doctor aligns the fracture with both hands until it is set properly. The other method is for the patient to lie on his back and have his hand suspended from his neck with a strap.
Then you order two servants, one to hold above the fracture with both hands and the other to hold below it, each pulling in their direction. If you want the pull to be stronger, tie a strap under the fracture and another above it, and have each servant pull them in their respective directions.
If the fracture is close to the shoulder tip, it is appropriate for the middle of the strap to be under the armpit and the other under the fracture toward the elbow. Similarly, if the fracture is close to the elbow, it is appropriate for the strap to be in that position and on the elbow itself.
Then align the fracture gently without force until the fracture is properly aligned and well united. Then bind it if there is no appearance of hot swelling; if hot swelling appears, then leave binding it until the seventh day and apply a clean cloth soaked in vinegar and rose oil.
Until the swelling subsides, then bind it. The method of binding is to place a bandage on the fracture, then wrap a strip of new cloth over the bandage, gather the arm onto itself, and place his hand open on his shoulder.
And place the cloth and binding on the arm and forearm so that the arm serves as a splint if nothing prevents you from doing so and nothing changes in the fractured bone. If you fear that something might change due to this, then use splints.
It involves placing on the fracture itself a splint that is wider and stronger than the other splints, with each splint separated by the width of a finger. The length of the splints should be according to the fracture, with an additional three fingers' length from each side.
Then bind the splints with the binding method I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
It is that your binding on the site of the fracture should be tighter.
The binding should be less tight as you move away from the fracture. If you see that placing the splints and binding as we described at the time of setting the limb during your treatment is appropriate, then do so.
And if you fear hot swelling, then leave the binding and splints until the seventh day as we said. Then examine the bandage every three days to prevent itching or swelling or hindrance of nutrition reaching the limb due to excessive tightness, and adjust all of this as mentioned.
If you are certain that none of this will happen, do not loosen the bandage except after many days, and the patient should lie on his back with his hand on his stomach, and a cushion filled with wool should be placed under his armpit at a moderate level.
And check at all times, whether night or day, to ensure that the shape of the broken limb does not deteriorate or the bandage loosens; correct everything with your effort. Make the patient's diet as we have mentioned previously, which is to make the food mild initially until the bone begins to strengthen.
It is advisable to make his diet more substantial, for it is common for the arm and leg to strengthen in forty days. At that point, the bandage should be removed, and he may use the bath and be treated with ointments suitable for this purpose. If the fracture is severe and inflamed.
Do not remove the bandage from him until fifty days or two months have passed.
Chapter Twelve.
On the setting of an arm fracture.
The arm is composed of two bones, called the forearm bones. One is smaller, which is next to the thumb, and the other is larger, located below the smaller one. The ulna, the larger one, may break alone, or the radius, the smaller one, may break alone, or both may break together.
When the upper smaller bone (radius) is fractured, setting it is easier and healing occurs faster. When the lower bone (ulna) is fractured, the fracture is worse and healing is more difficult. The worst case is when both bones are broken together. If the fractured bone is the upper smaller bone (radius).
The physician, when setting it, should make the traction mild gently until he straightens it. If the large splint is the one broken, he should make the traction stronger. If both splints are broken, he should make the traction very strong.
It is appropriate that the form of the hand be extended on a pillow when setting and traction are applied, with the thumb of the hand raised above all the fingers, and the little finger below the other fingers, and the patient sitting cross-legged.
And let the pillow be at his level in height so that the patient does not undergo difficulty.
Then, a servant stretches the arm from below, either by hand or with a band, and another servant stretches from above in the same manner. Then, the doctor aligns the bone until he restores it to the best possible form. If there are splinters in the broken bone, they should be removed.
Place each splinter in its position to the best of your ability. If a splinter protrudes and pierces the skin, and you have no hope of setting it, incise over it and extract it as described previously. If the fracture is accompanied by a wound, I have dedicated a separate section for it.
Seek the treatment for that from there. If a hot swelling appears at the beginning of setting, apply a cloth soaked in kerotyi made with rose oil and white wax, and let it be moderate between thick and thin. Bind the cloth gently until the swelling subsides.
Remove the kerotyi and apply a dressing prepared from mill powder mixed with egg white. Then, apply bandages, and let the bandage placed on the fracture itself be slightly wider and stronger. Know that the number of bandages for the arm is usually six.
The fracture is in one molar or in both molars together, then make your bandaging at the site of the fracture stronger and tighter, and every time you rotate the bandage upwards or downwards, make the bandaging slightly looser as was mentioned earlier in the chapter.
Let the bandage that is wrapped around the fracture be a soft, moist one and not too hard. Let the thread used for binding be of special cotton, intermediate between thinness and thickness as we described, and examine the limb and tendon after some days.
If something needs to be corrected, such as an itch that occurs in the limb, it should be washed with warm water until the itch subsides. The limb should be left unbound for a night to rest, then binding is resumed.
If the binding has become loose or the bone has shifted, correct all of that to the best of your ability. Also, if the nourishment is unable to reach the limb due to excessive tightness, you should loosen it slightly and leave it for a few days until the nourishment can flow through, then bind it again.
If nothing mentioned occurs to the patient, it should not be loosened until after twenty days or so. Then suspend the patient's arm to his neck and let his arm be in a balanced position. He should avoid restless movements and sleep on his back.
Know that this fracture of the arm will heal in thirty days or thirty-two, and it may heal in twenty-eight days. All of this depends on the conditions of the humors and the strength.
Chapter Thirteen.
On the setting of fractures in the hand and fingers.
The palm's knuckle and the fingertips rarely suffer fractures, but they often experience contusions. Whenever a fracture or contusion occurs in the palm.
It is advisable for the patient to sit cross-legged with a chair straight in front of him.
Then he should place his hand on it, outstretched. The bonesman then stretches the fractured limb, and the doctor aligns it until it is well set. At this point, bandaging and pressure should be applied unless there is a warm swelling; then a splint should be placed above according to the site.
And it should be inserted into a soft cloth. If the fracture is towards the palm, make a ball-like shape from cloth and have the patient grasp it with their fractured hand, then secure it with a long strip of cloth.
Let the splint be made of leather that has flexibility so that it conforms to the bending of the entire palm and secure it as needed. If the fracture is on the outside, a splint should be placed from above and another from below in the palm so that the hand remains open and straight.
Then secure the binding as the hand is rotated and interlock the fingers with a bandage. If the fracture occurs in one of the fingertips, and it is the thumb, align it properly and then bind it with the palm. If you prefer, you may make a small upright splint to support the fracture.
And if it does not move, then if the fracture is for all the fingers such as the middle finger and the index or little or ring finger, they should be aligned and bandaged with the healthy finger next to them or all of them are bandaged on a splint, which is better, or a small upright splint is placed on it.
As we have said about the thumb and examine during and after setting it, if it is away from the hot swelling, counter it as appropriate whenever something of this sort occurs, as has been described repeatedly.
Chapter Fourteen.
On setting the femur fracture.
The thigh bone often fractures and can be detected by sensation because it shifts forward and backward. Setting it involves placing a bandage above the fracture and another below it while the patient lies face down.
Then, each supporting bandage is stretched to its side evenly. This is if the fracture is in the middle of the bone. If it is close to the base of the thigh, it is advisable to tighten a soft bandage, either from wool or similar material.
At the base of the thigh toward the groin, the stretching should be upward and the other bandage below the fracture. Similarly, if the fracture is near the knee, the bandage should be near the knee so that the stretching is downward. Then, the doctor aligns the bone with both hands until it is restored to its natural form.
The bone will heal well. At that point, it is advisable to keep the dressing and binding in place if there is no hot swelling in the limb. If hot swelling does occur, leave it for days until the swelling subsides, then return to treating it.
And as for binding it, you should fold a solid and wide bandage around the fracture two or three times and leave what remains. Then bind the leg until the heel is at the base of the ankle, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg near the knee from below, and let the ends of the thread be above on both sides.
Then wrap what remains of the bandage around the thigh and leg. Then apply splints on the thigh at the site of the fracture itself, and make one splint for the shin bone. Fill the gap between the thigh and the leg with soft cloths so that the binding is even.
Then start with a strong binding from the middle at the site of the fracture, three or four turns, and as you move the bandage away from the site of the fracture, make your binding less tight, softer, and looser.
Then take the ends of the thread that you inserted between the thigh and the leg, tie them to the splints above, then pass the ends of the thread down until they reach the ankle, and also tighten them with the ends of the splints on the other side.
To ensure the bandage does not move from its place, then leave it tied as long as there is no pain, swelling, or inflammation in the limb. If any of these occur, immediately loosen it and correct whatever has happened as we have mentioned repeatedly.
If there is a splinter in the bone that protrudes, you should level it if possible; otherwise, cut into it and remove it. Treat the wound as previously described until it heals. This fracture of the thigh can sometimes be bound without adding the leg with splints.
As we have mentioned regarding the arm and forearm, except that setting it this way does not cause the patient to limp. However, if you set it alone without attaching the leg to it, the person will inevitably limp forever.
And know that the thigh strengthens in fifty days, or slightly more or less, all of which depends on the difference in temperaments and other conditions.
Chapter Fifteen.
On the fracture of the knee joint.
The knee joint rarely fractures, but it often suffers from contusions. If a fracture does occur, it would either be a split or a comminuted fracture in its parts, and this can happen with or without a laceration.
All of this can be determined by touch, and setting it involves aligning the dispersed parts with the fingers until they come together and unite as much as possible with precision, gentleness, and skill. Then apply a dressing, and if necessary, secure it with a circular splint.
Tighten above with the appropriate bandage for that, then attend to all the conditions we described in other fractures, such as hot swelling and the like, by addressing each symptom with what is suitable until it heals.
Chapter Sixteen.
On setting the fracture of the leg.
The leg has two bones, one thick called the tibia and the other thin called the fibula. Both are subject to various types of fractures similar to those of the arm bones. For this reason, its setting is like the setting of the arm, and the procedure is the same. If both bones are broken, the leg turns in all directions; if the thinner bone is broken, the leg turns forward; if the thicker bone is broken and this happens below, then it is not unknown to you.
Use stretching and alignment, and bind the splints accordingly. However, if the fracture of the leg is severe with many fragments, the stretching should be less and gentler, and you should take care in setting it.
And in the leg, there is an additional task compared to the arm: when you have aligned the splints and completed all your work, take two brooms made of pine wood, which are used for flattening rooms where strips are placed between the cracks of the boards, or they can be made from palm leaves or something similar.
Choose those that are slightly thick and not too thin, and let their length be the same as the leg from the knee down. Then wrap a cloth around each one twice along its length, placing one on the leg and the other on the opposite side.
And let it extend from the knee to the foot. Then bind the two brooms in three places at the ends and middle, for with this restraint, the leg will not tilt to the right or left and will be set well. Sometimes a wooden gutter of the length of the leg is also used.
It is placed there to prevent movement, and it is most necessary to do this in the case of a fracture accompanied by a wound, especially. Then examine the leg every day and pay close attention to any swelling or inflammation or other such conditions. And when any of that occurs, counter it with what is appropriate until it heals, and the bone of the leg will heal in about thirty days or so.
Chapter Seventeen.
On the fractures of the leg and fingers.
As for the heel, it is not subject to fracture at all. As for the bones of the leg, they may be subject to fracture, and fingers rarely suffer fractures; rather, they are more often subjected to contusions in most cases.
If the leg bones are fractured and you see that those bones are approaching each other, let the patient stand with his foot on the ground as if walking. Then you place your foot on the raised part of those bones and press down to align them.
Until they return to their places, then apply the dressing and splint. Place a small board with two flat ends under the sole of the foot, then firmly bind the foot after wrapping it with cloths and anything else needed.
If three or four days have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones aligned whether they were fractured or dislocated. The procedure is as you see. As for if one of the fingers is broken, set and align it as described for setting the fingers of the hand.
Then make a splint for the broken finger along its length, but let it be slightly wider. Place under the foot the board I described and bind it firmly. If two or three or more of the bones are broken.
Make on each finger a splint of appropriate size enclosed in a soft cloth and bind the board at the bottom of the foot and let each end of the board protrude from under the sole of the foot to secure it well.
You should not forget to attend to all the symptoms we have mentioned for all kinds of fractures and address each symptom as appropriate.
Chapter Eighteen.
On the fracture of the woman's pubic bone and the man's penis.
When the woman's vagina is fractured, sit her in a squatting position, then gently bend her towards her back little by little. Let her hold onto something behind her. Then the midwife should stuff her vagina with cotton until it is full and forms like a ball inside her vagina.
Then the woman should be shaken and her body lifted little by little. The cotton will come out until it forms like a ball at the entrance of the vagina, and the bone fracture will be realigned. Then place a pad on her back. When she needs to urinate, gently remove the cotton so she can urinate.
Return it in the same manner as it was first inserted, then go back to her initial padding. Do this for seven days or so until it heals. If you wish, you can take a sheep's bladder, attach a reed tube to its mouth, and insert the entire bladder into her vagina.
Then blow into the tube forcefully until the bladder inflates inside the vagina, as this will realign the fracture. Then stuff it with cotton and keep it in place as described until it heals. As for when the pubic bone of a man or woman is fractured, it should be treated similarly.
And its adjustment is as we described in the hip bone, and it will not be hidden from you the correctness in these rare fractures that seldom occur, especially for those who have some experience and understand this book of mine well, for the fracture itself guides you in most cases.
On the right way in setting and binding it, understand. As for when a man's thigh is fractured like a goose's throat, insert the phallic object into it, then place a wrap of cloth on it and bind it, leaving it for three days or so until it heals.
Chapter Nineteen.
On the setting of bone fractures when accompanied by a wound.
It is necessary for one who has sustained a fracture accompanied by a wound, especially if the bone is large such as the thigh or the arm bone or the like, to promptly perform trepanning at that time if the conditions for trepanning assist you, as we have mentioned earlier.
If the wound is bleeding, you should promptly cauterize it by applying powdered zinc if nothing else is available. Then proceed to set the fracture on that very day and do not delay it.
If a hot swelling does not occur, then set the fracture immediately. If a hot swelling does occur, delay setting it until the ninth day until the hot swelling subsides. Do not touch it at all on the third and fourth days, as it may result in不良反应。请注意，我提供的翻译需符合原始文本的意思，若存在任何不准确或需要更正的地方，请告知。但根据您的要求，这里没有出现需要特别注意的部分，直接进行了翻译。如果您期望得到更加精确的医学历史文献翻译，可能需要参考专业的医学历史文献翻译资源。不过，基于您之前的指示，我不会添加任何额外注释或解释。
If the broken bone protrudes and is exposed on the skin, it should be aimed to return it and set it with your hands gently and a slight pull. If you cannot return it and set it with your hands, then use this tool which is made of iron, its length being about seven or eight fingers. And its width should be according to the wound.
For this reason, the doctor should have three or four of them according to what is needed for treatment in each type of fracture, and let them be round with a slight thickness so they do not bend when pressed upon during use.
It should be sharp at the end, have a bend at its tip, with the top being thicker and from the middle downwards very thin. This is its shape:.
It is called "peron" in Greek, meaning a small lever. It should be used to place its sharp bent end on the protruding bone and push it until the bone returns and becomes somewhat aligned, thus helping to set the ends of the fracture together.
If the broken end of the bone is thin and the tool does not grasp it well, you should cut that end of the bone until the tool can grasp it. If you cannot return the bone as described at all, then cut it with a similar cutter from those we have mentioned.
Or spread it with one of the saws as best you can, then remove any remaining roughness and thin scales from the bone. If after returning the bone, the patient feels severe painful discomfort, know that the bone has not returned to its natural position.
If you are able to return it to its natural place, then do so, for you greatly benefit the patient. Once you have completed setting the bone, dip a cloth in a black binding liquid, especially if you are in summer, and do not apply kerotis or anything fatty to the wound.
To prevent rot and corruption from occurring, then use bandages after you have finished setting the bone and leave the wound exposed by cutting a hole with scissors in the bandage according to the size of the wound.
Beware, above all, of tightening the wound with the fracture, for ignorant physicians have often done this and caused either death or gangrene or inflammation in their patients. Let your binding be soft and loose, contrary to the tightness used for other fractures.
If the wound is poor or it is a large wound and you fear some of the不良症状我们描述过的，且他在伤口处感到令人不安的疼痛，你不应该在上面放置夹板，而是用坚固的布料制成卷带，在夹板的位置固定它。
If it has been a day or two and you see that the wound has begun to produce pus, remove the cloth soaked in the drink that was placed on it. Then use bandages and ointments which we customarily use to treat wounds such as the fourfold ointment and the like, and you should loosen the binding.
You should examine the wound every day, morning and evening, until it heals and closes. It is advisable to position the limb in such a way that pus can flow down easily. If many days have passed and the wound has not healed nor stopped discharging pus, know that there are likely small bone splinters present.
You should probe the wound with a probe. Remove and extract any of those splinters that are loose. As for those that are not loose and are causing irritation to the limb and causing pain, cut and remove them in whatever way you can manage.
If the wound is exposed to inflammation, putrefaction, or any other type of corruption and decay, you should treat each condition with a corresponding treatment as previously described in its respective section.
Among the things you should pay attention to and keep in mind when a large bone is broken, such as the thigh or the upper arm and other similar large limbs, do not attempt to pull it or remove it. For often such actions can lead to death. So leave it until it decays; perhaps it will fall out on its own after twenty or thirty days.
Then treat the wound if you see an opportunity for treatment; otherwise, leave it alone.
Chapter Twenty.
On treating the swelling that occurs after some fractures.
This swelling often occurs after the fracture has healed, especially near the joints, which can distort the appearance of the limb and may prevent the limb from performing its natural functions.
If the swelling is soft, use medications that constrict, such as frankincense, myrrh, aloes, alum, and the like. Take some or all of these, and mix them with a constricting liquid or with egg white or vinegar.
Apply it to the swelling and bind it tightly, leaving it bound for many days. Then release it and repeat with another binding until the swelling goes away, if God wills, or bind a sheet of lead securely over it.
For lead has a property that can reduce all that swells in the limbs. If the swelling has hardened and become severe, and the necessity arises to remove it, cut into it from above and remove the excess growth or pare it down with a knife until it is gone, and treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-One.
On treating fractures that have healed but left the limb weakened and different from its original nature.
If a bone fracture has healed but the limb remains weak and thin, this can be due to many reasons. One of them is either due to the excessive loosening and tying of bandages inappropriately, or due to over-tightening the bandages so that nourishment cannot reach the limb, or due to excessive and undue prolongation, or due to excessive movements at inappropriate times, or due to the scarcity of blood in the patient's body and its weakness.
The treatment for that is to nourish the patient and fatten his body until blood increases in it, using a bath, bringing joy and happiness to him, and so on. Then apply pitch to the limb so that the pitch attracts much nutrition or continuously prolong with warm water. Until nourishment flows through it and returns to its natural form.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
On the treatment of fractured bones that have healed crookedly and prevented their proper function.
If a deformity, protrusion in the fractured bone, or complexity arises in a limb after it has been set and healed, causing the appearance of the limb to be unsightly. However, if the limb is not prevented from its natural function, it should not be accepted for one to claim that they will break the limb again. Many ignorant physicians and bone setters in our country have often done this.
This action is highly condemned and can lead to great harm, the least of which is disability. However, if the deformity and complexity are pliable, it should be treated with water in which relaxing herbs have been boiled, such as the leaves and root of the willow and marigold, and the like.
And it is dressed with soft bandages like well-made diachylon, or the sap of the root of the colocynth is taken and mixed with chicken fat and cerise oil and used to dress it, or take the juicy fig and pound it with pigeon dung and similar medicines which are called dispersers of adhesion.
And the complexity is resolved by constant gentle massage performed by hand and using movement of the limb in all directions at all times. If the deformity has progressed, become severe, and hardened, and it becomes necessary to treat it with iron.
It is necessary to incise above it, release the bone connection, and carefully remove any remaining complexity or bone with fine cuts, performing this with gentleness, effort, and attention. Then treat the wound as previously described until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Three.
The jaw is a dislocation of one of the joints from its place, which hinders movement, uglifies the appearance of the limb, and causes severe pain to the patient. Whenever someone suffers from a jaw dislocation, it should be immediately attended to and reduced.
It should not be delayed at all, for if it is delayed, the area will swell and make it difficult to reduce the jaw. Therefore, it should not be delayed, nor should it be moved or stretched while swollen, as this often causes spasms and painful distress to the patient.
However, if this occurs, one should immediately begin to treat the patient. Then leave it until the swelling subsides slightly, then foment the limb with hot water and oil, then gently reduce it. Each part should be treated as described in its respective place.
And I have arranged the chapters on dislocation in accordance with what was previously mentioned regarding fractures, from the upper part of the body to the lower part.
Chapter Twenty-Four.
On the Treatment of the Lower Jaw Dislocation.
It is rare for the jaws to dislocate except in cases of scarcity, and their dislocation can occur in two ways: either they move slightly from their places and become somewhat relaxed, or they dislocate completely until they are fully relaxed. Until it reaches toward the chest so that the saliva of the patient flows and he cannot hold it back nor can he close his jaw, and his tongue stumbles in speech. If the dislocation is slight, it often returns on its own with minimal intervention.
And if the dislocation is complete, it should be corrected immediately without delay. This is done by having an attendant hold the patient's head while the doctor inserts the thumb of one hand at the base of the jaw inside the mouth if the dislocation is on one side.
Or if the dislocation is on both sides, he should insert both thumbs and use the rest of his fingers from the outside to align them. The doctor instructs the patient to relax his jaw and let it go in every direction while the doctor aligns and pushes the jaw back into its proper place.
If it is difficult to reduce the dislocation, especially if both jaws are dislocated, use a compress with hot water and oil until their reduction becomes easy. Do not delay their reduction at all as mentioned. Once they are returned to their proper place and the patient's mouth closes without relaxation, then apply bandages with cerotes made from wax and ointment.
Then it is gently bandaged with a loose bandage, and the patient should sleep on his back with his head pillowed between two pillows so that he does not move to the right or left nor chew anything but rather make his food liquid and easy.
Until the pain disappears and the jaw heals, let him eat what he desires, but he should do so gently and not strain to open his mouth while eating, drinking, or yawning until the jaw is set and healed.
If the jaws do not close properly when they separate at some point and do not return to their places, inflammation and constant headaches often occur, and the patient may experience bloating or vomit bitter bile. If you see this, know that it has become corrupted.
And many die from this condition within ten days.
Chapter Twenty-Five.
On the Reduction of the Collarbone and Shoulder Joint.
As for the clavicle, it does not dislocate from the inner side due to its connection to the chest, but it may dislocate outward, which can be determined by touch. Its reduction involves the patient lying on his back and extending his arms.
Then press the area with your palm forcefully, and it will return. Then apply a bandage and secure it tightly. As for the end that adjoins the shoulder joint, it rarely dislocates. If it ever does dislocate, it should be reduced and aligned as mentioned, and in whatever way you deem appropriate.
Then apply the dressing, bandages, and binding, and instruct the patient to maintain rest and tranquility until recovery. With this exact treatment, you also realign a dislocated shoulder joint.
Chapter Twenty-Six.
On the realignment of the shoulder joint.
Know that the shoulder joint may dislocate in three ways: one is when it dislocates towards the armpit downwards, the second is when it dislocates towards the chest, and sometimes it may dislocate upwards from the shoulder, though this is rare.
It does not dislocate backwards due to the presence of the shoulder bone, nor does it dislocate forwards due to the presence of the nerves. It most frequently dislocates and moves downwards towards the armpit, especially in those with less muscle mass because it dislocates and relocates quickly in such individuals.
As for those who have a lot of muscle mass, the opposite is true; that is, it dislocates with difficulty and relocates with difficulty. Sometimes, some people may receive a blow or fall, causing swelling in the shoulder and heat, leading them to assume it has dislocated. It should be examined thoroughly to confirm its actual condition.
Then proceed with its treatment. The dislocation is identified if it is downwards towards the armpit; when you align the dislocated shoulder with the healthy one, you will notice a clear difference. You will find the head of the dislocated shoulder indented and, upon touching under the armpit, the head of the shoulder feels like an egg.
The patient is unable to raise his hand to his ear or move it in all its normal movements. Similarly, if it dislocates towards the chest or upwards, you will clearly feel this upon touch, and it cannot be concealed.
This jaw may be easily replaced if it is soft or the patient is a child. Its replacement is done by having an assistant raise his hand upwards, then you place your thumbs under his armpit and lift the joint forcefully upwards to its position while the assistant raises his hand and extends it upwards.
Then apply it downwards, for it will return quickly. If it does not return as mentioned and the jaw has been like this for many days, the patient should bathe in hot water and use laxatives that relax and soften, such as cooking the root of colocynth, fenugreek, and marigold in water and using it.
Then the patient lies on his back, and a ball of wool, which is balanced between softness and firmness, is placed under his armpit. Then the doctor places his heel on the ball and holds the patient's hand in his hand and pulls it downwards.
And he pushes the ball with his foot, for it will return to its place. If you wish, you can replace it this way: have a taller person than the patient stand beside him, and have his shoulder enter under the patient's armpit and lift it upwards until the patient is suspended in the air. Another assistant should pull the patient's hand downwards toward his abdomen. If the patient is light, it is advisable to hang something heavy on him to increase his weight, for the jaw will return immediately. It can also be replaced in another way.
This involves driving a long stick into the ground, with its head being round like the pestle of a mortar, neither too thick nor too thin. Then it is placed under the patient's armpit after placing a soft cloth on top of the stick, with the patient standing along the length of the stick.
Then he extends his hand downward from the other side and also stretches his body from the other side with force, then the joint returns to its place quickly. If it is difficult to reduce it by all that we mentioned, use this treatment: take a stick about two cubits long. And its width is about four fingers and its thickness is about two fingers, it should have a rounded head to facilitate its entry into the depth of the armpit in this manner:.
Then tie a soft cloth around the rounded head so that the stick does not harm the patient, then place it under the armpit and extend the entire hand and arm downward on the stick, and bind the stick to the upper arm, forearm, and wrist.
Then the arm is placed on a bar. Give it width and extend the hand downward, leaving the rest of the body hanging from the other side, then the joint will be reduced immediately. Once it is reduced in any possible way, a moderately sized ball of wool should be placed under the armpit.
Then the dressing prepared from flour dust mixed with frankincense and egg white is applied all over the shoulder, circling it from above. Then the ball is tightly secured under the armpit and wrapped with a bandage over the dressing, and his hand is suspended around his neck.
It should be left不动七天，患者的饮食应少量，以便该部位能更快恢复 strength. Seven days later, or even five days, it can be untied and trained with movement. If it is stable and does not relax, then it has healed.
If the joint dislocates frequently due to moisture affecting it or another ailment, then cauterization should be employed using three pieces of brass as previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization. If you do all this and release the ligament after seven days and the joint does not stabilize.
I replaced the dressing and tightened it several times but it did not stabilize, fell, and relaxed, and you were unable to raise it upwards, know then that the nerve at the top of the shoulder has been severed or stretched or relaxed. Know then that the joint will never stabilize in its place.
As for the jaw that is directed towards the chest and breast and to the back, its realignment is done by pushing and stretching with the hands until it returns to place. All kinds of binding and treatment are applied until it heals. If stiffness occurs in the joint and movement slows down after healing, this may present.
Let the patient use the bath frequently until that stiffness is softened and returns to its original state.
Chapter Twenty-Seven.
On the treatment of the elbow joint.
The elbow joint dislocates with difficulty and also returns to place with difficulty. It can dislocate in all directions, especially forward or backward. Its dislocation is not hidden from you because it is clearly visible and palpable in whatever form it has dislocated.
When you compare the dislocated elbow to the healthy one, it will be clearly evident due to the deformity of the joint. The arm cannot be bent, nor can it touch the shoulder. You should act promptly and realign the dislocation immediately before inflammation sets in.
For if a hot swelling afflicts him, it is difficult to reduce and sometimes it does not heal at all, especially if the jaw is set back, for this is the worst kind of jaw and the most painful, and death often comes with it.
If it can be reduced, a servant should extend his arm with both hands and stretch out his arm while the doctor places his hands above and below the elbow, pushing the joint back into place with the thumbs of both hands or the base of his palm until it returns to its position.
And if the jaw is dislocated forward, it can be reduced by bending the arm until the base of the palm strikes the corresponding elbow. If the jaw does not respond to being put back, use very strong extension, which requires two servants to stretch the arm.
Two servants also hold the patient to prevent movement during the extension. Then, rotate the arm in all directions after wrapping a folded cloth or a wide bandage around his hand. When the doctor handles the joint with both hands, smear it with oil so that the joint can slide easily.
Then, push the joint forcefully until it returns to place. After it is reduced, it should be bandaged with a wrapping that includes binding and drying with egg white, tightly secured, and the arm should be suspended from the patient's neck for several days.
Then, if the joint remains in place, remove the binding. If you see that the joint has not healed properly, reapply the bandage and binding for several days until it strengthens, then remove it. If swelling occurs after the joint is reduced and the bindings are removed.
Difficulty in movement, so use moistening in the bath and gentle massage and kneading until it becomes flexible or make a splint like a fat ram on the joint then tie it and leave it for a day and night then remove it and enter him into the bath, if he sweats then rub the joint moderately.
Then apply the splint again a second and third time while entering the bath until it becomes flexible, and if you wish to put moistened light ox-plaster with fat on it and bind it tightly, do this several times for it will become flexible and return to its original state.
Chapter Twenty-Eight.
On the treatment of dislocating the wrist.
The wrist of the hand often dislocates and reducing its dislocation is easier compared to other joints. However, it is necessary to quickly reduce its dislocation at the moment it occurs before the area swells or a hot swelling appears.
To reduce its dislocation, place the patient's wrist on a board, have an assistant stretch the hand, and the doctor should put his palm on the joint protrusion and push until it returns. However, it is necessary to check if the dislocation has moved to the inside of the hand.
Let the patient place the outer side of his hand on the board during extension and flexion. If the dislocation protrudes to the outer side of the hand, then let the inner side of his hand be placed on the board so that the doctor's hand falls on the same joint protrusion. If it returns immediately, otherwise bind it with a bandage to reduce swelling.
Leave it alone and do not repeat it, for it cannot bear it, and you will not be able to correct it after days have passed unless the joint remains out of place, but it does not harm the patient except if the hand becomes weak and unable to grasp anything.
Then you will know that the nerve has been cut or damaged, and there is no remedy for it except to cauterize it, which may be helpful or may not make any difference. Once the wrist is realigned, apply the dressing we described, then bind it and leave it for five days.
Then it is loosened and the hand is exercised. If its movement is difficult or some stiffness appears, soften it with warm water and rubbing repeatedly until it becomes supple.
Chapter Twenty-Nine.
On the Treatment of Separating the Fingers.
Fingers may separate in all directions. When a finger separates to the palm's outer or inner side, extend the finger and push the separation with your thumb until it returns, then bandage the tip of the finger and suspend it towards the direction it separated from.
Leave it for two days, then release it and extend it until it stands straight on that day. If it is at night, bind it as described. Continue to release it during the day, exercise it with movement, and bind it at night. Do this for several days until it strengthens.
Do the same if it separates to the inner side of the hand, binding it towards the same direction and following the initial treatment until it heals. Do likewise if it separates in any other directions.
Chapter Thirty.
On the treatment of spinal hernia.
When a vertebra of the spine or neck is completely dislocated, or many vertebrae have moved from their places, there is no treatment because death quickly comes to the patient.
The sign of this is that the patient's feces are discharged without will, unable to hold it back, and often some of his limbs become weakened, either his legs or his arms or one of them. As for if a single vertebra moves from its place, it often returns to its position.
Its movement can be in four directions. The one that moves backward is called a hump. As for its treatment, you should consider if the hump occurred in youth, then there is no treatment and no cure at all. As for those that occur due to a fall or blow or something similar.
The earlier authorities have mentioned various treatments at great length, most of which do not prove beneficial. I have condensed what they said so that a little of my explanation suffices instead of much of what they provided, by my approximation of the meaning and my clarification thereof. I have also depicted the instrument differently from how they explained and illustrated it.
I say that the hump which occurs in front on the chest cannot be treated and has no cure. The same applies to those occurring on the sides. Only the one that appears on the back specifically can be treated as I am describing, and that is by laying the patient face down.
On a flat surface near a wall, place a wet cloth underneath him to prevent his chest from being harmed. Then place a vertical board fixed in a hole in the ground at one end of the surface near his head, and another board near his feet at the other end of the surface.
A servant holds the board, and it should not be secured in the hole, and another servant holds the other one in that manner, then wrap it around the patient's chest and under his armpits with a soft, tight bandage, and extend the end of the bandage to the board at his head and tie it there.
Then secure with another bandage over his hips, above his knees, and at his ankles. Then gather all the bindings and tie them to the other board at his feet. Then each servant pulls the board in his direction with the binding, and the two boards do not move from their fixed positions.
Except that they are not secured as we said, and the doctor places his hands on the hernia with force until it returns, or he places a board on it then leans on the board with his legs until it returns. If it does not return with this treatment, take a board that is about three cubits long.
And dig in the wall, which we said should be near the patient, a place where one end of the board can fit. Then place the center of the board on the bulge and have the doctor put his legs on the other end and pull tightly until it presses on the hernia.
And it returns to its place. If you wish to make it with a hand-turned winch, then drive into the ground at the head of the patient at the end of the bench two boards that are an arm's length long, and at his feet at the other end of the bench also two boards.
And let there be a cubit between each board, and make a hole in each board through which the winch can pass. Secure all the boards firmly in the ground so that they do not move at all, and insert a round rod, which is the winch where the rope is wound, into the holes of the two boards.
And at its end is a hole in which a stick, a cubit long, is tightly secured with what is coiled. And on the other two boards something similar to that. Then tie the strap which you tightened at the chest of the patient to the spindle which is at his head and the straps which you tightened at his legs to the spindle which is at his feet.
Then, a servant stands at each spindle, turning his hand with the crank that coils the spindle, and the doctor adjusts the hump as mentioned. This is an image of the spindle, the board, and the patient:.
Then, after the vertebra returns and the area is straightened, it is necessary to apply a bandage dried with egg white, then padding. Then place on top of the bandage a splint made of a board that is about three fingers wide or so, and its length should be enough to cover the area of the hump.
And on some of the correct beads, then it is tied with the appropriate strap, and the patient should use mild food until healed. If some protrusion remains in the area at the end of healing, it is necessary to use medicines that relax and soften, along with using the board we described for a long time.
A sheet of lead may be used for that. Sometimes a protrusion appears at the end of the spine beads, and it may be mistaken for dislocation, but it is actually an extra bone that has protruded. Do not treat this with such treatment, as death might occur.
The Thirty-First Chapter.
On the Treatment of a Dislocated Hip.
Know that the hip joint and the shoulder joint are only subject to dislocation, and they do not suffer what other joints suffer from such as slight displacement and concavity. The hip joint can be dislocated in four ways.
That is, it can be dislocated inward, outward, forward, and backward. It most often dislocates inward and rarely dislocates forward or backward. The sign of its dislocation inward is that if you align the healthy leg with the affected one, the affected leg will appear longer.
The knee will protrude more than normal, and the affected individual will not be able to bend their leg at the joint. The area adjacent to the joint will show明显肿胀，因为股骨的头部已经移位到了那里。
The signs of outward dislocation are the opposite of these symptoms. For forward dislocation, he will fully extend his leg, but he cannot bend it without pain in the knee. If he attempts to walk, he will not be able to move forward.
He will retain urine, his ankle will droop, and when walking, he will step on his heel. For backward dislocation, he cannot extend the knee and cannot bend it before bending the ankle, and his leg will also be shorter than the other.
The ankle will be relaxed, and the head of the femur will be明显位于髋部。对此类脱位的复位，你需要观察；如果脱位已久，伴随者没有尝试复位且保持原状，则完全无法治疗。
It should not be exposed to it, and as for the one that was recently dislocated, whether it is any of the four types of jaw dislocation, you should immediately twist the joint and extend it inward and outward and move it right and left, perhaps.
If it returns without needing other treatment, then if it does not return this way, you should prepare a servant as a strong aid to extend his leg from below, either with his hands or with a bandage tied above the knee on his leg, and another servant to pull him from above.
By inserting his hands under his armpits, then tightening a soft bandage at the base of the thigh, and another third servant holds the end of the bandage, extending it either from the front, from the side of the armpit to the side of the clavicle, or from behind towards the back.
They should all extend simultaneously until the patient is lifted off the ground and remains suspended. This type of extension is common to all four types. If the jaw returns with what we have said, otherwise each type requires the specific treatment I will mention.
As for its specific reduction if the jaw is dislocated inward, the patient should lie on his healthy side, then a bandage should be placed at the base of the thigh between the head of the femur and the area below the armpit.
Then extend the bandage upward from the armpit to the upper body towards the clavicle. Then another strong servant should take hold with his arms, embrace the thick part of the patient's thigh, and pull outward strongly, then it will return to its place.
This type is easier than other types of treatment used to replace this organ. If it is difficult for you and does not respond to this type of treatment at all, you should bind both legs of the patient with a strong flexible bandage around the ankles and the knees.
There should be a space of four fingers between each one and the other, and the affected leg should be stretched out more than the other by two fingers. Then, suspend the patient from a beam in the house, being two arms' lengths above the ground.
Then, you order a strong servant to hold the thigh and another servant to hold the patient. The other servant holding the thigh should push with force, for the joint will return to its place quickly. As for the specific realignment if the joint is dislocated outward.
The patient should lie on the bench as described for the hunchback case, and a bandage should be tied specifically to his affected leg and chest. Then, place two boards, one at his feet and the other at his head. Place an additional board in the middle of the bench and secure it very well.
It should be wrapped with moist cloths to prevent injury to the patient, so that the board is between his thighs to prevent it from moving downward during stretching. Then, each servant pulls in his direction and the doctor aligns the hip with his hands, if it responds to being returned.
Otherwise, place the board on him and press it as mentioned in the case of the hunchback, except that the patient should lie on his healthy side. If the dislocation is forward, you should stretch the patient’s leg once while he lies in this manner on the bench.
The physician places the palm of his right hand on the diseased hip, then presses it with the other hand, and thus extends the pressure downwards towards the knee. If the dislocation is backward, it should not be extended downward.
It should be elevated from the ground; it is preferable to place it on something solid. It should also be positioned outward as we mentioned regarding his posture on the bench, lying on his stomach with the bandages tightly secured.
As we said before, it is also advisable to use pressure with a board on the place to which the joint has moved. If the hip joint returns completely as it should, its return will not be hidden from you, and that is when you can extend the patient's legs.
When you see them level and the patient can bend and extend the leg without difficulty, know that the part has returned as it should. At this point, join the thighs, place the dressing, and bind with a turban tightly so that the hip does not move in any direction.
The patient must remain still for three or four days, then loosen the bandages and dressing. Compare the leg with the other one; if you see them equal in measure, know that the setting has held, and allow the patient to walk. If you notice any laxity, however.
Return and dress it, binding it as you did initially. Leave it for another three days, then loosen it. Walk slowly on it for a few days until it strengthens well, if God wills.
The Second and Thirty-Third Chapter.
On treating the dislocation of the knee.
The knee dislocates in three directions: inward, outward, and downward, which means backward. It never dislocates forward at all. The sign of its dislocation is when you order the patient to draw his leg towards his thigh.
If it does not adhere to the thigh, know that the knee is dislocated. The method to correct all its dislocations is to make the patient sit with his legs stretched out if he is able to do so. Have a servant sit behind him to hold his middle and bend him slightly backward. Then you sit on his thighs.
You adhere your back to his front, place his leg between your legs, then grasp his knee with both hands and interlock your fingers around it. Then you press the sides of his knee firmly with both hands, and another servant stretches his leg until the knee returns to its proper place.
The sign that it has returned is when the leg adheres to the thigh in a relaxed manner, not forced. Then dress its wound and adhere the leg to the thigh, then bind them together with a bandage for three or four days, then release them. Only light walking should be done for several days until it strengthens.
If it is difficult for you to return it as described, then use strong stretching with bandages, which I have previously described in the treatment of the hip until it returns.
Chapter Thirty-Three.
On treating the dislocation of the ankle.
The heel may be dislocated slightly or completely. Its dislocation can either be inward or outward, and the sign of its dislocation is that you see the heel swollen and protruding towards the side to which it has dislocated.
As for the treatment of its slight dislocation, it is easily reduced by gently stretching with both hands and aligning until it returns to place. As for the treatment if it is completely dislocated, the patient should sit down and a strong servant should hold him from behind in the middle of his back.
Then grasp his foot with your right hand from the top and with your left hand at the ankle. Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then do it again with your left hand twice, then stretch it with your left hand and push the sole of the foot with your right hand towards the leg without force.
Do this twice as described, then on the third time, push the sole of the foot towards the leg while pulling at the ankle. If it returns in one or two tries and you see the foot is aligned, otherwise repeat the procedure as it will return to place.
If it does not return as described, then lay the patient on their back on the ground and drive a peg into the ground very securely between his thighs, wrapped with cloths so as not to harm the patient, then have an attendant hold his thigh steady.
Then another attendant stretches the leg, either with his hands or by using a strap tied around the ankle. Each attendant then alternates in stretching while the peg remains between the patient's thighs to prevent his body from being pulled downward during the stretch. The doctor then aligns the dislocation with his hands.
Another servant holds the healthy leg downward, then the dislocation returns quickly. Once the dislocation has returned and you are certain of its proper return, apply the dressing and splint and secure it with tight bandages and immobilize the foot with a bandage downward. You should be cautious of the nerve which is above the heel from behind.
So that the bandage is not too tight and does not harm him, then leave it for two or three days. If the bandage becomes loose, tighten it again and release it on the third or fourth day. The patient should abstain from walking for forty days.
If he attempts to walk before this period, do not be assured that the dislocation will not recur and become spoiled, and it will not accept treatment afterward. If a hot swelling occurs, you should use what we have previously described in another section of the treatment and prolonging until it disappears.
Chapter Thirty-Four.
On the treatment of dislocation of the toes.
It should be aligned gently without force where it has become dislocated, and this is not difficult but easy. If the dislocation is in some of the joints on the top of the foot, the patient should place his foot on a level surface of the ground.
or on a board while standing as if walking. Then you place your foot on top of the dislocated joints and press them with your foot firmly until it returns and you see that it is aligned and no swelling appears in the area.
Then place a board under the sole of his foot that covers the entire foot, which has two ends. Then secure it tightly for three days, then release it and keep him from walking for many days until it strengthens and you are assured it will not recur, if God wills.
Chapter Thirty-Five.
On the types of jaw dislocation that occurs with a wound or with a fracture or both together.
When any of that occurs and you treat it and set it, it is often followed by death.
Therefore, none but a skilled, experienced, tender-hearted, compassionate, patient, and not reckless or bold person should undertake such treatment. At the beginning, only use medicines that relieve hot swellings and leave the patient alone.
Except for what you hope will be safe from damage with the lightness of the disease and some hope appears to you, then do not delay treating it at the first moment before a hot swelling occurs.
If the part returns as you desired, then use treatments that relieve hot swellings and treat the wound with appropriate drying ointments. If the jaw is fractured and fragments of bone are detached, then extract them. Follow in this what we have mentioned regarding simple diseases as presented earlier in their respective sections.
Exert your best effort and refrain from entering paths of risk as previously advised. That will preserve your reputation and keep you safe, if God wills.
