After I have completed to you my son this book, which is the last of the science of medicine with its supplement, and having come to an end in it from its expositions and declarations, it has seemed good to me to complete it for you with this treatise which is part of surgery, that is, with the hand.
Since surgery with the hand is lying in our region and is private only at our time: until perhaps science has perished, and the trace of it has been lost: and there remain from it only a few descriptions in ancient books, which hands have altered: and it happened to them that they made an error and had hesitation, until their intentions were closed and his vision was prolonged. It seemed good to me that I should uiuify it with this arrangement of this treatise according to the second meaning of exposition and declaration and abbreviation: and that I may make it with the forms of instruments, and the rest of the tools of the operation: for so is it from its addition and its propering that it is necessary.
Because for this reason an excellent craftsman with his own hand cannot find good surgery in our present time, it is: because the art of medicine is long, and the author of it must be exercised before it in the science of anatomy which Galen told, until he knows the movements of the limbs, and their forms, and their connection, and separation, and has knowledge of the bones, and nerves, and ligaments, and numbers of them, and their egression, and pulsatile beatings, and quietures, and places of their exit.
And because of that Hippocrates said, for a name with a name is much, and with work it is little, especially in the art of the hand.
We have already spoken about it at the beginning of this book.
Since who does not know that we have spoken about anatomy, will not be cleared up, unless he falls into error, in which humans fall into, as I saw many of them who form themselves out of this science, and boast themselves from it without knowledge and without experiment.
A doctor was sawing off an apostema scrofulous wart on the neck of a woman, and he cut some blood vessels in her throat. Why did the blood flow from the woman until she died between her own hands?
I also saw another doctor who thought he would pull out a large stone from the urinary bladder that had been present for some time; but the stone was big. So he approached it, and removed it with a twig of bamboo. Why did the man die on the third day?
And I had already been summoned to remove it; and I saw from the great size of the stone and the care taken by the nurse that he would die.
I also saw another doctor who was taking a fee from the Duke of our land for medicine; and a black eunuch, who was with him, broke his thigh near the heel; but the doctor went away without knowledge of the matter, and he bound the fracture together with thin bands and strong nails, and did not let the wound heal.
Then he released it according to his desires. Then after a few days he sent him away with instructions not to loosen the bands; but he stayed as he was until his leg became rotten, and it came to ruin.
So I was called to him; and I relieved him of the bands; and so it was quiet, and he was free from his pains.
However, the corruption had already become established in the limb; and I could not prevent it.
Then the corruption ceased to spread in the member, until he died.
I also saw another doctor who was piercing a cancerous pustule; and it got worse day by day, until the malignancy of it appeared to its lord.
That is, because when it is cancer pure from the melancholic humor, then it should not be approached with iron at all unless it is in a member that can bear it so as to be cut off completely.
For this reason, my sons, it is necessary for you to know that surgery is divided into two parts: namely, the operation which is associated with health and the operation with which there is danger in many dispositions.
And I have already begun to explain in all the places of this book where surgery occurred, where there was terror and fear.
Why is it necessary for you to be careful about that, and to avoid it? So that we do not find stupid people talking, and disgracing themselves.
Therefore, receive with caution and protection, and guide our sick with ease and strength, and use a better path led by the grace of God to health and the admirable succession: and remove the terrible illnesses that cause difficulty in recovery: and take away our souls from there, since it makes you fear, so that it may come upon you a hesitation in our faith and comfort.
For there remains more to remain for our glory, and higher in the world this is, and finally for the quantities of ours.
Because Galen has already said in some of his advices: Do not treat diseases that are bad: do not call yourself a doctor of evil.
I have already divided this treatise into three chapters.
Chapter one:
Chapter one:
Chapter two:
Chapter two:
Chapter three:
and the cure of twists, and similar cases: a treatise, ordered from the head down to the feet, and forms of instruments.
But before that, as soon as I remember the operation with him, it is necessary for me to say the quality of his incisions and wounds: and in which complexion he presents himself.
I will therefore say that the speech about the quality of cauterization's incision and wound is a lengthy, subtle, learned, and secret speech.
Even many wise men spoke in it, and disagreed with each other: and for me alone a little of their speeches is enough, fearing extension.
I will therefore say that cauterization is universal to all complexions, whether with substance or without: excepting two complexions, which are a warm complexions without substance, and a dry complexions without substance.
In complexion, however, the warm and the dry, with substance, disagreed. Some have said that cauterization is in it. And others said the opposite of it, that cauterization is not fitting for a sickness, which is from heat and dryness: because the nature of fire is hot; and does not suit, that it should heal a sickness from hot and dry, with hot and dry.
And he who says the opposite of it said: That through cauterization is made a healing in all sicknesses hot and dry, which happens in human bodies: for when you compare the human body, and its moistures, to the complexion of fire, you cool down the human body.
And I myself also say through his speech: because from experiment I have already discovered that sometimes.
But it is not necessary that you make it about that, unless he has already been tried, and exercised in the exercise of the chapter on cauterization, and has known the diversity of human complexions, and the disposition of sicknesses to themselves, and the causes of them, and the accidents of them, and the space of their times.
Do not fear also the residue of the poultices; and above all in cold and damp diseases. For indeed all doctors have come together on them, and they do not disagree with cautery in them.
And you sons, know that from the secret cure by cautery with fire, and its goodness over cautery with medicine burning is simple: because the action of fire does not reach, unless to the member that is cauterized; and it does not hurt another member joined with it, except with small damage.
But of medicine burning action reaches to that which is elongated out of the member; and perhaps makes happen in the member difficult disease of cure, and perhaps kills it.
But fire because of its subtleness and goodness of its substance does not do that, unless it overflows.
Indeed I have already made it known to you that by experience, because of the length of practice and study with skill, and station on verity of things: and because of it I excuse from the length of speech.
And if it were not, for it is not allowed to my book, I would bring to you the secret and hidden thing in fire, and quality of its action in the bodies of its expulsion, which expels diseases by philosophical demonstration of speech, which was added from the minds of your men.
And you sons, know that they disagree in the time, in which it is to be made cauterium, and put better time of the wound.
But I say that cauterium is to be made at all times: for the damage that happens because of time is hidden in the healing, which is attracted with cautery. And above all if the cauterium is because of the pains from necessary pains, strong, feasts, which do not tolerate tardiness: for they fear them, that happens mischief which is greater, than small damage is intrans because of time.
And may not fall in the minds of your sons that son, who does not hold back, unless you are common and stupid doctors, namely, that he who has a sickness which is healed by cauterization, is not always returned: and they put down this consequence, and the thing is not as they think: because cauterization is not, except in medicine, which changes the complexion, and dries up the humidities which are the causes, why pains occur.
However, cauterization surpasses medicine in the speed of its healing power, and the excellence of its operation, and the swiftness of its lordship: and it is possible that it may bring back a sickness at some time of the day according to the complexion of the patient, and the location of his sickness, and the excellence of its cure; and because it is prepared in his body from an excess of gathering in him: and it comes to itself in acquisition from food, and similar things from causes, unless it be a sickness, in which cauterization is administered.
A sickness of the body is less likely to be healed by cauterization than an excess of little members and humors, such as a toothache, because of the pain, and similar ones; for it is possible that this pain may not be healed in him. But this happens in a few.
But the word of the common people again, that cauterization is the last medicine, is a straight word: it does not refer to what they intend in him; for they believe that there is no cure which is brought about by medicine, and by nothing else after the occasion of cautery.
But the opposite of this is true, and the intent, that cauterization is the last medicine, is not, unless when we administer methods of cure in some illnesses, and they do not confer these medicines: then we administer at the end of the thing cauterization, and it confers; then it falls, that cauterization is the last medicine, not according to the intent which the common people and many stupid doctors understand.
But the ancients say that it is better to apply cautery with gold than with iron; and they did not say this except for the reason that gold is equal in strength to flesh and yet does not corrode it; and they say that there is no need of a place for cauterization. But this is not absolutely true; for I have tried it myself and found that it does not work in certain parts of the body without other means.
And cautery with gold is good, and better than with iron, as they say. But when you ignite the cautery from gold in fire, it is not revealed to you, when it burns according to the quantity that you use, because of the redness of gold: and when it comes to itself, and if you add ignition on it, it melts in fire and becomes thin sheets.
Why does the artisan fall from that in business; and because of that do we prefer cautery with iron among us more quickly and closer, from its rightness towards the work?
And I too have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to chapters; and I have arranged it from the head to the feet, that you may easily find what you want from it.
The second top.
Confirm here cauterization towards the domain of humidity and coldness over the brain: which are two causes of blood, and multitude of flow of humors from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and multitude of sleep, and pain in the teeth, and pain in the throat: and universally all sickness, which happens from coldness, such as paralysis, and soya, and epilepsies, and apoplexies, and similar ones from those illnesses.
The way of cauterizing is, that you draw out with a soluble medicine the head three nights or four, according to the need of the sickness, and its age, and custom of it.
Then tell him to cut his head with a scalpel. Then have him sit between your hands and face the fourth side, so that he has already placed his hands on his chest.
Then place the root of your palm over the root of his nose between his eyes. Whatever way your middle finger goes, mark that spot with a bit of pepper.
Then put olive oil on the cautery, which has this shape.
Then place the specimen at the marked spot with the oil, and compress your hand slowly, and you turn it around. Then quickly lift your hand up, and look at the spot.
If you see that he has already removed a quantity of skull, or a quantity of hair, then quickly lift your hand up. And if not, repeat the motion of your hand with the iron, or with another one if it is cold: until you see the bones, which I told you.
Then take some salt and dissolve it in water, and drink it with the bag, and place it on the spot: and release him after three days.
Then place the soaked bag on top of the specimen and release it on the spot, until the fire goes out. Then take care of that with the four-part ointment, until it heals.
They have already said that as long as there is a wound open, it will discharge pus: why is this better and more beneficial?
And one of them said: 'The skin should be cauterized all the way down to the bone': and the cautery should be held, until some ossification appears.
Then scrape after that which is burnt from the bone, then cauterize again.
And others say that it should be scraped with the cautery up to the last part, until it makes an impression on the bone like a stamp, so that the bone is made as in the shape of a crown: or an instrument that women put in a little cup and pour out, which they call alpha, and measure it, since from this place vapours of the head are exhaled, and the wound is closed after a long time.
Then treat, until it has healed.
Which, however, are not evident to me at all these two kinds of cauterization unless they are present in some people according to the first fear.
And let go of him, with me it is better when he is healthy.
For the head is weakened by the continuation of its natural solution: as we have testified in the other members; and especially when the head is weak with sickness: and the species of cauterization is first more healthy and better to me, and I use it: then let's operate while he is healthy.
Head III.
When there is a chronic pain in the whole head and it is prolonged in the sick, and he uses ointments, and poultices, and washings, and oils, and employments (such as). And especially if it has already been cauterized by one kind of cauterization, which we have described, and does not benefit from any of them: then examine. For if the head is sick with the strength of nature, and is not weak, and there is a sharp coldness: then cauterize it with another kind of cauterization under it little by little. Then cauterize him on all the horns of his head with his own cauterization, and don't let it pass through the skin, and disclose a quantity from the bone, which we have described. And cauterize him with one kind of cauterization on the back of his head in the place which is called the "wind" and this is a place where there is a breeze; and dip your finger in water in this place, and do not disclose the bone. For the sick is troubled by that sharp pain, and is far from the pain of all the other heads' cauterization.
And I will call this cauterization in its place; and it must be a cauterization by which the horns of the head are cauterized, and the back of his head is cauterized with a smaller kind of cauterization, by which the middle of the head is cauterized.
Chapter IV.
When it hurts in one part of the head and soapes, or extends the pain to the eye, and the head is washed with cleaning medicines, and the rest of the treatment is administered as I have mentioned in the division of illnesses, and does not give all of that: then cauterization is according to two ways: either cauterization with burning medicine: or with iron.
But if cauterization is with burning medicine, it is as if you take one of the teeth of a cow, and you cut it into two sides. Then cut the area of pain at the time with a blade on one side, until a place appears under the skin where the pain is caught.
Then introduce it into that under the skin, until it is hidden: then tie it tightly with a thread of constricting knot, and let it go for fifteen hours, then unravel it, and remove it on the second day or third: then put a covered thing over the spot immersed in butter, until a pus place appears: then heal the spot with ointment until it heals.
And if you want to do that with certain medicines that burn, which I have written in the 12th book, on Medicinal Incantations.
But if cauterization is with iron, it is according to this way. Fire cauterization, whose form is this:
And it is called a Klis; because the form of the head is like the form of a kleis, in which there is some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a small eminence.
Then put the iron on that place, and hold your hand: and you turn the iron little by little with speed: and let the amount that burns be according to the thickness of the skin, such as half of it. And pray that your hand does not hurt, so that the artery below does not rupture and blood flow occurs.
Then dip the bandage in salt water and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days: then dip it with butter: afterwards apply ointment until it heals.
And if there is a headache, cauterize this headache with the point of a scalpel, second time with cauterization. And do not cut the artery in this headache, but use the old one's own.
The mode of cauterizing in a headache:
When you are healing a headache, with the method we have mentioned before in connection with cures for diseases, and as we have mentioned in respect of divisions of illnesses, and when there is no effect from this treatment: then you will see from the illness that it does not suffice to apply the cautery at first with medicine, or with the cautery with fire; then you must apply the fire of the cauterization until it turns white after the signs on the spot of pain with a line whose length is half a finger, or almost like that: and place your hand in a grip and squeeze it until you hit the artery, and reach as far as the mouth.
However, you must cauterize the jaw which moves during chewing, so that it does not hurt on one side or the nerve which moves it, from which spasm occurs.
And be on guard, and take care with regard to the flow of blood from the artery which has been cut off. For there is a danger in cutting it off, and especially for one who does not know what he is doing, and is not learned or experienced: and he dismisses the operation with that.
And I come with a reminder about the treatment of blood flow from an artery according to its way, and in its place in this book.
If you see from illness that this cautery does not suffice, and you see the body bearing up the cauterization in the middle of the head as we have told, take care of a wound, until it heals.
And if you see it, administer cauterization, which we have said in the chapter on arteriotomy with a cautery instrument having two knives. For cauterization is better and more beneficial than this.
(On the method of cauterizing in ear pain.)
When pain occurs in the ear from cold, and the cure is with solutions, and the remainder of the treatment as we have said in the division, and the pain does not disappear, then fire cauterization: and that is what is called a point, whose form is this.
Then the points with it after its ignition around the whole ear, as it resolves itself: or in the circumcision of both, if at the same time pain is in both. And lengthen it with the cautery from the root of the ear slightly, after you have marked the places with the caustic: and let the amount of the cautery be ten points all over the ear, and almost the same.
Then cure the place, until they are healed.
(On the method of cauterizing in torture.)
Chapter VII.Et si uis, administra Cauterium
And if you want to administer cauterization in torture, it is not except for the species that occur from phlegm, according to which we have said in the divisions of diseases.
And distant cauterization of a species that occurs from dryness, and spasm of a nerve.
When you cure this species of torture with hipirrhea, and caputpurgia, and gargarisms, and your treatment does not bring about a cure, then you should cauterize the sick person with three cauteries: one near the root of the ear, and a second a little below its edge, and a third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the weak part. For softening does not occur unless in the part that appears to be healthy.
And the form of the cautery is that it cauterizes itself at the very tip of the upper ear by the corner of the head slightly: and another in the timpan: whose length should be according to the length of a thumb. And lay your hand with the cautery, until a quantity of half-thickness of skin has burned.
And this is the form of cautery, and its shape is from a scalpel, whose shape is as follows: indeed it is not more subtle by a little, as you see: and it should be that the blade is in it slightly too thick.
Then care for the place, with what preceded it: until it heals.
§ On the way of cauterizing in ancient apoplexia.
When an ancient apoplexia is established, and care for it has been as we have said, and your medicine does not help, and the patient has no fever, then cauterize him with four cauterizations on all the horns of his head, and a cautery in the middle of his head, as we have said, and a cautery in his occiput, according to what preceded: and the mode of cauterization should be according to what preceded.
Also cauterize with the cautery above the throat of the stomach: and it is more final.
Then care for it, with what preceded it.
CHAPTER IX.
It should be that he is placed in a strong wine in the first sick person of a great day, and a pill that purifies the brain.
Then wash his head entirely with milk, and put over his occiput a plaster of myrrh described in the treatise on plasters: and put him on occasion.
But this is the mode of cauterization: and make it according to the order given there.
If then he heals by that, it is good. Sed si non sanatur, iterum curetur, et iterum, usque ad qu But if not: then care for him again, and again, until he is healed: then put between every cautery slightly the thickness of a finger.
Then care for the cauterization, with what preceded it.
If however you wish to add a stitch, and he is a weak one who accepts it: then make him a cautery in the middle. That if you wish to add a stitch: then cauterize him himself on two horns.
Then take care of the wound, until it is healed: and let the cautery be greased after the form, which has been mentioned above.
The mode of cauterizing in paralysis, and softening.
Chapter X.
It is necessary that you should proceed in the purification of the head with hyssop, and with that which I have said.
Then wash the head with milk: then cauterize him with a cautery in the middle of the head, and a cautery on all the horns of the head, and a cautery on the posterior part, and three on the spine of the neck.
If however you are indigent in the softening of the body with many of these, and he is a weak one who accepts it, and the disease is strong: then cauterize him with four cauteries on the spine of the back, and the last with a cautery, until it is burned out from his skin by fire, and wash your hand. Then take care of the wound, until it is healed: and let the cautery be greased.
The mode of cauterizing in epilepsy.
The epileptic should not be cauterized, unless the epilepsy is from phlegm.
It is necessary that you should first purify his brain with hyssop, and with the other purification which I have said in the division: when he is a great weakling, or accepts medical treatment.
If however he is a youth who does not tolerate medicine, then administer a gargle, and chewing which purifies the brain, before those days with many good foods.
Then wash his head with milk, then cauterize him with a cautery in the middle of his head, and another on the occiput, and on all the horns of his head. If he should be weak and yet bear it patiently, then cauterize him with the cauterums which I have spoken of in the case of paralysis, and with the softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and back: and let there be oil cauterium according to the manner which has preceded.
But if the boy is sick, then put on a fine cautery, according to this manner.
§ On the way of cauterizing in melancholy.
When the cause of melancholy is corrupt湿度 and thick phlegm, then cauterize him with the cautery which we have spoken of in the case of paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is a superabundance of release into melancholy, and his body is wet with humidity, then give him in a drink what will mend his brain, according to that which has preceded in division: and then shave his head, and afterwards make a tortious thread made of linen, like a circle.
Then put it in the midst of his head: and the sick one, sitting, should hold himself at a distance from all parts.
Then present the ointment. And it is worthy of old butter. And heat him on a fire with moderate heat, which he can bear, when he enters into him. Then let him vaccinate himself in the midst of his head in a circle, and let him go until he is cooled down.
Do this sick one once a week, with the rest of his regular treatment, until he is healed.
Or if you want to, cauterize him by making small spots all over his body, except that you hold the hand with the cautery: but smell it first.
This kind of cautery humidifies the brain with its quality.
Then put on him a coat imbibed in butter, or in fat of chicken.
§ On the way of cauterizing in descending water to the eye.
Chapter XIII.
When you observe the beginning of water in the eye through the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin to drink and pour out the medicine with it, when he washes his head.
And keep him away from all moisture, and let him sit in a bath, on a few days of fast.
Then command him to shave his head, and cauterize it in the middle of his head. Then cauterize him over two temples with two cauterizations, if the beginning of water is present in both eyes simultaneously: or from one side, if it is present in one eye only: and cut off all the veins and arteries which are under the skin: and let there be cauterizations in her long in length.
What if you see anything of it, then cut it off immediately with whatever medicine is possible: and I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and in their dissection, and in caution to stop the flow of blood.
And when he is cauterized in the hair, under two bones, with two cauterizations finally produced.
The way to cauterize in ancient tears.
When the tears of the eyes are old and persistent, and they stand on the veins and arteries that are on the outside of the head, it is known that this is from cold and phlegmatic humours: then cauterize with the same cautery which I have mentioned in the beginning of descending water, cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauterizations over two bones, and two cauterizations in the hair under two bones. And if he can stand to add a little, then cauterize him in every side of the eye, at the end of the brow with a small cautery.
The way to cauterize in the nostrils' discharge.
When you treat this, as we said in the division, and the medicine does not benefit: then approach it, and give it three nights of weak broths: afterwards shave its head, and cauterize it with middle cautery, with olive cautery. Then cauterize it with two cauteries, one above the eyebrows, a little below the hairline.
And guard against injury to the artery, so that you do not hurt it.
This is the form of cauterization with a clauw.
The way to cauterize for softening the eyelids.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by sickness or moisture: then cauterize the eyelid with one cautery, with this lunar cautery.
And if there is a need, cauterize it above the two eyelids with two cauteries on the whole part: and let them extend by two hands: and let the length of each cautery be according to the length of the lid: and do not put your hand near the cautery, but according to the quantity that burns, let there be a third eyelid.
The way to cauterize the eyelid with hair that pierce the eye.
The cautery is in two ways: with fire, or with burning medicine.
But in the cautery with fire, instruct the patient beforehand to stop shedding his hair, if he is one who cleans it, until it grows and becomes even. But if it pierces him at the root: then tighten the eyes with poultice, so that they do not move until they are healed.
When they are healed and even, then place the head of the patient in your lap: and afterwards mark the eyelids of his eyes with encaustum, a mark that is according to the shape of the leaf of myrrh: and let the beginning of the mark be near the hair.
Then place the poultice wet with albumin on the eye or in silk mucus.
Then the fire cautery, whose form is this:
Then cauterize on the shape, which you have marked little by little in many places, until it is burned through the surface of the skin, which is as if the figure of a palm leaf, all apparent by itself.
And the sign of the work of your health is: if you close the eyelids of the eye already and remove the hair at the point of the eye.
So then raise your hand: and send it away for three days.
Then place on the spot a poultice with butter until the sore is removed. Then care for the spot with ointment until it heals.
That if any of the hairs return after an hour, and the eyelid becomes soft: then repeat the cautery on that spot, as you did in the first place.
But if the hairs are in the lower part: then cauterize the spot until it returns to its natural place: and adjust so that the hairs do not sting the eye.
It is as you instruct the sick person to let the hair grow on, until it grows long and even. Make in the shape of a palm leaf form out of a sheet of cloth.
Then take out of known soap and not imbibed in water from each pound of a pound or almost like that: then dry it all at the same time with good wringing, and make it with urgency, so as not to grow cold. Then out of the cloth from that which you made in the form of a palm leaf, and place the spot on one eyelid or both. And place under the eye poultice wet with albumen: and let the head of the patient be in your lap.
And place your finger tip on the medicine, and press the spot a little. And thou shall move him when he feels sick to the touch of medicine: for his touch is like fire.
But while this was so that he found out about the touch, then dismiss medicine, and move it with your finger yourself. But when the touch of the medicine has ceased, then remove medicine, and wash the eye with water.
And consider then, if you see the eyelid go up, as it were removed from contraction with fire, or with incision, is good: and if not, then repeat on him out of medicine on the spot where medicine does not print, and does not deteriorate, until your operation is adequate, and the eye closes.
Then put on top of it the poultice with butter, until the skin of the injury is removed. Then care for him with the ointment diaphanum, or other, until he is healed.
And it is necessary for you near the operation, to keep the last guard, so that nothing falls into the eye from medicine.
That if the eyelid softens after a few days, and fights from hair something into the eye, then repeat medicine on that place, which softens from the eyelid of itself, as you did in the beginning. Then care for him, until he is healed.
And this is the form of the ointment of myrtle.
And you should know that the eyes of men differ in size, and fineness. So second to this your consideration: and does not obscure the way of its straightness, which is the study of this art.
On the mode of cauterizing in the lacrimal fistula.
When you care for the fistula, with what we have said about the divisions of illnesses, and your cure is not effective: then it should be cauterized in this way.
Prescribe to the sick person, that he puts his head in your lap, and holds it with his hands so that it does not move or shake with its head.
Then put the cotton wisp soaked in the infusion on his eyeball, or in the slippery elution of psillium; then apply fire cautery, whose shape is thus.
Then put the cotton wisp soaked in the infusion on his eyeball, or in the slippery elution of psillium; then apply fire cautery, whose shape is thus: and if the wisp sits penetrating all the way to one end, with which it makes the cauterium; and if the wisp sits up high like this.
However, this cotton wisp is better for your task.
Then take the syringe if it is open, and extract the pus from it, and dry it out; and if it is not open, then open it, and extract the pus from it.
Then put the fire cautery on it, which has been made hot.
And hold it gently near the fire cautery from the eye, toward the nose side, so that your hand doesn't wander or shake; and place the fire cautery into the fat of the eye, and dissolve it.
If then you hold the fire cautery near the eye as described above, it will be good. And if not: then repeat the cauterization once or twice, if you can put up with it; and discharge it after three days.
Then put the cotton wisp soaked in butter, and treat it with the dry ointment, until it heals.
That if, after forty days, it is not healed: then put on the eye a sharp corrosive medicine, until you see the tooth; and cut it out according to what comes next in his book.
And there is another way of fire cautery with a tube, which some first said about. Then find the place of the tube, and locate it; then put a small hole in it, that is, a small cane, whose shape is thus. And pour into it a small amount of liquid lead, and hold your hand so that the sick person doesn't move at all, so that it doesn't run away, or get the liquid lead near his eye.
It is necessary that you put on over the eye an ointment infused with albumin, or water.
Lead, however, burns the place of the fistula, and heals it by a wonderful healing.
If the fistula is healed, with what we have said from the Cautery and Cure, is good. And if not, then it is necessary to administer a hole of the nose, and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose, according to which he will come to his own place of himself.
The way of cauterizing in fistulas of the lips.
Often there happen to be on the lip a fistula, which are called hairs, and especially on the lips of boys.
When you have to deal with these fistulas, with what we have said about the division of ailments, and when the cure is not effective, then a small fire should be cauterized with a knife, according to this form.
And let it rest in the shape of a knife.
Then put quickly the lit fire on the fistulas, until it reaches the depth of the fissures.
Then care for him with a clean wound, until he is healed.
The way of cauterizing in the fistula of the mouth:
When it happens that a pimple is on the root of the gingival, or on the palate, or on the roots of the teeth: then pus is made, and it bursts: then it becomes hardened, and pus runs, and a fistula forms: then care for it, and the cure is not effective in it, then fire should be cauterized with fire according to the quantity, which enters into the fistula. Then introduce the lit fire into the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand, until it reaches the depth of its, and the last one: do this once, or twice.
Then care for him after that, with what we have said about the cure until it is healed.
If then a wound is cut away and heals, it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to detect the place, and take away the corrupt bone according to what comes into its head.
§ On the mode of cauterizing in gingival diseases and softened teeth.
When the gum softens through moisture, and the teeth move, and does not yield to medicines, then put the head of the patient in your lap.
Then place the fire cautery, of which the shape comes into his head after these things, so that you put on a cannula over the tooth: and insert the lit cautery quickly: and hold your hand a little, until the sick one feels the heat of the fire having already reached the root of the tooth.
And dry your hand: then repeat the cautery a few times, according to what you want.
Then fill the sick mouth with salt water, and hold it for an hour: and has it expelled.
For the tooth moves stiffer, and the softened gum is tightened, and thus the corrupt moisture dries up.
§ On the mode of cauterizing in dental pain.
When the dental pain is through coldness or cold or itchiness, and does not yield to medicines: then the fire cautery is in himself according to two ways: either with butter: or with fire.
But the cautery of his own is with butter, so that you take butter that is very hot, and heat him up in an iron tube or in a mold. Then take a stick, and turn it over on the tip of the tongue. Then dip him in the hot butter: and place him on the painful tooth quickly, and hold him until he feels cold: then repeat him a few times, until the power of the fire has reached the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, dip the thread, or wrap it in cold butter, and place it on the tooth that is hurting; and place iron which has been heated on top of it, until the fire reaches the depth of the cavities of the tooth.
But cauterize it with fire, so that you may direct it towards the hole of air, or the hole of iron. And let there be some grossness in his body, so that the keenness of the fire does not reach his gaping mouth.
Then hold the cauterizing fire, of which form you wish; and place it on the tooth; and hold your hand, until the cauterizing fire cools down.
Do this sometimes, because the pain is relieved, or do it on the same day, or on another day.
And it is necessary to press the cauterizing substance into his impression, so that he may fill his gaping mouth with good balm, and hold it for an hour: then let him spit it out.
And this is the form of the cauterizing.
Cauterize with whatever extremity you can: and this is the form of the cane.
The mode of cauterizing in strophulas.
When strophulas are swollen with phlegm, and from cold humidities, and do not submit to digestion by medicines, and wish to have a quick digestion: then hold the cauterizing fire, of which form is this.
It has two open extremities, that smoke may flow from the cauterizing fire's one extremity: and place the heated iron on the abscess once, and again, if you can bear it, until it reaches the depth of the abscess.
If the abscess is small: then place the cauterizing fire according to the quantity of the abscess.
Then discharge him after three days, and place on the tooth cold soap immersed in butter, until what was burned is relieved by coolness.
Then take care of the tooth with dental ointment, until it is healed in the form of a cane.
To cauterize in a sore throat and constriction of the air passages.
When there is an excess of moisture above the canal of the lung, and especially when it is accompanied by a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the sick be evacuated at first with soluble medicines.
Then cauterize it yourself at the root of the cough in a depressed place; and be careful not to go too far with cautery on the throat or skin unless you have some of its substance.
Then cauterize it with another cautery at the joint of the neck at the last of the spine of the last; and let the cautery be a small one after that which has preceded.
Then take care for this patient with what has preceded until he is healed.
The method of cauterizing in lung diseases and coughs:
When the illness of the lung and the cough are caused by cold humidities, and the sick person does not have a fever, nor tuberculosis, and the illness is old: then cauterize it with two cauteries above the rib in depressed places, lightly, and slowly. And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between two breasts; and let the cautery be a small one after that which has preceded.
And if you wish to apply your cautery by pricking with the cautery which is called a "Punctum", of the same form as that which has preceded in pricking the pain of the ears: and let there be punctures from thirty to nearly fifty.
Then take care for this patient with what has preceded until he is healed.
And now let there be a cautery with three branches: in this form. Why is it alleviated by this cautery, when you make the three cauteries into one?
Chapter XXVII.
When the dislocation of the head has been caused by moisture, and there is no return to his normal state at the time of dislocation, until it has become accustomed to reducing, then dislocates with little movement, which we have already testified that it happens, then it is necessary that you reduce the dislocation first. Then he should lie down on his back or on his side. Then massage with oil, which is inside the little finger toward the top with your left hand: and if the dislocation has occurred inwardly.
Then he should have a caustic fire with two handles. Whose form is this.
Then he should burn the oil, until it penetrates to the side of another, and the shape of the cauterization is with four cauters.
And when it is made cauterization with a caustic having three handles, why the shape of the cauterization then is six smaller ones: and the handles are according to the subtlety of the touch.
And this is the form of the caustic with three handles.
And when one is added to this mode, why are there eight cauters.
Then he should place on the caustic crushed peppers with salt. Then he should make the member calm, so that it does not move at all during a certain time, until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation has occurred upwardly, and rarely happens, then burn him on the shoulder with a small caustic, or with multiple cauters by poking it.
For the dislocation is firm, and the moisture is removed: and the sick person recovers.
The mode of cauterizing the stomach.
When there are cold and great moisture in the stomach, until they have extracted it from its skin, and multiply the catarrhs to it, and frequent methods of curing, and does not confer: then the sick person should lie down on his back, and extend his legs, and his hands. Then he cauterizes with three cauteries, one cautery under the cochleary breast in the quantity of a finger with cautery clauilis, and two cauteries below from the two sides one cautery, until the figure of the cauteries is triangular. And he lengthens between each other so that they do not join together, when they make pus.
And there is the depth of cautery in the quantity of two thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And let the figure of the cautery be second to this form without addition; and if you want to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and let there be a cautery by which this cautery is made, one according to the form of a circle.
And let the stomach be cauterized by touching it which shudders at this cautery; and it is, so that the signs on the stomach are according to the quantity, which you want with the caustice: then he cauterizes itself with the cautery of touch: then he cares for itself with the cure, which preceded until it heals.
The way of cauterizing the cold part.
When it happens in the Epate that there is pain from cold and wet, or from a thick wind, until it goes out from his skin by natural discharge of the excess, and the sick person is treated, with what we have said, and does not profit in him: then it should lie down sick on his own cerement, and signs with the caustice three cauteries according to this form, and this quantity the same over the espar below from the hypocondriis, where it reaches the bed of the man: and there is a space which is between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger: and there is a cautery according to the length of the body straight: and do not compress your hand with the caustice much.
And there is the quantity of him which is dried out from the thickness of the skin, half the quantity added to it: and let the sick person stand on his own feet.
If he is not standing, then lie down, for he has already stretched his legs and raised his arms.
This is the form of the operation.
And you too can perform this operation with a knife as a cautery, when subtlety and prudence are with you in the art.
And guard yourself, so that you do not proceed too far in the cauterization, and let the skin there become thicker, for it is thick throughout the body, and may reach the intestines: since the skin is thin there, know that one.
Regarding the method of cauterizing the liver pustules.
When the problem has developed and you need to know, if that pustule is in the liver or in its membrane: then, if it is in the liver, you will see a dull pain, and there will be no sharpness: and if it is in its membrane, the pain will be sharp; and you will see that the treatment of doctors is tiring.
Therefore, let the sick person lie on his back. Then determine the position of the pustule with respect to the surface of the body. Then set fire to the cautery so that it radiates. This is its form. And cauterize it with one cautery, until the skin is completely burned over and reaches the syphac, until all the pus has come out: then care for the person who is treating the pustules, until they heal.
And it is not necessary that the appearance of this cautery be used, unless the study of medicine is prolonged in someone: and because, from time to time, some disease can be brought about by experiment: then one should dare to perform such an operation.
But, if you want to stop it, it is better with me.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in the pleura.
The ancients said that they used to cauterize with radices of arista lochaea on the pleura in this way. And it is as you should receive from the roots of dry aristea long, a root which is found in it, and sit like the thickness of the finger. Then immerse it in oil: and light it on fire. Then cauterize with one cautery in that which is between the continuation of the fork with the neck, and two small cauteries under guidices somewhat declining to the side, which is under the beard.
And two cauteries also in it, which is between the fifth and sixth rib declining somewhat to the rear: and one cautery in the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach. And three cauteries from the rear: one in it which is between two spatulas: and two cauteries from the sides of the chest, lower cautery which is between two spatulas.
And it is not necessary that you should squeeze your hand with the cautery, but let it be in the open skin smelling.
And some ancient ones said that from men who use a cautery of similar iron rod: and they light it, and put it inside him which is between the ribs until it reaches with it to the apostema of the liver, and comes out pus: as we have said in the aposteme of the liver.
But in this piercing with the cautery there is a fear that either the weak man dies immediately, or happens to the place a fistula, which has no cure.
§ On the mode of cauterizing the Spleen [Kaput XXIII].
When you cure the disease of the spleen, with it which we have said from the curing of diseases in a division of diseases, and your curing does not bring about a cure, then cauterize in it according to three modes, which are all correct.
Of which one is that you make three cauteries, or four lined according to the length of the spleen according to the figure of cauterias of the liver, of which preceded the figure.
And let there be between every cautery quantity of thickness of the finger, or less.
And let the mode of the incision, which we have said in the liver is equal.
And do not compress your hand with the incision; and let the patient be laid down on his back.
And another mode of incision is that the patient has two hands with fire to incise, which we have said in the chapter on shoulder dislocation: and wipe clean the skin that extends from the direct side of the spine where it reaches the bed of the sick man to his left: and raise up your hand so as to wipe clean the skin according to the length of the body, so that the incision falls according to the length of the body.
Then introduce two hot hands until they penetrate the skin on both sides: and then remove the incision; so that four incisions are made.
And if you want to cut with a different incision having three hands.
Then take care of the incision after you have removed it, to emit pus for many days: because it is more healing as much remains that preceded from the cure.
The mode of incising in the Hydropsis.
The incision does not fall in Hydropsis unless it is raised properly.
When you cure Hydropsis with the modes of cure which we have said in the division, and there is no improvement in the patient, then let four incisions be made around the navel, and one incision on the stomach, and one incision on the liver, and one incision on the spleen behind, and two incisions at the back between the vertebrae, and one on the right side of the chest, and one on the left side of the stomach: and let the depth of the incision approach the thickness of the skin.
Then remove the incision open, so that it emits pus after a long time.
And do not make the patient sweat after the incision with it; because two purposes should be gathered to him, and he will hurry to heal himself with the help of God.
The form of the incision when the stomach is cut should be a slit: according to which it precedes in form; and its back, when cut, should be ovoid, according to which it precedes in form.
To cauterize the feet and the legs.
When they are submerged in water, and become yellow: you should cauterize on the back of the foot, between the auricular and the ring fingers: and wash your hand with the cautery, and do not twist it: then wash your hand: and do not repeat the operation at all.
For the water turns them yellow, and sits the cautery in this form.
Then make two cauteriums on the two legs, and let the cautery go with the edge of the knife-edge of the cautery: and let the cautery go along the length of the leg, one under the knee, and the other lower down by that, about halfway down the leg: and make two cauteriums on all the back: and do not close the cauterium for a long time: so that it is healed from it some water: then care for the rest as we have said.
The way to cauterize in the solution of the belly.
Chapter XXV.
When the solution of the belly is weakened by cold and moisture, until it loses its holding power and digestive power, which are in the stomach and intestines: and cure that with the ways of curing, and does not heal: and you will see a bearing tolerating the violence of the cure, then cauterize him with a large cautery on his stomach, following what preceded in the cauterization of the stomach with a circle-shaped cautery, and four small cauteriums around the navel, with a fine knife-edge: and a large cautery over the palate above the molars, or two small cauteriums.
And if you see exuberant moisture, and a weak bearing of that thing, then cauterize him with a cautery on his chest, and a cautery on all his loins: and perhaps you will add two small cauteriums on the stomach near the large one.
For the cure is perfect, whose sign is not mistaken.
To cauterize hemorrhoids.
Chapter 36.
When there are many old hemorrhoids, or one, and they are of gross humor, cold, or corrupt humors, and treat them with the same means as we have said in the division, and there is no cure: then cauterize three cauterizations on the lower back of the trunk under an egg-shaped triangle, and a cauterization under the navel almost like two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is cold, and his food is not digested, and you see that his face is pale, then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cautery, according to what preceded it: and cauterize on his spine, and another on his spleen, with a cautery of the claw: and leave the cautery open at some time: and then take care of him, until he is healed.
Chapter 37. The method for cauterizing the arteri
When you cut off the arterioles, then set fire to the cautery that is radiated. Then introduce the fire into the arterioles that you have cut off: and with your last hand, until the cautery reaches the opening of the anus, from which runs the blood: do it once, or twice.
If there are many arterioles, then cauterize each one with a separate cautery, as we have described. Then take care of them, with the ointment that is used for them, until they are healed.
And if you cauterize him with a large cautery on his back, it is more final in the procedure.
Chapter 38. The method for cauterizing a fistula in the anus.
Chapter 38. The method for cauterizing a fistula
When the sick person does not obey the section and operation that we have described in its place, and shudders because of it, perhaps he will be healed with a cautery.
So when a fistula occurs in someone, and it is old, pus runs out of it, and corrupted humors. It is fitting that you should examine it with care when you attempt it gently. Then recognize the depth of its extent when you attempt it.
Then apply the cautery of fire, which is like a ray. Then insert yourself into it with an ignited rod and measure how far it enters.
And repeatedly apply the cautery to her until all corrupt bodies are burned up, once, twice, or three times, according to the amount of your need.
And guard yourself against the burning of the nerve, if it is there, or a large vein: or if the fistula opens into the woman's body, or into the body of the intestine, then guard all these places.
And do not make it unless when the fistula is in a muscular place: and consider that it is not penetrating.
Then take care of the place until it heals.
But if the place is sealed and tissues are removed from it, and remains so for a long time: then know that it has now been completely healed.
And if they do not remove the tissues from it, then know that it is penetrating, or its bottom is corrupted, or something like that among them: whose remembrance will remain in its place.
As for the way of cauterizing the perineum.
When a pain arises in the kidneys from cold or coarse wind and is soothed by sleeping, then you should cauterize that part on top of the perineum, cauterizing each kidney with a cautery, preceded by the remembrance.
And perhaps we will have cauterized that part second in the same place. Why are there three lines drawn? So they will be more effective in the process of cauterization.
As for the way of cauterizing the vagina.
When weakness and relaxation occur in the bladder, and there is a softening due to cold and moisture, until the sick person no longer retains urine, then cauterize him in the lower part of the scrotum above the bladder, where the hairs begin to grow, and cauterize with fire on the right side, and with another on the left: and let the length of the cautery on the side correspond to the length of the nail of the thumb: and cauterize him with two cauteries, if you can bear it: and let the second cautery be made according to what came before.
With respect to the mode of cauterizing the womb:
When cold and moisture occur in the womb, and pregnancy is prevented by it, and her menstrual periods are delayed, and pain occurs with her menses, then three cauteries should be applied around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder, and one cautery on the back below, or two cauteries: and let the length of the cautery on the side correspond to the length of the nail of the thumb.
With respect to the mode of cauterizing the vagina in a case of dislocation:
When the mucous membrane of the vagina flows with moisture towards the anus, and there is a cause for its exit from its place: the sign of this is that the skin protrudes over the other when they are placed face to face: and the site of dislocation is found in that which is hollow.
Therefore, let the sick person be cauterized on his own vagina with a similar circle of fire: after you have marked the signs with caustics around the vagina, as it recedes: and let her fall into the middle of the circle.
If you do not have this kind of cautery, then cauterize him with three cauteries, with a large oil-filled cautery: and let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the skin of all.
Afterwards, take care of himself, until he gets well.
The mode of cauterizing in sciatica.
When pain occurs in the sciatic nerve, and there is cause for this pain, coldness, and moisture: the sick person should be cared for with the remedy we mentioned in the division, and if there is no benefit from it, and it becomes worse: then one should remove the sick person from thick humors with fetid pills, or with artificial pills, and others. Then cauterize him.
And the method of cauterization with it is according to two ways: either with cautery with burning medicines, or with fire.
With fire, there are many ways.
Of which one is that he cauterizes over the sciatic nerve of his own body with three triangular cautery wicks, according to this form: And make them a good depth, or a bad one. And there should be space that is between each cautery of the quantity of the thickness of the finger: and let there be oil cautery.
When, however, cautery is made in the middle on top of the sciatic nerve of his own head. Why are there four cauteries?
And if you want to cauterize with a circle, whose form precedes the cauterization of sciatica, one: so that the circle contains all the sciatica.
And burn away the thickness of the skin of all.
This is the method of cauterization in sciatica, when pain is attached to the sciatic nerve itself, and does not extend as far as the hip and thigh.
If, however, it extends as far as the hip and thigh: then cauterize him with two cautery wicks on top of the hip, in the place where the pain is, and a little to the left: and let there be a knife cautery.
And let there be depth of cauterization according to the depth of thickness of the skin.
If the sick one signals that the pain extends up to almost the toes, then cauterize him there where he signals it with the cautery of a point, three, four or more, if he needs it.
And if he signals pain being under the knee towards the leg, then cauterize him there with one scalpel.
And let your cauterization be such that you do not hurt with the cautery towards this thing so as to burn nerves, or a large artery, and do not attract it by that means on top of a bad wound on the sick person, or contraction.
And I have already seen one and the other who cauterized above the knee and finished off in the cauterization, and the leg was inflamed until the tumor followed the foot, and it was completely perforated and completely corroded: then the solution of the wound came out, and death after that.
If the pain is on both sides at the same time, cauterize each one according to this mode.
And some wise men have said in cauterization of the anus, whose cauterizing is this mode. Make a similar punch from iron, whose diameter is half of the palm: and let it be at the opening of its third finger according to the thickness of the finger nail, or less; and inside that third hole there is another third.
And let there be a space between each punch according to the quantity of the nail of the thumb: and let the punches open on both sides; and let their height be almost like a knot, or two knots: and make them handles from iron that are unevenly fitted in the punches.
Then let it be lit in fire, until it turns red, and let it throw sparks off: then let it be placed on a plate of the anus lying down on the healthy side. Then cauterize him with three round cauteries in one line.
Then let go of him after three days. Then bind with butter: and let the broken bone remain open for many days. Then heal him with ointment, until he is well.
Says Albucasis, with this kind of surgery on the son, we are not very fond, because of the fearsome appearance: and therefore, because there are few who wait for him.
However, from good surgery he who endures, and remains with him at his place.
The cauterizing should be done with the doctors present, so that you make two knots on either side of the arm, which is pierced with the pin of his door frame, made of iron or brass, with its length at the height of their backs: whose ends are almost like themselves.
And let there be a space what is between either quantity of the thickness of the finger, and let them be open above and below: and let it hold itself toward the one and the other, according to this form.
Then place it on a wooden tray, the sick man lying on the sound side. And squeeze your hand much on the wooden tray. Then pour between two circles of hot water, which is heated with fire a little, and hold it for a time: and let the sick man feel the prickling, and his burning, for he feels the prickling like fire, until he is at rest from the burning.
Then wash your hand with an instrument, and wipe off all with sweet water: then let it be for three days.
And place on it the butter, until it moves away from the burning; and let it be for some days, and let the pus run out from it. For this is final in healing.
Then heal that with ointment, until he is well.
If the pain extends to the hip or leg, make him a sitting place in it that holds water, according to what you have made in the width is equal.
And this is the way to make warm water: and I have already written about it in the book on the rectifying of medicines. Take alkali and burned lime, each a part of one; separate them, and put them into a new crucible, the lower part of which is bored with a small hole; add to it the quantity of substance to be treated; and put another crucible, full of water, below; and pour on the alkali and lime from above by way of a stream: then compress them well in your hand; and let the crucible go until the sharp water has run out at the bottom of the hole.
Then pour all the water together, and pour it on to another lime; and filter it, until it runs clear again.
This will then be very sharp, which is used in many surgical procedures and in cauterizing the remaining parts of the body. For it effectually performs the operation by the fire itself.
And from among medicines there are those which, when mixed with each other, cauterize widely, like caraway, and also myrrh, and lime mixed with soap, so that both are mixed together.
And Galen himself related the story of a certain man from ancient times who was cured of pain in his hip and sciatic pain: and he said that it was very effective. And he said, "I do not like another cure, and I was cured from one hip, until he related that perhaps he had entered a warm bath, and came out healthy.
And it is taken from the oil of the gopher-lark; and if gopher-lark oil is not found, it is made up like this: a little is mixed with fat, and put on the hip where the pain is, or in the groin, or in the thigh: it is bound, and left for a certain time, three hours or more, so that the sick person feels a sedating pain from the heat. Then introduce it into the bath.
When the body then becomes wrinkled, introduce it into the bed. For the pain has subsided, and he is healed.
And you should know that these medicines should not be applied to the body without first evacuating it.
And Dioscorides who said that when sheep dung is applied as a poultice to the sciatic pain, it will benefit him: and it becomes a second-degree burn in this way. The wool is to be soaked in old oil and laid on a deep place, which is between the thumb of the foot and the heel, and is closer to the heel.
Then take sheep dung that has been gathered up, and set it on fire in a fire until it becomes a coal.
Then place the coal on the wool and leave it there until the fire is put out. Then repeat this. Do not then cease to do this until the sensation has become accustomed to the stimulation up to the ankle, and the pain rests.
And this method of poultice is called Vaccine Burn.
The cauterization for sciatic pain.
When pain occurs in the back due to various causes, or from injury, or from excessive evaporation, and similar causes, and does not respond to cold infusion alone: then the burn should not be applied unless it is done in this one way only, that is, with a cold infusion.
Then after the evacuation with pillules of the bitter herb, and similar ones, let them be applied to the back where there is pain, three lines according to its width, having marked the lines with encaustum in each line; then five cauterizations, or more according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the healing power: and it should be done by cauterizing with the cautery needle.
And if you wish, apply three cauterizations, or four, with the middle clava of the cauterizing tool, in this way:
To cauterize in case of gangrene.
Many times this disease has occurred in infants.
And the sign of the onset of this disease in children is: that which occurs on him stricture during defecation, and movement: and inflammation in the last spine of the back and knots of it, which has already begun to emerge over the remaining spines.
When you therefore see that, and wish to do that, then cauterize it with a cautery which is in the form of a circle.
And he takes the cautery over the entire spine evenly: and if you wish to cauterize around the spine with a needle-point cautery two lines, or three: and let the points be close together side by side.
Then take care of the place, until it heals with him which we have said.
And be careful, do not administer the cautery to gangrene, which is made in a spasm of a nerve.
The way to cauterize in podagra, and pains of joints.
When the pains of joints are from cold humors which flow to any part of the body's limb, then when pains occur in the feet, it is the custom of doctors to name that properly as podagra.
When therefore podagra of cold cause is cured by means of the cure, and do not remove the pains, then remove the cautery to remove those.
And it is so, that he is cauterized after evacuation around the joint of the feet with many cauteries: and let the cautery be of olive oil.
And if you are able to bear it that you touch the tip of the foot with a needle: then do so with a needle-point cautery. That if they ascend pains as far as the knees, or other joints, and many times this happens: then cauterize it over all the knee with three cauteries, or four from all sides, with this same cautery of cloves.
If, however, you need many more of this antidote, then cauterize yourself. And do not submerge your hand in the antidote, but instead dip it only in the skin's thickness.
If, however, the pains rise to the knees and back: then administer what we have said about the antidote in our chapter.
That if the pains are only in the hands, then pierce around a flame, as the two lines resolve.
If, however, some pain remains in the fingers, then pierce them, over every knuckle a point, and over the palm of the hand.
If, however, the pains rise after days to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize both completely.
And do not leave the sick person without treatment, from the taking in of medicines. For if a good regime is established and the phlegm is expelled, it will be healed with the help of God and this antidote.
On the Method of Causing a Burns to Heal.
When a Rupture has occurred in the groin, and the intestine has descended, or has touched the testicle, and it is beginning to be close to the scrotum: then you should order the sick person to cease from his food on that day only. And he should use laxatives so that the stool falls from his bowels.
Then let him sit between your hands on his back: and order him, that he hold his breath, until he has gone out, or until the testicle appears, or the intestine.
Then let him reduce the person with your fingers, and mark with the causticum at the edge of the Rupture above the pelvis, with a mark whose extreme is equal to a half-circle to the upper part of the body.
Then light the fire of the causticum, which has this shape, until it becomes white, and throw off sparks. Then let him reduce the intestine, or the testicle to its opening. Then let the attendant place his hand on the wound, so that it does not come out of the intestine: and you have already opened between the legs of the patient, and placed under him the pulley, and serving as another over his legs, and another over his chest which holds his hands.
Then place the cautery on the wound, your hand standing straight with the cautery. And hold him, until you succeed in getting to the teeth: or else try again with another force, if you do not succeed in getting to them with the first one all the way to the teeth.
And carefully observe that the intestine does not come out in the hour of your cauterization, so that you do not burn it, and let it go through it into the sick or death, or great evil.
And know that when you do not succeed in getting to the teeth with the cautery, your operation is not effective.
And it is necessary that the cautery of infants be fine, according to their measure.
Then take care with the other unguents until he is healed.
And let the sick person lie on his back for forty days, until the wound has closed.
And it is necessary that you provide for him food according to the length of his healing time, which softens his stomach: so that he does not lose the intestine by effort and defecation.
Then when he should rise after forty days, then administer loose ligaments that have been made, and hold him for another forty days.
And let him stay away from work, and with full food and drink, and with loud speaking.
For when he uses this regimen, so does he heal with whole healing.
And I will speak about the healing of ruptures with an incision in its chapter.
When, however, ruptures happen in the rest of the flesh, and are beginning, and do not add to them, then cauterize his rupture with round cautery according to its quantity: and let it be as dry from then on as the third part of it. Then care for himself, since we have said: and do not be drawn away.
And some had said first: that he be cauterized with a triangular cautery, according to this form.
Afterwards it is signed with encaustrum and put on the line which lies across the back of the rupture, and another line down below. And place your hand in the middle with the cautery.
But first the cautery is easier and better.
The way to cauterize in pain because of a fall, or because of percussion.
Chapter 58.
When it happens to some member by a fall, or because of percussion: and this pain persists for a long time, and does not yield to treatment: then it should be cauterized with the Pointed Cautery.
And let the cautery be to any member according to its size, and its health, and weakness, and its strength, and its twist, and the pain from it.
If then he is healed by first cauterization, it is well. But if not: then repeat over him the cautery.
Because of the custom of these pains is that they should change from one member to that which approaches it. Why it should be that those members should be cauterized until the sick one is healed.
The way to cauterize in Leprosy.
But the lepers are often cauterized with a hot iron. And especially the species of leprosy, which is produced by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy: so that you carefully consider the way to cauterize it.
If then Leprosy is resistant and you have treated it with the same cautery that we have said and it has not fallen, and does not stick: and if you wait for the disease to include a corruption on the whole complexion of it: then cauterize it over the head five cauteries: one in the middle of the hairline, and the second below it towards the front at the end of the hair, and two above two horns, and one behind the cheekbone.
And lastly bandage your hand slightly with cautery, until it impresses a rough impression on the throat, and the membranes are dislocated from it; so that the exhalation of large vapors is eased from it, and the cauterization is also applied above the spleen, according to what preceded.
But if the leprosy has already spread on the sick person and appears manifestly: then it is necessary that you should apply the above-mentioned cauterizations, which we have mentioned in the head, and cauterize also on the tip of the nose, and two cauterizations on the two cheeks, and two cauterizations on the two ears, and two cauterizations on the two shoulders, and six on the back, and one great one on the loins near the tail end, and one above it, in the middle: and two on the breasts: namely, one on each breast, and two on the knees: one on each knee, and two on the arms, and two on the cubits of the arms, and two on the tender parts of the chest: and cauterize also on all the joints, from the joints of the fingers of his hands and feet: and cauterize also on all the heel of his feet and knuckles of his hands.
And let you be careful of the nerves that are above the heel of the foot, so that you do not burn them.
And when one is cauterized with the cautery on the bone of the jaw, and with another on the bone of the stomach, and with another on the spine.
And you should know that the more you add cautery, the greater the benefit is, and the more it cures.
And you should know that a sick person does not feel pain in the cauterization, as they do when they are healthy: for this reason, his body is already stupified.
And it is necessary that the cauterizations should be of a certain size and thinness according to the limbs and joints: for what has preceded from the appearance of the instruments.
Then take care of the cauterizations with a paste of herb flour mixed with honey, and with the rest of the cure, until it is healed.
To cauterize while stupor persists.
When a limb is numb and does not respond to medication, oils, plasters, or poultices; then, the limb that is numbed should be cauterized according to the degree of its numbness or the extent of its pallor.
And place your caustic where it will penetrate slightly into the depth of the skin. Then care for the limb with ointment until it heals.
And at times when cauterization occurs due to some numbness that happens in the hand or foot, in the vertebrae of the back near the exit of nerves that move that limb: and the numbness is relieved.
But do not be hasty about it, unless you are knowledgeable in the anatomy of limbs, and the exit of nerves that move the body.
The Head.
When Albucasis is applied and does not produce any effect with medical techniques; then, apply a deep caustic slightly to the area, according to the thickness of the skin, until the color changes and the tone is relieved.
Then care for the limb with wheat flour, and with rose oil, and with leaves of arglosh (a type of herb), and with pigeon blood, and with hen blood; let one part be used; all these things are to be mixed together, and spread on a cloth, and adhered to the area until it heals.
The mode of cauterization for cancer.Dei quoque discentia, si non potest sanari cum medicinis, n
When cancer is beginning, and the limb needs to be held still; then, cauterize the limb with a caustic that forms a circle around it, as it turns.
But the wise have said that it should be cauterized with the last caustic in the middle.Et si forte uoluitur, et non potest sanari cum medicinis, noli u
But I do not consider this suitable: for I fear it will ulcerate: and I myself have seen it happen a few times.Et si forte uoluitur, et non potest sanari cum medicinis, noli u
And it is better that it be cauterized around its circumference with a circle, as we have said: or with many cauterizations.
On the mode of cauterizing on the abdomen.
When anyone has an abdication, and is delayed in maturity, or is doing it for no reason, or because of old age, so that it is little blood, or because of time, and the pulse does not hasten in the maturation of abdication, then cauterize around its circumference with a few cauterizations by puncturing. Then let go of it. For it will hurry up with the maturation.
But if you want to pierce it with a knife and then cauterize it, then this is the form of the cautery.
And place it in the middle of abdication until it penetrates the skin; and let the cautery be behind it so that it does not get weak, so that the course of blood is eased.
Then take care of the patient until he is healed.
On the mode of cauterizing on a sore corroding.
Chapter LIIII.
A sore does not corrode unless it is a member that walks and corrodes the member itself; as fire devours dry wood.
But if you see a sore that tolerates cautery with fire, then let the many cauteries be small and large, and suit them to the place where the sore is;
Then cauterize the member from all parts until you eradicate the whole corruption, and do not leave anything hidden in it.
Then let go of the member for three days, and put sulfur mixed with oil on the places that have been cauterized; until all the escarments are eradicated, and all corruption.
Then take care of the patient with ointments that generate flesh.
But if you see that after three days the flesh is born healthy and there is no corruption, it is good.
And if not: then apply again cautery to that which remains in corrupted places.
And when the corrosion is healed, it is sometimes cured with acute medicine. For it itself rises up at the place of cauterization.
However, cauterization with fire is faster in action: and indeed I have already said that cauterization with acute medicine is division: so take it there when it is digested.
On the mode of cauterizing in clefts, and warts.
Chapter 50.
This affliction of the lower parts of the feet often occurs; and it is a gross disease, which affects the foot after filtration.
And there are two ways of applying cauterization: with fire, and with warm water.
How much, then, is it with fire, as the fire of a brand is like the feather of a fowl: which let be from iron, according to the quantity that contains the cleft from all parts: and let the edge be slight.
Then deposit the burned thing on the cleft. Then, with the thumb, rotate the thumb with cautery around the cleft, until the cauterization reaches the depth of the cleft: and let it be for three days, until it begins to emit pus. Then bind the thing with soft silk threads, crushed with salt: and let it be for the night. For he will himself be removed from his roots.
Then care for the place with a soothing ointment of flesh, until it is healed.
If they are not converted, and often happen on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet: then apply to them cauterization with warm water: and it is, as you may get a tube from iron, or steel, or from a fowl's feather: and deposit it on the cleft, or on a hard thing. Then throw into the tube a little quantity of warm water: hold your hand, and rotate it with your thumb, so that the edge of the tube is pressed into the root of the cleft, and let the warm water find its way into the depth of the cleft: and expect for a while on the tingling of the warm water.
Then let go of him, for the clamp should be removed with its roots.
So do it with them one by one, until you have done all of them in the body.
Then take care of them after they are cut off, with that which generates flesh from the scar.
The way to cauterize during a tremor.
When it happens to someone that there is a tremor due to cold in the nerve, or from a quartan fever, or some other thing: then one should cauterize the person with four cauterizations, or five on the back of the spine, and between each vertebra with a cauterization, and in his pit with a cauterization, and over his stomach with a cauterization.
For a tremor ceases with an olive oil cauterization, and a feverish condition speeds up with health from cold.
The way to cauterize according to Albatar.
Chapter LVII.
When certain aliments are expelled from the body, that is, pustules which arise from corrupt dry matter.
Then, when they first appear, they should be cauterized with a fine wood cautery on the whole head of the pustule, whose tip is lit with fire. Or with the root of aristochnoke long. Or with a lenticular cauterizer.
And when they are cauterized with iron, at first their expulsion follows this mode: and they do not increase: and they break up their excess, healing from them.
However, it should be done after evacuation with phlebotomy.
The way to cauterize during a blood flow from an artery in the ulnar.
This often happens with a blood flow from an artery which is cut at the ulnar, either from outside, or at the incision of a pimple, or from cauterizing a member, and similar to them: and it is difficult to remove it away.
So then, when this happens to someone, then grasp the artery with your hand and place your finger on top of it: and tie it tightly until the blood is blocked beneath your finger and nothing comes out of it.
Then put on a small amount of olive oil fire, and a great deal more: and blow over them until they are very hot.
Then take from them one, or small, or large, second knuckle and the place where the artery is broken, and place the fire on top of it; then remove your finger quickly: and hold the fire, until the blood comes off.
That if it is expelled when you remove your finger from the artery's opening, and extinguish the fire, then take another fire quickly, from those that are prepared on fire.
So then do not stop doing this with one after the other, until the blood comes off.
And be careful, so that you do not burn the fire that is there, and misfortune happens to another illness.
And know, that when blood flows from an artery, it is then impossible to stop it: especially when the artery is large, unless with four measures. Or with fire, as we have said. Or with extraction, when it is not extracted. For when it is extracted, its ends contract, and the blood comes off. Or is bound with a strong ligature. Or are placed on top of medicine by virtue, which stops the flow of blood, and is tied with a decreasing constrictive pull.
Whoever performs this dissection with a ligature, and constriction with a cloth, or position of burning things, and like things, does not give it a complete cut, unless rarely.
But if this happens to someone, and there is no present doctor, nor medicine: then begin with the position of the index finger on top of the wound's opening, as we have described, and constriction of it very much, until the blood is blocked from the upper part of the wound, and over the artery. And do not move the finger, above it with cold water always cold, until the blood is congeleth, and groweth, and is cut off.
And while you are considering this, what does it need from the poultice or medicine?
On Incision, Puncture, and Bleedings on Wounds and Similar Matters.
We have said in the first chapter, all disease can be cured with fire as a cautery and medicine to burn together, and the causes of it, its causes, and instruments for doing it, and forms of cauterization.
And I set out those chapters from the top to the bottom.
And I shall proceed in this chapter in the same way: that is, to allay the curiosity of the quester as to what it seeks.
And before I begin that, you should learn, O sons, that fear which is in the first chapter regarding cauterization.
And for that, you should be more cautious regarding the matter, since in the operation described in this chapter, often drops of blood fall with which life is lost at opening the wound, or incision on a pustule, or opening an exit, or curing a wound, or extracting an arrow, or incision on a stone, and those similar matters: from all of which trembling and fear arise, and death falls in many of them.
And I warn you, do not let that concern you, for when it falls on you in this art of surgery with the modes of human weakness, in various diseases. For from them is one who becomes irritated with his illness, and is less concerned about death: because of the severity which he finds in his illness and the length of his disease. And when illness is accompanied by fear, which signifies death.
And from these he gives you his scalpel, and tells you to use it in hope of healing, but his sickness is harmful.
Therefore it should not be that you agree to him who comes to you from these, whose way is such. And be your caution much greater than your desire and your avarice. And do not presumptively claim anything from him unless after certain knowledge which confirms among you that which he attains to the success of praise.
And so you may heal all your sick patients, by prognosis and indication concerning that where there is healing.
For in him is the aid of you to gain fame and glory and memory and praise.
May God inspire you, O son, with his understanding, and may he not take away from you his guidance and inspiration: for it is in his hands.
And I have arranged this Chapter distinguishing it by Chapters, after what preceded in the Chapter of Cautery from the hair to the feet: that you may be relieved in your request which you wish from him, and where you need it.
Of the Cure of Water which is added to the heads of boys.
Chapter I.
You should know that this illness often occurs in boys at the time of circumcision: or when the midwife tightens the head of the boy without lightness.
And whenever it also happens for an obscure cause which is not known.
And I have not seen this illness in any other than in boys; and I would see all of them die, for this reason therefore I have quit the operation to them.
And I have seen a boy of these whose head was swollen with water, and the head became magnificent every day, until he could not sit on himself, by the size of his head; and the moisture increased, until he died.
And this moisture, or gathered between the skin and bone: or gathered under the bone over the sinus.
And the operation in that, if there is moisture between the skin and bone, and the pus is small, then you should find a crack in the middle of the head in width: and the length of the crack is almost two knots, until the moisture runs.
And this is the shape of a little knife.
But if the moisture is increased and the pus is larger, then place two cracks, according to this form.
And if the moisture is under the bone, and there is a sign of it, that you see the scalps open from all sides: and when you press it with your hand towards the inside, it does not disappear from before you: then it is necessary for you to find in the middle of the head three cracks, according to this way.
And after the incision has been made, remove all the moisture. Then tighten the cracks with rags and powder. Then immerse it from above with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then loosen the ligaments, and care for the neck with linen bandages, and ointments.
And do not stop tightening the head with equality. And feed the sick with dry food of little moisture, until their members are comforted, and the wound heals.
And another way to make an incision is to consider where the pus appears in size, and the collection of water.
For when it is more in the back, or in the forehead, or on the right, or on the left.
So go up with the incision where you see the pus and the water fills: and cut it according to what is possible for you.
And observe, so that you do not hit an artery, and does not happen a flow of blood, and the sick dies from that flow with the discharge of moisture.
Of the arteries that are behind the ears.
Chapter II.
When a cataract occurs to the eyes or to the chest, and it has been there for some time, and does not respond to medical treatment: then the last resort is to cut these two arteries.
Therefore, when you are going to incise these two veins, let the sick person's head be covered so that they do not see. Then prepare the place with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear. Then the sick person should tie their neck with whatever cloth they have. Then consider where the pulse is beating. And the places are those that are behind the depressed ears: and rarely隠れたり, except in some people.
Then mark with caustic on each: and cut both with a sharp knife, while looking into the mouth: and let it be done across the width of the head.
And if you see any blood vessels, insert the needle under the artery, and cut it from above with an incision.
And let the length of the incision be almost two fingers joined together.
For when the vein is incised, blood flows out with the pulse, which rises to the inside at a regular interval.
If, however, the artery does not appear in the sense, then you must measure the distance from the ear to the length of three fingers. Then mark with caustic and find until it reaches the mouth.
And what should be released from the blood, is six minutes, and perhaps you release more or less of it. All this depends on the quantity that appears to you from the vein and is filled with blood.
Then consider towards the eye. If there is anything stuck in the throat, then cut it so that it does not cause a sore throat: and tie the eye with a linen cloth.
Then take care of the person with ointment until he is healed.
Regarding the extraction of the arteries, which are in the temples.
Chapter III.
When a person has an old headache, or sharp cataracts due to acrid humors and heat in the lacunae of the temples, or ancient soda, harsh, and similar things: and he is treated with the methods of medicine, and this does not work: then we are experienced in these ailments by extracting the arteries from the temples, or cauterizing them, as we have related.
And the mode of operation in extracting them is, that the sick person whose hair is on the temples should be shaven, and the artery apparently visible in the temple should be intended. And it itself is shown to you from its pulse, and rarely hides unless in a few people, or when there is a sudden change in temperature.
If it hides from you, then the sick person should tie his head with any kind of cloth: and then bring the dry place with a rough cloth. Or wet the place with hot water until it appears to you in a manifest way. Then take a thin knife, which was made little before. Then scrape with it the skin easily until you reach the artery. Then throw it into her a hook, and extract it upward until you pull it out from the skin, and let it ooze from under any part of it.
If the artery is thin: then turn it around with the end of the hook. Then cut from that part according to how long its ends are stretched out, and turned in opposite directions, and do not cause a flow of blood. For if it does not cut, and if it does not separate, the blood will not rise deeply.
Then pour out the blood from six ounces, up to III.
If the artery is large: then it should be tied to it in two places with a double thread, strong, from silk: or from a string of alhohod, so that it does not adhere to it before the consolidation of the wound, and blood flows.
Then cut through the superfluity, which is between two ligaments. Do that at that time, or after another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cauldron until the nose, with a knife: until the extremities are cut, and remains in place of that work.
And this work is better if he has a fever or a hot skin. For the cauldron is from those that remain to finish the moisture. Therefore it is better to cut.
And after the extraction of the arteries, so that the place may be filled with an old cooking: and they are placed on top of it feathers made haphazardly.
And after the solution with dry medicines, which make the flesh grow, and with liniments, until it heals.
That if while you are working a flow of blood comes out from an artery, then come closer to cut it off with a cauldron, or to fill the place with a poultice: and grasp your hand tightly, until the blood is cut off. That if there is nothing of those for you at hand, then place your finger on the spot, until the blood has frozen. And soak the place with water of chilly temperature, until the sharpness subsides, and is clasped tightly according to what is necessary.
And from that which is lighter and easier to extract the artery, it is, as a cauldron with two knives has: and the sharpness of the two knives is like an almond. However, they are much less sharp than the two knives. For if they are sharp, like the two knives, it is better that they have coldness: and they do not cut into the flesh with speed. And so if there is some roughness in them, a heat of fire is held in them, and the flesh is cut off quickly: so this work is better for every work, lighter, and easier to do.
And this is the form of the cauldron.
And make a space between the two scalpel-like objects according to the thickness of the finger, after you have marked the two places with fire; and put the both on fire widely until they come to the mouth, and fall together in the two places: that it may become longer what is between the extremities of it. For with this cauldron they do not harden when placed inside.
Chapter IV.
¶ Of the care for the course of acute tears and persistent tears from the eyes.
When there are persistent tears and the course of the tears from the eyes runs from the top of the head outside: and does not bring anything into them of medicinal care with medicines, and their eyes become red, and feel a movement in their front as if it were the movement of ants: and their eyelids are heated because of the acute tears: then the elderly people used to cure them with this operation, and they called this cure Ense.
And it is, as you command to the sick to shave the hair that are on his forehead. Then cut in the forehead three slits equidistant according to the length of the forehead: and make the length of the slit almost like two fingers, and one slit be equidistant in length to the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second be according to the length of half a snake's move, and the third from the other part: and take care not to cut the arteries which are on both sides: and make your hand extend from the continuation of the two mandibles, and make the space between each incision equal to the quantity of three joined fingers: and have you prepared a sponge fragment, or many dry fabrics, with which you dry the blood.
Then introduce the spatula between the two acute ends, whose subsequent form is as follows: From the incision which is from the temporal part, until the second incision: and scrub with it all the skin which is between the two incisions, with chafe, which is on the bone. Then also make this from the incisions middle to the second incisions. Then extract this bone also, and introduce into the first incision again another instrument called a sharp chisel, soft on one side, not sharp on the other. And this is its form.
And put his sharp side opposite the flesh attached with skin, and his soft side opposite the bone: and push him, until it reaches the middle opening: and cut off all the tools that come down from the head to the eyes: except that it continues the incision until that which appears from the skin.
Then make also this in the middle opening until another opening.
And when an equal quantity of blood has run out, express the places from the clotted blood.
Then put into every opening a chisel made of hardened iron, and put on them flints dipped in wine, oil, or vinegar. And see that it does not happen that the blood clotted is hot.
And on the third day loosen the ligaments, and administer a strong infusion with warm water. Then care for that with the ointment of Basilicon, and with the others which are treated with wounds: until it is healed.
Head
§ Of the treatment of acute lacrimation and cataracts on the eyes from within the head.
When there occur to anyone acute, sharp, and persistent tears: and his eyes look pale, thin, and their appearance is weak: and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hair falls out from them, and there is a sharp pain in the deep part of the head, and subsequent sneezing: then remove these accidents, that those materials and cataracts do not come, unless they are taken away with many.
And the best treatment for them is this. And it is, as you instruct the sick person to shave his forehead. Then cut in it one opening in the middle of the forehead, or a little more around the width, and begin from the left side of the time to the right: and let the incision go down to the bone: and extend your hand from the teeth which move at mastication: until when it has been uncovered the bone: and you will dry out all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate between the two lips of the fissure with dried old wax, or with linen liniments. Then bind above with dust: and dip the dust in wine and oil so that hot pussing does not occur.
And when you dissolve that, and you will see that the hot pussing is about to begin coming out: then it is necessary that you cut the flesh of the nose, until the baby begins to come out.
Then take care of the baby with drying treatment that makes the baby come out: as if you took two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony: and prepare an ointment from it, and administer it to the birth of flesh in these wounds.
Chapter VI.
The care that falls on gold.
All that falls on gold is of four kinds: either the mineral rock, or similar rocks, such as iron and lead; or it is a plant, like beans and peas; or it is a liquid substance, like water and vinegar, and similar things; or it is an animal.
When therefore gold falls on a rock, or a kind of rock that does not contribute to gold and does not grow in gold, expose gold to the sun alone: but if you see a stone, then distill into gold some oil that has been cooked, or put it in mustard. Then administer the extraction of it, and make it snort with condiments, and rub the nostrils near the coming of sneezing, after you have put on gold-colored bandages from rags, or wool, and spread the gold towards the top.
Many times has this treatment gone out with this care.
But if it does not go out, then administer the extraction of it with gentle gestures: whose form is this.
But if it goes out with gentle gestures, it is good.
And if not, then administer the extraction of it with a slim black hook made from a few twists.
If then he does not come out by that [method], then make a tube from brass; and introduce the extremity of the tube into the ear hole very much, and the resin which is around the tube with softened wax with oil so that there is no wind going except through the tube: then draw it out with your breath in strong吸引.
Indeed, he comes out many times when he hears us [speaking]. But if he does not come out in this way, then take from the ash wood or from the stream, that is, the gluten prepared with which they are wetted, something like it: and set [it] at the end of a stick after you have dried up the ear with [the use of] moisture. Then introduce [it] into the ear hole with ease, after you have removed the wax from the ear with your finger.
But if he does not come out with all that we have described, then approach to cut off before the feverish heat or spasm occurs.
And the mode of the incision is so that the phlebotome takes away the blood from the head first: and draw out [it] by the amount of the power of his skill. Then make the sick person sit between your hands, and turn his ear upward, and find a small hole at the base of his ear where his fat is depressed in the shape of a moon: and make the lunate shape remain until you have reached the rock: then remove it with that  [tool], as far as you can do it with your instruments.
Then heal the hole from your own hand with haste, and take care of it until it is healed.
If something that has fallen into the ear comes from one grain which grows and swells: then administer extraction of it.
But if it does not obey you to come out, then take a small, fine straw, according to this form.
And with that administer the cutting off of its species from the grain which has fallen into the ear, and do not consider that it is already moistened by the ear's moisture until you have put on many straws: then draw out it with a hook or with a gentle hand or with suction as we have said, for the extraction of it is comforting.
In the water that is added to the ear, it should be used by the sick with sternutation first and foremost, and the ear has already been filled with some of the old cooked [water]: and he lies down on his side on top of the ear where the water is. If so then come out through that, it is good.
And if not: then take many stones, according to the length of a finger, small, soft, and warm them with fire slightly, and insert one of them into the hole of his ear: and let him sweat on one foot from that part, and hit against one stone with another stone in the ear. So then do not stop doing that with stones and pebbles, until he comes out all the way with water.
And already he comes out with water so that you take it from a branch or a vine and introduce the end into his ear; and you light the other end with fire, until it is burned well. Then again take another branch, and do this many times, until he comes out all the way with water; and draw it out with a tube according to what has been said above in the stone.
In the extraction however of an animal that enters into it, if it is a small body like a flea, and similar to it, take care of it as I said in the division.
But if it is a large body, which seems by touch: then administer its extraction with movements and hooks: and the matter of it is easier for all those who hold it in the ear.
In the extraction however of a foal that is born in the ear, when you take care of it with that which we have said in division and in the treatise on distillation, your treatment does not bring about its cure: then you must examine the ear under the sun. If so then it appears there something of a foal, then extract that with movements, or with a subtle hook.
If there is nothing visible there, then take a cannula, which has this shape, narrow from below, wide from above; and introduce the thin end into the ear according to the quantity that the sick person can bear: then suck strongly with it. Do this often, until all the wax has come out.
If they do not obey you up to the exit, then cover the cannula with wax, as I said on the stone.
That if they do not go out with it which I have said: then administer the distillations which the ancient ones have experienced in the infection of wax: and you will find that in the book of distillation.
And let your flow be as it flows with oil and medicines into the ear with this instrument, whose shape is depicted here. As you see do yourself from silver or brass, narrow from below, where sits the small hole, wide from above.
So that it is pushed out what is in the concern of the cannula, let it be made of brass and be crooked. And if you want, take a radium, and wrap it with a cotton wisp that is gently wet; then pour oil, or liquid, or what you want from these medicines into the cannula: and let it be in the ear: then insert the radium with the cotton at the top, and squeeze it slowly by your hand, until it pushes out oil in the concern of hearing, and feels it inside the sick person: and that which has been poured into the ear, may already be warmed a little with fire: and let there not be anything that distills in it quickly: for medicines do not tolerate that.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of the loss of hearing due to an injury of gold.
When certain young men come out of their mothers' wombs unharmed.
And has also happened to some men that they have wax in their ears due to a cut or flesh born in it.
And this oileation sometimes occurs in a deep hole of the ear, which does not follow on from the injection: and when it comes to occur at the outer holes a little, and follows on from the injection.
Now that which occurs in a deep hole of the ear, and what does not follow on from the view, is difficult to cure in many positions.
And in that which follows on from the injection, it is necessary that you should place gold-plaster on the ear and examine it: then if you see the oileation apparent, open it up with a very fine awl, of whose shape this is one that follows on; let the end of it be in that part where there is some little width, of which some sharp part is: and let the other part of the awl be soft on both sides: so that it does not wound the ear.
If then the oileation is born from the flesh at the top of the ear: then hold it with a very fine hook, and cut it easily with a sharp instrument, until all the flesh is removed.
That if the oileation is in a deep place of the ear: then take a very fine ray, smooth it, and heat it slightly with fire: then send it into the ear.
If then you feel the oileation with it, that it is located in a weak place of the ear, be careful to open it up easily: and carefully, so as not to wound the nerves of the ear.
Then put into the ear a liquid second to the quantity of width of the hole which you have opened with Egyptian ointment: leave it for several days, until you are sure that the wound is healed.
Or take liquid, and pour it into rose water, and powder it on top of it, and use it.
That if you see the ear already blistering: then it is necessary that you should take liquid out, and let it with the liquid which you have used in the green ointment made with rose oil, until it is healed by itself: and then take care of the ear until it is cured.
If however there is a flow of blood: then dip the sponge, or cloth into cold water and put it on her: and use the remainder of the cure, which has cut off the flow of blood predicted in the treatise on distillation.
On the Treatment of Athers of the eyelids.
Head VIII.
These are Althelis that occur in the eyelids when they are wet, and dry when they are.
Therefore you should hold them with tenails: or with an iron hook, and strike them with an awl from their roots. Then place on the affected areas ground pepper.
If however any blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a thin lens cautery.
And cauterize them, it is better after an incision. For often they return when some of the roots remain. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned, and do not return.
On the Treatment of Athers in the eyelids of the eye.
Head IX.
Often there occurs in the eyelids something that is congealed on Crandin in its strength, and hardness, and because of this it is called Grandin; and is an aggregation of moist grossness in the upper eyelid, and lower eyelid.
Operation on them is, that you consider then, if there is Grandin going out from it, which appears on the eyelid, and move to all parts, and the thing is easy to perform.
Then find on her a slit across the width. Then scrape off that skin from all parts with ease, until it bleeds. Then hang her up by the hook, and cut off that one.
If however you are not prepared to cut off that thing, unless after you make an incision slightly in the eyelid, then it will harm that thing which is bad.
If however the slit is large: then aggregate it with a stitch: and care for it, until it heals.
And if it is too much, do not let a bad thing come out of it. For he will restore her, and make her flesh grow.
And if there is a great hole towards the inside of the ear from the surface inward, then turn the lid upside down and hang the ring with a hook: except that you should cut it and press it from all sides.
That if the eyelid is stretched by cutting, that does not hurt in any way.
Then wash the eye after cutting with salty water: and take care of the place with it when it is inflamed, until the wound heals.
§ On the Care of the Eyebrows.
Chapter Ten.
Axirnath is the grease that is generated in the eyebrows; and it happens very often to boys: and it damages their eyes, and they are afflicted with cataracts in the morning, and they cannot see the light of the sun, because the tears go to them, and therefore they lie on their faces all the time, and sleep on them, and their eyelids are always wet, which has been cured by inflation; and the prominent Axirnath is apparent to the eye, and when you press the spot with your fingers, you feel Axirnath between them.
And the way that it works is that he puts the sick head in your lap.
Then take a piece of linen cloth and prepare it with strings, and make from it a loop according to the amount that contains Axirnath from all parts. Then put him on it, and press him with your fingers from all parts, so that the Axirnath is gathered up in the middle of the loop.
Then find in the middle of it a wet spot with a sponge that is incident on cracks by width, and there is no larger crack that is made in the depth.
Or you should find the whole skin, until you reach Axirnath; for in many ways Axirnath proceeds from a crack: and with a white sponge, when it has been driven out, it is called Axirnath.
Extrahe ergo eam cum panno, quem infiltrasti inter digitos tuos ad exteriora: et tu reuoluis manum tuam ad dextram et sinistram, donec dispergatur: et caue, ne addas in fissura, ut non peruenias cum spatumili ad oculum, et laedas eum.
But if you do not see the axillae at first in the groove, then you insert a little bit into the groove until the axilla comes out. Then take it out, as we have said.
Then dip the cloth in vinegar and water, and place it on the spot, and tighten it with powder.
And there are people who put salt on, and place it in the crack so that what remains of the moisture is liquified.
Then take care of this, until it heals.
But if there is a hot swelling at the site, then take care of it with soiled plasters, until it heals.
As for the methods of eye treatment, that is, when the eyelid becomes soft to the eye, so that it does not rub like it should.
Chapter 11:
When hairs grow out in the eyelids, adding to the natural course of them, and become ingrained: then they hurt the eye, and cause diseases such as constant tears, enlargement of the eyelids, and whiteness, until the cause of destruction of the eye is reached.
And the treatment for Ataxmir eyes, that is, eyes that rub, is treated in four ways. Or with a caustic, using fire. Or with acute medicines, according to the precepts given in the chapter on cauterization. Or treated by Ataxmir through incisions and suturing. Or with reeds, according to what I say.
It is necessary that you place the head of the patient in your lap. Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If so, it is good. And if not: insert now into it, where sits the hair from the lower part of the eyelid, and let the thread go through with a thread from above, and let that be close to the hairs themselves, that is, close to the edge of the eyelid, where the hairs grow out: and pull the thread up with the eyelid, and turn it around.
Then find in the inner part of the eyelid under the added hairs with the knife incident from the larger tear to the smaller tear.
Then pull out the thread, and put under the eyelid a small tuft of wool from wool, or cloth: then mark on the eyelid with the encrustation, which sits like a figure of a leaf of mulberry.
However, it should be made according to the size and height of the eyelid: for this has been varied in humans.
For from them is he who does not wish that the thread should go out from the eyelid according to the quantity that softens it from the eyelid.
Then with the knife find above the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the larger tear to the smaller one, and let there be a groove next to the natural hairs, as is the height of the radius.
Then insert the hook into one of two angles of the skin. Then scrape all of it out. Then bring together with a stitch the two lips, with an aiguille and a thread of fine wool: and wipe away the blood, and let whatever excess remains from the hairs on the two eyelids stick to the two eyelids, with certain things that are slippery, if you wish to do so: and if not, it is not important.
Then let go of the stitch and the thread until three or four days: then take care of it.
And if you wish, let go of the hook without a stitch, and take care of it with it, that it dries up and tightens. For the eyelid rises by the sigillation of the wound and its aggregation: but a better one will come in the future.
Thus they taught the method of treatment of Ataxmir in the ancient times.
Indeed, in it is concern for the sick, and it is from a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And another mode also in Ataxmir: and that is, as signs on the eyelid a figure, which is like the figure of a bay laurel leaf, as we have told.
Then wipe the eyelid with three separate or joined hooks according to this form that follows, then cut what exceeds with small blades according to this form, with an equal incision.
But if you are not able to hold the hook, and it does not match: then take an acme in which is a thread, and introduce it into the middle of the figure: and introduce another thread near the larger tear, and a third thread near the smaller tear: and gather between your fingers the threads with an equality.
Then wipe your hand with an equal wiping: and wipe the skin over where is marked the spot, as we have told.
Then gather together the two lips of the wound with a stitch: and take care of it, until it heals.
But if there happens to be a blister on your incision or a crack: but that blister with white of egg, and these similar ones, from a ointment sitting.
And when the eyelids also happen to turn inward so that their hairs come together.
It is necessary, then, for you to use on it what we have said in the incision: but the stitch on both sides is more artificial. Of the care of Ataxmir with hooks.
And is, as you turn the eyelid and divide the crack which is within, according to what we have told. Then, with art, make two hooks or two thin pieces of wood: whose length is according to the length of the eyelid, and whose width is less than a fingernail's breadth: and you have already incision on the extremities of both sides where you hold the threads.
Then collect it with subtlety on what exceeds the eyelid of the eye, and tightly tie two reeds from both sides with a strong constriction, and let go after a few days. The skin, however, will die, be degraded, and decompose until it falls away by itself.
If it therefore is delayed, then cut it with scissors. Then take care of it until it heals.
When it has thus consolidated, remove the eyelid: and the hair no longer prickle.
This is the form of two reeds which you shall make according to this figure, and in quantity in length and breadth.
Head XII.
De elewatione pilorum pungentium in oculo cum acu.
Operation in that is, that you take a fine acme, and insert in it a thread of silk, soft. Then gather together the ends thereof, and tie each with a small knot; and make the length of the threads equal to that of a palm.
Then compose in the Alinxotatus a second thread under it, and tie the ends thereof if you wish.
Then lay his sick head in your lap, and bring it near the light that the operation may be declared; for it is an operation of subtlety or minuteness.
Then insert the acme with the Alinxotatus at the root of the eyelid, and let it penetrate into the eyelid swiftly, until you draw out a natural hair.
Then pull the hair up above the Alinxotatus: and insert in the Alinxotatus that hair; if one, or two, or three, not more.
Then take your hand with it, until the hair and Alinxotatus come out of the eyelid with a natural hair.
If it is not drawn out with the Alinxotatus, and a hair does not come out with it: then draw out the Alinxotatus downward with a thread which you have composed therein, until the Alinxotatus comes out of the upper opening, and close the eye thereof; then let go the eye for two days, or three, until the hair adheres to its place, and grows on the top thereof.
If the hair is short, then either attach a long hair from natural hairs, and cut it off with it; or let it go until it grows out after a space, and then cut it off.
Head XIII.
When this occurs to the eye, it is called Leporina.
And this disease of Al-Ashtar is either natural or accidental.
So the accidental one is caused by the union of a wound, or a cut, or cauterization, and similar things.
And the mode of action in it is, that you may find that union, and that you separate its lips, and put into it what is between them from linen, and bind it, until it heals.
And it is not necessary that you should use for its cure the things which dry and tighten; for if you do so, Al-Ashtar returns worse than it was: but use for it the things which soften, such as fennel seed; and bathe with water in which has been cooked aloe, and oil: and anoint with it, and apply with it.
And the treasure of your cure is, that you may keep any idea, so that it does not harden, according to its form which it had at first.
And this operation which we have described is no more than a certain correction of Al-Ashtar, so that the form of the place does not return to what it was altogether.
On the treatment of Al-Ashtar's disease which occurs in the lower eyelid, and is either a swelling or a contraction upward toward the right or left.
Head XVIII.
This disease of Al-Ashtar which occurs below is the one which is called Al-Ashtar's in truth. And it is either natural or accidental. Et haec Alxatrati est quae accidit ex sectione
So the accidental one is caused by a wound, or a crack, or cauterization, and similar things. Et haec Alxatrati est quae accidit ex consolidatione uulneris, aut sectionis, aut cauterii, et
And when you have grasped the operation on it, so that you can see two filaments therein, and wet it with flesh, and make it penetrate from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal until the filament comes into contact with both ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh toward the top with a sharp knife, and cut it with a chisel from the side. If therefore the shape of the eyelid returns according to what is necessary, it is good.
And if not, take the beam, and put it in the notch, and turn it with it: and find two notches in the inner side of the eyelid, and are the ends of the two notches from two angles of incision, until they meet and make this figure, and is the Greek letter pi.
Then take off that flesh according to its quantity, which is the acute lower side of it, from there that follows the eyelid. Then bring together the separated parts: sew them with a woolen thread.
Then take care of them with what I have said, about the soothing medicines and poultices, until they are healed.
And if it happens to be from a notch, and stitching, or cauterization: then you should find a flat notch under the eyelids of the hair, also according to what preceded it. Then separate the two lips with a lint, according to what we have said.
And the whole speech about the care of Al-Khazini when it is above, or below, it is as follows: let it run in that operation, according to what was prepared from the form of Al-Khazini.
It itself is a diverse form: and the prudent craftsman prepares his mind with whatever way it is possible for him, until he makes a figure return to a natural shape, or close to it, and himself sickens, according to what suits him from operation and instruments in various dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid of the eye with the conjunctiva, or cornea.
And this consolidation sometimes happens in many people so that the upper lid with white of the eye is consolidated and prevents itself from its own natural actions.
It is necessary that you insert the end of the radius under the eyelid and lift it up: or that you extend it with a pin: then cut the adhesion with a very fine spatulum which is not sharp in cutting the spatulum, rather it is slightly blunt: so that the sick one does not stir during the operation, and moves the spatulum, and hurts his eye with its own sharpness: and let your incision be as if you were taking away the adhesion with ease, until when the eyelid returns to its natural form, and cures the whole adhesion.
Then at that time pour into the eye water which is salty, with water cleaning it up: or distill into it from a distilled liquor, from a dissolved tin with water.
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a string of linen: and put over the eye wool infused with alumen: and after three days use a distiller, and with consolidations until it is cured.
Regarding the incision of the nail and the eminence of the flesh of tears.
Chapter XVI.
You know that the nail is according to two ways. Or it is nervous: and it is similar to soft bone, thin. Or it is not nervous, similar to frozen moisture of white: which when it touches a hot iron, or a sharp instrument with a hook, tears off, and does not stick to it.
And both kinds of nails do not begin, except from the greater tear: until they are gradually discovered, until they cover the eye, and prevent light and the movement of the eye.
And the method of operation for its incision is: so that the sick one puts his head in your lap. Then open his eyes, and lift the eyelid with your hand. Then take the nail with a few twists, and extend it to the upper part. Then take the nail, and insert it into the hoof with a few twists; then pierce it with an awl or a twig: and fasten the thread strongly to one end of the nail, and fix it in the middle of the hoof: then drive it in with a needle, and tie it with a thread around the hoof, and extend it towards the top: and scrape off with a hair the side of the hoof that follows the pupil, as if you were holding it with a hair until it reaches its tip.
Then cut off the residue in the lacrimal root with a fine chisel or with tiny tweezers; and let go of the natural lacrimal flesh, so that the regular flow of tears is not interrupted by the incision.
And when the nail is extended with the hook alone: or with a thread, as we have said. Then scrape off with a fine chisel, which has this shape.
And beware, so that the chisel does not touch the horn tunic, and a tear does not occur, and the pupil is punched through.
Then after the incision, pour into the eye some crushed salt, or made from a solution of zinc, and let it rest until the next day. Then take care for the eyes, with what is necessary, until they are healed.
That if the hoof is not nervy, and you cannot drive a nail into it, nor can you fix an móng in it; then this kind of hoof treatment with medicines should be carefully applied, and he will heal like a narrative in a division.
That if you want to cut it with a knife, then open the eye of the patient, and take a fine chisel, slightly sharp, according to this form. And scrape off the upper part of the hoof with a subtle razor. That if you see that the eye has become red and inflamed, and it has been impressed by the razor; then pour into the eye from your own tears, made from a solution of zinc or red wine or salt: and rub the eye until the next day.
Then repeat over himself the operation, until he has entirely removed him. Unless there is an opposition to you in his eye a hot apophtheme: then indeed dismiss her, and care for the apophtheme, until he is healed.
Then repeat the operation on himself with reasoning, until he is healed.
But the eminence of the flesh of the eye, if it hurts greatly in the eye a great harm, it should be suspended with an anchor, and cut off from her that part: and do not make the last cut, so that does not happen run of tears.
Then drop a rubies in his tear-ducts, or made from zinc, until he is healed.
Of the incision of Algordainic, and the flesh born in the eye.
Chapter XVII.
It is born when and in some eyes of men there is a red flesh put together, or placed on top, until it covers the pupil, or approaches, or squeezes the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelids outward: and is absorbed by the roses of the balastine.
And the operation on her is also, that he puts his sick head in your lap. Then open his eyes, and take her off all that flesh with an anchor suitable for it: and hold her with one pince, or grasp.
Then cut the flesh first, until he has finished all of him with a scalpel. And caustica from the eye, so that you do not scar him during the operation: and let your cut be which one you cut off, or with a chisel, which we have mentioned in the incision of nails: or with small tongs, with which the asebel is caught, according to which it will come after this chapter.
When your cut is complete, and all the Algordainici has been removed, then fill the eye with crushed salt: or distil into it a red powder, and similar drugs that burn: and put on the eye a woolen cloth with alume, so that he is secure from the hot apophtheme.
If something remains of the algyd in your eye, and warm blood flows to it, and you see a red swell: then let go of the eye, and take care of the swelling with it while it is lying there.
Then go over the eye with the operation until it heals.
And do the same for the flesh added which has happened to the eye from this kind.
However, it is necessary that you do not interrupt the healing of any weak eye from its natural way, or from an accidental way, while operating with iron: and do not put your hand in any of these operations until it has healed, since this member is tolerant of that operation.
Regarding the collection of sebaceous matter from the eye.
Chapter 18.
Sebel are red swellings that cover the eye and prevent the performance of surgery: and they weaken the eye with the passage of days.
Therefore you must first consider, if the eye in which there is sebaceous matter is strong, and there is no other illness in it apart from the sebaceous matter: then gather the sebaceous matter.
And it is, as you have ordered for the sick person, to put his head in your lap.
Then hang those swellings with a hook, one or two according to your discretion: and let the hook be thin, double according to this form, or let there be two hooks separated by a double length, according to this form.
Then pick them up with slight hook-like things, carefully, and wipe away the blood hour by hour until they have healed over, and dissolved: and do not leave the eye with its edges wet.
And let your operation be in the middle of the day before the sun, and be steady in your operation very much: so that you do not fall except on those swellings.
And when you have emptied it, then pour into the eye clear water or red water: so that its own sharpness may corrode what is left of the sebaceous matter.
If, however, you are not able to collect that whole [amount of] medicine at that time, then bind the eye with that which soothes the eye's pain; and leave him for a few days until his pain subsides: and keep him away from heat [contingent] on the eye. Then repeat over him in the same way again until he is cured.
And this is the form of the knife.
The treatment of arsy-varsy [a kind of fever] to the nose.
Chapter XIX.
They call the treatment for arsy-varsy with a funnel, which they apply with caustic or sharp medicine, as per the previous description.
If he does not recover, then there is no skill in it: unless you discover the pus  [the cause of the arsy-varsy] under his birthmark and remove all the moisture that is in it and the pus until the hole is exposed.
When, then, the hole is exposed, and you see corruption or blackening in it, then shave him with an instrument, the form of which is as follows:
And it is called Shaving of the Head.
Let it be made of iron rod, and let the head be round like a wheel, so that it is pierced with a file or fine chisel   [a type of tool]: and place him on the site of the corruption of the bones.
Then roll him between your fingers, and press your hand upon him moderately, until you know that that corruption has now been shaved off: and do it sometimes.
Then restore the site with dried-out styptic   [a type of medicine].
If, then, the site has healed, and flesh has grown there, and the scar has disappeared   [the scar indicating a healing]: and remains for forty days, and does not return to its former state or cause any irritation: then know that he has been cured.
If not, then there is no skill in it except to apply a funnel to the nose, as per this form.
And it is so that you remove the second bone with iron or sharp medicine; and when the bone has been removed, then take this kind of hammer, its end being made of iron in the form of a triangle: and make its wood an elongated pyramid up to its end, as you see.
Then put this above the bone itself: and let it be near the tear: and extend your hand from the eye a little. Then rotate your hand with the hammer, until it penetrates the bone and feels weak: by this you will see a vapour emerge from it when it holds its hand over its nose.
Therefore then restore the place with sharp medicine that dries up, as I have taught you.
When then does the flesh grow and the place hardens: then the substance that flowed outside returns to the nose: so it is lighter over the weak one.
De reductione eminentiae Oculi.
The Reduction of Ocular Prominence.
When the eye emanates with its entirety, and does not occur to damage the sight or decrease it: then you should remove the weak one: then let blood be drawn: then put vents on the skin without scarring, but with suction.
Then put over the eye a lotion that is made of oak, and of aloe, and of pine resin, and of sarcocolla. Then tie the eye down from above over a plaster with various powders.
And the method of the powders is this: that you take soft cloths, many and double, each cloth out of four: make from them many: then put them one on top of the other, according to the quantity that the eye requires: then tie them together with a stiff cloth, strong fastening.
And again put vents on without scarring.
Then remove the vents, and let the eye rest during the day and at night.
If however the ligature again softens, then you should tie it very tight: then remove the ligature after a day and night, as we have said.
If you see that the eye is now red again with new wounds of the sheath, it is good; and if not, then apply again plaster, and dust, and tighten, and wettings, until healthy.
§ On the Incision of the Sheath.
Chapter XXI.
If a disruption occurs in the sheath of the eye, then let it be cut and removed outside the eyelids like a grain of wheat, and let it be shaped like a human form because of it, and let it be incised: then the operation on it is, according to what: and that, so that you insert the acumen into the root of the eye from below to above.
Then introduce another ακουμ (acumen) which is at the place where there are two nerves from the lacrimal side, and let it penetrate; and release that other one according to its placement.
Then incise the place of the double nerve, and tie with it the side of the sheath around the ακουμ; and tighten it much.
Then remove the ακουμ , and place on the eye wool that is infused with albumen on the whites of the eye; and release it, until the nerve drops with the sheath.
Then take care for the eye that comforts it, until its wound heals.
And when the sheath is tightened all around with a circle of cloth so as to give the eye great prominence.
Then it is pierced with a thin awl that reaches to the depth of the eye, and moistened with albumen, and drops down, and enters immediately; then tighten it, until it heals.
§ On the Treatment of Alconostia.
Chapter XXII.
This ailment called Alconostias, is not unless it is a deposit, which is gathered in the eye, similar to water that has dropped down, and it is not itself.
And the way of operation in it is, so that you make the sick sit on a prepared seat, or straight.
Then take its head in your hands from the two sides, and move it so that you do not see the deposit coming down to the lower part of its eyes. Then stop it from flowing out and let the light be made whole; and let the sick person see things as they are seen. And if it does not flow down to the lower part, know that it is water.
But if the descent is not prepared with him as we have said, then make him sit between your hands. Then take a very fine spatula and find it with him above the horny layer a little bit towards the edge of the joining with the cornea in the crown, until it comes out.
When it has come out then distill into the eye hot water in which you have mixed honey: or water in which you have already boiled wheatgrass and honey; and then let the rest of the cure take place, until it is healed.
Of the cure of water that comes out of the eye, or a waterfall.
CHAPTER XXIII.
We have already spoken about the kinds of water, and which is suitable for piercing by revealing and explaining, then take the same water according to its suitability for healing.
Then it is necessary that you make the sick person sit between your hands square-wise, opposite the light, near the sun: and bind the eye of the healthy hand, and tighten it tightly: then with your right hand palm the eye of the sick person if the eye in which the water is is on the left: or with your left hand, if the eye is on the right.
Then take in your right hand almagest (a kind of mineral), if the eye is on the left: or in your left hand, if the eye is on the right.
Then put the end of the almagest a little bit towards the crown by the thickness of the radius in the same whiteness of the eye apparent tear: then push the almagest with force; and you will feel that the almagest has already come to the tear.
And it is necessary that there be a measure of the journey of the almagest to the depth, a space which is from the pupil to the end of the darkness: and this is the crown of the eye. You shall cut off this eye, because of the clarity of the corneal membrane.
Then put on the almagra until such time as it reaches the place where the water is. Then press down on yourself with one hand after another.
If then the water has descended at once, then he sees that eye at once, and the almagra in his own eye.
Then you rest for a little while. If then the water has descended, then put it down again, except that the almagra comes out.
When then does it stop, and does not rise up again: then pull out the almagra easily: and you relax your hand little by little.
Then dissolve in the water some of the clear salt of the lens: and wash the inside of the eye with it. Then put out all the eye with a cloth, or a woolen yarn immersed in oil and stained with albus: and bind it up with it so that the eye is healthy.
But we, and those who are of our time, put over it a finely-ground chalk mixed with albus.
That if the almagra does not obey you at the entrance to the eye because of its hardness, since it is from a man whose eye is very hard: then you should take the plant called Alberidge, which has this form:
Then open with it the connection only for a little while, and do not put your hand at all into the hole: and is there not except that you make the way for the almagra to the small opening.
Then introduce the almagra, following what we have said before.
And when you have finished your work, prepare for the sick person an awkward bedroom in which he may sleep on his back in a dark room: and prevent him from all movements, and from coughing: and let him eat that food by which nature nourishes him: and do not move his head to the right or left at all.
And let it rest until the third day.
Then remove it from that dark house and test its vision; and make him see things. Then reduce the ligament up to the seventh day.
And it is not necessary that he make it do the work of cure at the time of the operation or immediately after the incision; but it is necessary that he keep it apart: for the water rises quickly through a slanted surface.
But if it happens that the swelling is warm: then you should open his eye before the seventh day: and make straight that which is wrong, so that it may be right when it has rested; then you shall test his vision, and put it on his mouth where his vision goes under while he rests those days, while he is in that dark house.
Then let him go out of the house little by little, and let him walk about in his rooms.
And know that the pupil is not exempt from vision sometimes: then he should dare to look at the operation.
And indeed some of those who are from Al-Ayyelah have come to us, who said: "It was done in Al-Ayyelah that the eye was pierced, so that the water comes out.
But verily I have not seen anyone in your land do such a thing; and I have not found it written in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that it is new.
And these are the shapes of the eyes, so that they may stand over them who do not know them.
Let them be made of pure brass; and let their edges be of the same delicate triangular shape, and the acute point.
Chapter 24.
Regarding the cure for the birthmark that is born on the nose.
When and how do they grow on the nose: from which there is something that is like a scorpion with many feet; and from it is the flesh of cancer that is hard, pale-colored, and fuzzy; and from it is the soft meat that is not pale-colored.
In the part that is soft from among these flesh, not fraudulent nor cancerous, you should make the sick person sit with his hands opposite the sun, and open his nostrils and insert hooks into those flesh: then pull them towards the outside, and cut what you have gathered with a thin sharp blade from one side, until you know that all the flesh has been removed.
That if anything remains of it from which removal is not possible: then shave that with one sharp tool easily until no more remains of it. If, however, blood rules over you, or an infection is hot: then oppose it with what is needed: or it is from malignant sores, then approach it with cauterization, until the blood stops flowing, and all flesh is removed.
Then pour into the nose after cutting vinegar, and water, or wine. If, however, the nose is opened, and moisture proceeds from it up to the palate, then you should know that he is already well.
If, however, the moisture does not penetrate, as should be the case, then you should know that flesh is born inside the upper bones of the nose, to which the cutting tool does not reach.
Then you should put a thread of linen with some thickness, and make many nodules on it: and place between each nodule the length of a finger or less: and the sick person should bring one end of the thread into his nose with a jaw, or with whatever is possible for him to do after he has done himself like this: and he should smell it, until he reaches the palate, and comes out onto his throat.
And many times indeed young men do this thing like this in school: and it is an easy thing for him who wants to do it.
Then place the two ends of the thread, one end that goes out over the nose, and the other that remains in the nose. Then apply a massage to the flesh with nodules which are on the string. Then apply a massage to the flesh with nodules which are on the string.
Then take off the string: and put into the nose after abstinence of blood the liquid which you have imbibed with the Egyptian ointment: do this three days, or more, until the ointment has eaten up all that remains of the flesh.
Then put into the end of the matter a plummifed tube in the nose for a few days, until it is healed.
If however the cure requires that which dries up, use that.
For the making of a poultice for the head, when with it are distilled oil and other medicines into the nose, make that of silver or brass: which is like a little lantern, opened as an oyster: and its outlet likewise.
And if you wish to make a closed tube, like a reed.
And the oyster of the instrument for making a poultice for the head, is full, and closed: which has at the end a handle, by which you hold it, when you heat it in the oil, or what you wish to put into it, and fluid things.
Head XXXV.
Theul often grows in the end of the nose, and becomes larger and more noticeable with the days going by, until it makes a sort of crust.
And for this, at the beginning of its appearance, you should cut off all of it. Then put over the place, or caustic, or medicine that burns where it is.
If however the cutting away of it is slow until it becomes larger, then consider, if it is hard and dull in colour and not very sensitive: then do not touch it with iron: for it is a kind of cancer.
Often has been seen that which incised the flesh of man and made thereon a bad sore, and has happened from it great mischiefes to the one who had it.
And if the apoplexy is mild and not discolored and you see that an incision can be made in all of it, then clean the sick part and make the incision without fear or anxiety, and heal the place along with it until it heals.
Chapter 26. On the suture of the head.
On the suture of the nose, lips, and ears.
You know that when there is a rupture of the continuity of one of these cartilage pieces, surgery is little use unless in certain individuals.
It is necessary that when such a thing happens to someone, you should consider whether it is a recent wound with its blood: and then add the pain of the wound to the suture: and then heal the wound itself until it heals.
And if the rupture has separated the lips and made one side healthy while leaving another unhealthy part, then it is necessary to remove all of the skin on that side until it bleeds. Then add the two lips together with the suture and tighten them and sprinkle dragon's blood on it and crushed olibanum: and put a fragment of hardened plaster on it, and some other piece of consolidated plaster: and let it be bound for two days or three. Then remove the dressing and change the medicine: and let it go until the threads separate by themselves. Then heal the wound with ointment until it heals.
The method of the suture is that you add the solution of continuity, or with a thread as we have told you about the suture of the eye: or you add the solution with a thread, as I have told you.
Chapter 27. On the head.
On the removal of bumps from the lips.
Many people have hard bumps similar to small grains of herbs inside their lips, and some smaller ones, and larger ones.
Therefore, when you have turned the lips inside out, and found all of the bumps, and suspended them by a thread, and cut them off from all sides.
Then fill the place where the incision has been made with dried earth, until the blood is dried up.
Then clean it with vinegar and treat the spot with that, in which there is a staph, until the wounds heal.
Head XXXVIII.
A wound that has come from cutting through the flesh near the gums.
しばしば口唇に肉がはみ出し、古い人はこれをabulusと呼んだ。
It should be suspended with a hook; or you should hold it with tongs, and cut it at the root of its attachment, and let the blood run or the blood flow.
Then put on top of the place where the incision was made, or other dry powder that is astringent, to dry it up.
If that same flesh returns after treatment, for it often does, then cut it a second time and causticate it; but it does not return after the application of the caustic.
Head XXIX.
The shaving of teeth with iron.
When the teeth are gathered in the surface from within and from outside, and between the gums there are rough parts, and sometimes they corrode and turn yellow, causing the teeth to become rotten through that corruption, which is called "dentinous" dentin.
It should be so that you can sit the ill person between your hands, and their head in your lap, and grind the tooth and the gum where you see the nerve, and any similar material like sand: until none remains of it, and likewise for yellowing, rotting, and citrifying, and other defects until they are clean.
If then what is taken out from the beginning of shaving is good: and if not, then shave them again another day, and a third time, until you have come to the end of your working in it.
And know that the tooth is sensitive to different types of blades, and to various shapes: second, that the blade with which you cut the tooth from below is different from the blade with which you cut between the teeth, according to the shapes.
And these forms of razors are with you prepared, which you see.
Chapter 30: Head.
On the extraction of pain from teeth.
It is necessary that you treat the tooth with all your skill and remove it with difficulty. For the tooth does not yield easily when it is extracted; for the substance is delicate: until, when there is no excuse for extracting it, then you should extract it when it is weak, so that it may harden, and certify with you the complaining tooth.
For often the pain deceives the weak one, and he supposes that the pain is in the tooth and extracts it himself: afterwards, the pain does not retreat until the weak tooth is extracted.
For we have already seen this from the operation of bloodletting.
When, therefore, the complaining tooth is certified with you, then it is necessary that you make a incision around the tooth with the scalpel, in which there is some of the power, until it is broken: then move it with your fingers, or with subtle forceps, little by little, until it is wriggling.
Then place there large knots on the spot in a good position, and the head of the wound between your knees: which you held firmly so that it did not wiggle: then draw out the tooth along its length, so as not to break it.
If, however, it does not come out, then take some of their instruments and push it under it from all sides with ease, and try to move it, as you did at first.
If, however, the tooth is perforated or corroded: then it is necessary that you fill it with cloth: and tighten it with a slender hook, so that it does not break at the time of your constriction on top of it with the forceps.
And you should, so to speak, do an incision around the gum with a lot of bleeding.
And guard your strength so that you do not break it and a part of it remains, and returns to the weak one from the evil which causes it more pain at first.
And so, do not make that mistake which the phlebotomators make out of ignorance and their rashness in eradicating it, except that they administer to it what we have described.
For many times have we seen how great ailments they bring upon men, which are harder to break than they remain the roots of it all, or some of its parts: or as they take it out with some of the bones of the jaw: as we have often witnessed.
Then they clean up after eradicating it with wine, or vinegar and salt.
That if it happens that a flow of blood comes from the places (for many times does happen) then mend some wound and fill it with it: and if not, cauterize it itself if not giving you a wound.
The shapes of the forceps are small at the ends which they move first, have long handles, thick, so that they do not double themselves when pressed upon a tooth: are as you see the thick handles of the forceps, until when you squeeze them with them, do not bite themselves, nor double themselves: the short ends, and are made of iron rod, or a split piece of wood, straight ends: and in their ends there are teeth, some of which enter into some things, and squeeze them tightly, surely.
And when they make the ends as the shape of the ear opening which is called the ciconia, and are strong constriction.
Chapter 31.
Of the eradicating of teeth and extracting of bones of the jaw fractures.
When remains after the eradication of a tooth which is broken something, then you should put upon the place Cotum with butter one day, or two days, until it softens the place: and then introduce into it algast or forceps: of whose ends are shaped like the ear opening which is called ciconia. The shape however of this forceps is.
The extremities should be made round like a lemon: or like an egg.
If he does not obey you at the exit with these forceps, then it is necessary that you stop up the root, and scrape off all the flesh, and insert the instrument which is called a small spoon-shaped scissor, whose form is this.
The end should be short, somewhat longer: and it should not be soaked, lest it break.
If then the root is gone out by that, it is good: and if not, it is necessary to move with these other instruments the forms of which are these.
The form of the first extreme, in which there is some груssness.
The triangular shape of the small extreme.
And with the other instruments and tools which have preceded in the cutting of teeth.
Also sit the clamping with this instrument which is similar to a large hook, of this form, triangular extreme torted, in which there is some груssness, so that it does not break: and it should not be soaked.
And you should know that there are many instruments for teeth: and likewise the other instruments do not count, and the prudent artist finds his own instrument, according to which serves him operation and the diseases themselves.
Because from the diseases there are those for which the ancient instrument did not speak, because of the diversity of their forms.
If then the jaw is broken from the mandible, or from other bones of the mouth, or putrid: then examine on top of it in its own place with what belongs to him from instruments and forceps which I spoke in extracting the root, and move with the gesture, whose form is this.
It is sat there some gruesomeness gradually, so that it is tight, or hold with it the jaw, and does not flee and move, until the exit of the jaw: and restore place with medicines fitting for it.
If there is pus in bone then it should be carved away from its own pus and cured until healed.
Head 32.
Of the excellent locking of teeth on others.
When the teeth are not in their proper position, i.e., when they do not grow in a natural way, they become pus-filled through the shape of the jaw; and this especially happens with women and girls, i.e., those who are still growing.
Therefore you should consider. For if one tooth has come up after another and does not fit, nor can its locking be done, then eradicate it; and if it is joined with another tooth, then cut it out with this instrument, the shape of which is as follows.
It is similar in shape to a small chisel, and is made of iron, and has a sharp point.
And let your cut be deep, and for the hardness of the tooth, and so that it does not displace any other teeth.
But if it is exposed and its filing is worn out, then file it with a sharp chisel made of iron; the shape of which is as follows.
It should all be of iron, and the handle of its minute pointed tip should be like a chisel with which akos are made; with this file the tooth is gradually filed away over many days with ease, so that no other teeth are disturbed and it falls out: then make the tooth smooth by carving it with some rasps.
If a tooth breaks off and hurts the tongue, then it should be filed as well until its roughness is gone, and made smooth; and if it presses on the tongue, or disturbs the speech, then make it smooth without pressing it.
Head 33.
Of retaining teeth with gold fillings.
When the anterior teeth are injured and shaken by a blow, or fall, and cannot be held firm so as not to fall out: and they have been treated with stinging medicines, and the treatment does not help: then let there be a design in them to be tied with gold wire; for gold changes color, and spoils after a while; but gold never changes.
And let there be a thread of middle thickness between subtility and coarseness according to the quantity that it takes between teeth.
And the shape of retention is that you take a thread and insert it between two healthy teeth: then you tie it with both ends between the teeth, or one end, or more, until you reach the dental nerve until you hit it with a needle until you reach the healthy side's nerve. Then repeat the texture until you reach the side from which you started: and tighten your hand with subtlety and wisdom, until it does not move completely: and let your constriction be where you tighten the thread, near the roots of the teeth, so that it does not break.
Then cut the ends of the thread that are excessive with scissors: and gather both together, and twist them together, and conceal them between a healthy tooth and a teeth-motus tooth so that they don't hurt the tongue: then let go, so that it is tight when left alone.
If it becomes loose or breaks, tighten them with another thread and keep it in place for a long time.
And this is the shape of the teeth, and the figure of retention of two healthy teeth and two teeth-motus as you see them.
And sometimes a tooth falls out, or two teeth after the decay and rust in their places, and remain in place as we have described, and does not make it except for an artisan who is careful, wise, and experienced.
And sometimes a bone breaks, and becomes the shape of a tooth, and is placed in its place, from which it holds firm a tooth, and tightens it like we said, and remains with it for a long time.
Chapter 34.
And sometimes the ligament that happens under the tongue is either natural, with which a person is born, or accidental, from an arrow that has already healed.
And the operation is, so that you open his mouth in his head in your bosom, and relieve his tongue; and then cut that ligament that nervously through its width, until his tongue is released from its hold.
If there is anything of hardness and swelling, and it is from the union of a wound; then throw into it a hook, and finish it through its width, until you cut the ligament, and the swelling is released.
And cause not to be a breach in the depth of the flesh, and cut there an artery, so that blood flows out.
Then moisten in the shadow of the incision with rosin water, or vinegar, or cold water.
Then put under the tongue a piece of linen that holds the weak one all night, so that it does not harden again.
But if there is any flow of blood, then put on the spot a lump of earth. But if you are pricked by blood, then cauterize the spot with a piece of dried cow manure that comes to it: and then take care for yourself with the rest of the cure, until it is healed.
Head XXXV.
When there is a small sore under the tongue that absorbs the little frog, prevents the natural movement of the tongue: and perhaps it grows so much, until the bone is filled.
And the operation is, so that you open the closed mouth from the sun: and consider the sore.
But if you see that the color of it is dark or black, and hard, to which the sick person does not have a sense of touch; then do not touch it, for it is cancer.
And if it declines to whiteness, in which is moisture, then throw into it a hook, and cut it with a fine scythe, and free it from every part. If your blood pricks you during the hour of your operation, then put on the spot a lump of earth until the blood is separated: and then return to your operation, until it is extracted with its complement.
Then cover with vinegar and salt: and treat him with the appropriate cure for that, until he is healed.
In the treatment of boils, two walnuts should be used.
Chapter XXXVI. On the Treatment of Wounds and Ulcers.
When, however, the wound is between the mouth and the tonsils, that is to say, the glands which resemble azalea and occur on the sides; they are called two walnuts: when you treat them with the cure mentioned in the division, and they do not heal, then consider carefully.
If, however, the boil is hard, of a fusty colour, with little sensation; then do not touch the boil with the iron.
And if its colour is ruddy and its root is thick: then do not touch the boil with the iron, fearing a flow of blood, but leave it, until it boils dry. And then you shall either pierce it, or let it burst by itself.
And if its colour is white and round, and the root is fine: then the boil should be pricked.
And the operation upon it is such that, before you perform the operation, if the boil has become warm and quiet and has completed its healing, or is about to diminish in any way: then cause the sick person to sit in front of the sun, and place his head in your lap; and open his mouth, and let him take hold between his hands, and press his tongue with an instrument of this shape.
Let it be made of silver, or of brass, that it may be as sharp as a knife.
When you press it with the instrument on the boil and see it swell your skin: then take hold of a hook, and fasten it in the walnut, and pull out as much as you can, taking off at the same time some of the skin.
Then cut it with an instrument which has this shape. It is to be joined together by a hook; and yet its extremities are so curled up that the opening of each of them is in the acute angle of the other: therefore the cure should be that it be made of iron, or of a metal which absorbs.
If this instrument is not present, then cut it with a chisel, which has this shape. This instrument should be sharp on one side but not the other.
And after you have cut one side of the jaw, cut the other side according to the same shape of the incision.
Then, after the incision, the patient should gargle with cold water or with vinegar and water.
But if there is a flow of blood, gargle with water in which the bark of the willows has been boiled: or with leaves of myrtle and similar things from astringents, until the flow of blood stops: and then care for the wound, until it heals.
And when there are other pustules in the throat, except for two in the amygdalis. Then cut these according to what I said in the incision of the two amygdalas.
And I have already treated a woman with an abscess between her teeth, which was causing her pain and loss of taste, which had almost closed her throat: and this woman breathed through a narrowed airway, and had already lost her appetite, and could not drink water, and was approaching death if it continued for another day or two.
And the abscess rose just enough to break through the two branches of the nose.
So I hurried and fixed one of my scissors in one of the openings. Then I pulled it out, and a large piece came with it.
Then I cut it off where it emerged from the nasal opening.
Then I made the same thing go forward from the other nasal opening.
Then I opened her mouth and pressed on her tongue; and then I fixed my scissor in the abscess; and then I cut off a part of it, and there was not much blood coming out of it: so the woman's throat is completely blocked, and she immediately started drinking water again, and then she began to eat.
I therefore did not stop pressing on that for a long time often: and the scar which I pressed on succeeded to the place of that which I pressed on until it was prolonged too much and with that one.
I therefore did not stop pressing on that for a long time often: and the scar which I pressed on succeeded to the place of that which I pressed on until it was prolonged too much and
So then I did not stop from that addition: and then I walked away from the part, and I do not know what God did with that after me.
Regarding the incision of scars on the throat.
Chapter 37. On the incisions of scars on the throat
When a catarrh descends to the voice-box, and is scarred, and is long: then it is called a perpendicular; and if it is in the lower part thick, round, then it is called a vocal cord.
When you treat it along with that which we mentioned in the division, and does not bring about the treatment: and you will see that the scar has become cool from it, and is thin: then you should press on it.
And what is joined on to that which has become round, and has no length in it, and is bloody or dark-colored or black, and has no sensation: then you should remove the scar from it. For fear is in the scar over the disease.
Then you should, when you see it according to the way which I mentioned from whiteness, and according to its length, so that you set the sick person before the sun: and press his tongue with an instrument, of which the preceding story has been told: then fasten a hook in the throat, and pull it down: and cut it with one or two instruments which I mentioned in cutting between the two ears.
And you should not press on it, unless that is added to the natural term without adding to it.
For if you press on it any more, you will damage speech and conversation.
Then after the incision use what we mentioned in the incision of the two ears: and care for it, until it heals.
If however he trembles with fear at the incision: then it is right that you should act with courage and without fear or anxiety during the cauterization.
And the mode of cauterization in it is not, except with sharp water: and it is, that you put the head of the patient in your lap. Then press his tongue with the instrument which we have said. Then take from the water which I have told you to take in the chapter on cauterizing, and moisten it with this fire not extinguished, and place it not thick, nor thin, and fill it with this shape of the instrument.
Sit at the end of which the medicine is placed, congealed, as congealed is the ear of a ray.
And place the instrument with the medicine on a bandage: and let the patient lie on his side, so that the saliva may flow from his mouth from the interior medicine, so as not to fall from it into his throat anything, and may hurt him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And you from the first put on a bandage half the quantity of the medicine every hour, until you see it has become discolored, and sit at rest with the Mordication of the medicine.
And if you wish to take a bath, and wet him on the end of a ray, and dip the cloth with the medicine, and insert the ray with the cloth into a tube from above, until the cloth sticks to the bandage.
Make it many times, until you get the result that you want of the new cauterization. Then dismiss him: for he will be healed and will fall after three days, or four.
That if you wish to take a bath with the medicine, repeat it: and after the cauterization wash off in the new circumcision with a cloth dipped in butter, and clean up with it what is in the circumcision of him from the medicine: and cool down with cold water.
He should be treated from the outside with poultices and from within with gargling until he is well.
This therefore is the species of treatment that is more salutary than incising and less anxious about fear.
And sometimes also with him cure is to be done that is finer than cautery and incision: cure is to be done indeed with suffumigations, in this way. Take also hemlock and hyssop and oregano and rue and sseah and chamomile and abrotan and other such herbs; and put them all together in an olla or some such vessel, and pour over them with vinegar and make it boil: and let the olla be well covered with a lid: and let there be a hole in the middle of the lid above which put a sharp instrument, according to this mode.
Let it be made of silver or of brass: and let the end, in which is the granule, be put into the nose, until the vapor ascends to the hole, until it is much darkened.
Then do this often, until it has healed.
And beware, do not make this cure at the first approach of apoplexy. Indeed it adds something to apoplexy: and you should not make this cure except when the aposteme is declining from its heat.
But if you do not have this instrument with you, then take a pipe and fit it with a plug of wood at the end, so that it may not burn the nose: for the wood prevents the vapor from burning the nose; and this is good cure with safety.
Of the extraction of spine and of the teeth in the throat.
Chapter 38. On the extraction of spines and teeth from the
A long time in the throat held fast a tooth or some spine, or something else.
Then it is necessary that you extract what lies visible upon that which makes the yawning, after you have pressed the tongue with an instrument against the sun, and have shown it to yourself.
And what does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, you should make the sick man die before food digested in the stomach. For perhaps it would come out through the dung.
Or perhaps the sick man would swallow a bit of straw, or a radish leaf, or swallow dry bread; or he might take a bit of dried sea sponge; and he should bind it with a string, then he should swallow it. But when it has come to the place where there are spines or teeth, and is taken out, then it comes out. Et si peruenit ad locum ubi est lacta cum radice, tunc deglutitur lacta cum radice: aut si peruenit ad locum ub
If it does not come out with it that we have said: then you should use an instrument made of lead in this form.Et si neque id egreditur, sed manet in ventre sicut aqua, et non esset quod illum afferri possint uti instrumento ex
If it is not brought out, but remains in the stomach like water, and there is nothing that they can bring to him to use the instrument: then he should have his head raised up.
And let him keep his throat from touching his epiglottis so that he does not cough, and push with it a tooth, or spike, or insert the doctor's own hand.Et si non esset uti huius instrumenti, sed uti aliis instrumentis, quae cuncta sunt in hoc liber
But since the sick man is pushing down, or pulling up his hand with the instrument, all of this according to the quantity that has been prepared for him, until it comes out.
Now we come to the extraction of blood from a patient.
Chapter 39.
When the leech is given to him with that which I have said in the division of cure with medicamentorum, and does not work, then consider in the throat before the sun, or after the sun when you press his tongue with the instrument that I have told you.Et si non esset, cum id quod diximus ad effectum veniens, sed non veniet, tunc
If your yawn falls on the leech, remove it with a small hook, or with subtle gestures that are not seen.Et si neque non esset id quod diximus, sed illud cadere perculsat prope locum ubi est radice sicut radicem heraeae: tunc uis sursum trahat cum
If it is not possible to do so with them: then take a hollow tube and insert it into the throat of the patient until near the throat: and then insert into the hollow part of the tube an iron rod that has been heated with fire. Do this many times: and let the sick person refrain from all water for a day.
Then let him take a full drink of cold water, and open his mouth in it: and let him kiss the water with his mouth, and let him not swallow anything from it: and let him moisten his hand in the water for an hour after another. For a leech will immediately fall when he feels the water.
But if he does not emerge with it when we have described it, then let him inhale the sick person with fumes, or with a pipe that we use to inhale the smoke.
Do this many times, for she will fall herself.
And the method of operation in inhalation is that you take a bowl, in which are placed with fire the blades of a grater: and the bowl is covered with a cover, in whose middle there is an opening: and place the end of the instrument in it.
Then throw the inhalation and let the sick person put his mouth at the end of the tube, and let him close his mouth so that it does not exit the inhalation until you know that the inhalation has reached the leech. For the leech will fall immediately.
If it does not fall, then repeat the inhalation many times.
And let the sick person endure hunger, and eat meat, and other things, and do not drink water.
Therefore it is necessary that he should emerge with this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument from which the leech is extracted from the throat when it falls on it.
It is similar to a pair of forceps, as you see: but because it has a width that enters into the throat. And its end is similar to an ear, which is called a ciconia, in which is a roughness of the blade: and when it grasps anything, it does not let go at all.
On the opening and cutting of abscesses, and on their general treatment.
Chapter X. On the opening and cutting of abscesses,
There are many types of abscesses and many ways of remembering them, as there is only one chapter on this matter in this book, and they vary in their perforation and the cutting out of their contents from two aspects.
Of which one species of abscess is in itself, and because it comprises fluid substances.
And the second mode is due to the locations from which they occur in the body.
For an abscess occurs in the head, it is different from an abscess that occurs in the anus: and an abscess occurs in a fleshy part, it is different from an abscess that occurs at a joint; and each has its own decision according to the operation.
And of the abscesses there are some that should not be opened until after the blood has been congealed in them and the clot is complete; and of them it is necessary to open those that are raw and have not come to maturity according to the complement.
As for abscesses that are close to joints.
For when an abscess occurs near a joint and it is prolonged until the pus that is in its vicinity may have rotted the ligaments or nerves of that joint; therefore, there is a closer cause of the spasm of that member.
Or an abscess at a main member; for if you delay opening it until it is complete, it will damage that member or harm another main member through it.
Or near a limb, then open it when it is immature: and you should not open an raw abscess that has not been completely digested, unless it is near a limb, so as not to rot deeply, and prolong its course towards the inside of the loin, and become a fistula, or remain at its edge where it does not heal.
It is necessary that you know the time for opening an abscess, which has come to maturity according to the complement; and it is in the repose of pain, the abatement of fever, the lessening of redness, and pulsation, and the sharpness of head from abscess: and the other signs.
It is necessary that you make the same perforation in the lower place of the fistula, and more prominent: and let the perforation be wet along the length of the body, if the fistulas are in the parts of the hands and feet, and in the places of the lizards, and of the strings, and of the nerves, and of the arteries, and up to the last place in all places equally, where there is no reflection.
But those which reflect, go with the perforation according to that member.
But when the fistula is in fleshy places: then it is better to leave the perforation of it until its digestion is confirmed, as we have said according to the complement.
For if you pierce it before that, the course of the virus from it will be prolonged, and there will be much sickness and decay, and perhaps its lips will become thicker, and its depth.
And some fistulas are pierced according to the width of the body at necessity: or according to that by which the member is stretched.
And it is necessary that you administer a small perforation in small fistulas, and a wide perforation in large fistulas: or several sections according to the similarity of the size of the fistula.
And there are fistulas from which the skin should be tightened: and it happens when it has already been made like a piece of cloth, and has already reached its limit, that it is already dead: like that which happened to many, as a blister, and as boils.
And there are those which cut by section with three angles. And one of them is like a figure of the leaf of myrtle.
As the fistula of the groin.
And among them are those in which a round section is administered, and a lunar section, and similar sections to these.
But that which has no head, as are the superficial fistulas of the skin, is to be pierced by a superficial perforation, or simply flat.
When the abscess is large and has already discharged a great deal of pus, and you pierce it, so that the pus does not spread all over at that time: draw out part of it. Then cover the abscess until the next day. Then draw out some more pus.
Do this frequently according to the degree, until it is discharged: especially if the patient is of weak vigor, or a woman pregnant, or a boy small, or an old man decrepitous: for the animal spirit from the animal is often dissolved with the exit of the flux: and perhaps the sick one may die, and you not perceive it.
Therefore, take great care in this chapter.
After you have pierced it, when you pierce these abscesses, it is necessary that you clean the wound: and consider. If then there is a small abscess, or it is on a flat surface, then administer liniment made from linseed oil, or old cotto. And if there is a large abscess, and there are many holes made by the piercing, then at that time it is necessary that you introduce liniment into all the cracks, until they come together on both sides.
And if you have cut off a part of the skin in the abscess, or have wrapped it around: then it is necessary that you fill it with old cotto, or as when a cloth is stretched, or a woolen fabric is brushed without moisture: and tighten it tightly for three days.
Then throw it out, and take care of that with it as you must from ointment, until it is healed.
If however a flow of blood occurs at the time of your operation, then administer cold water and vinegar, after it has been soaked up by a cloth: and lay it down often on the site of the blood flow.
If however the blood flow persists, then it is necessary that you administer a regimen and treatment, and powders, which are mentioned in many places in our book, and from a division.
If, however, it is in the winter season and the site of the pustule is a place of many nerves: then you should pour powder with wine and oil and put it on the spots.
And if it is in the summer and the sites are fleshy: then you should put powder soaked in water and oil, or in wine and oil, and all of that cold thing. Until the third day, as we have said, then you should remove the pustule, wash it, and administer to it what is appropriate for its care, until it heals.
This is therefore what is necessary from the consideration of the cure of pustules in general.
However, according to the halfway distinction, I have already spoken about all pustules, which way leads to the cure of each one separately.
[Head] Chapter LXI.
[De] sectione [apostematum quae accidunt] in cute [capitis].
Pustules small occur on the scalp, and they are of two kinds: nods, which are surrounded by membranes, which are like little bags: almost as if they were caused by hens.
And their kinds are many.
Of them there are some thin ones: and of them those which contain a similar moisture like a lime: and of them those which contain a similar moisture like a flour and pulps: and similar ones, and of them the hard ones.
And in the section of all of them, and their extraction is not a fear, when it comes to the section of them, there does not make a contrast of the arteries.
And the operation in their section is as you experience it with an instrument, whose shape comes after this, which is called Intromissum, until you know what it contains.
Nam  si  est  illud  quod  contenit  humiditatem,  tunc  seca  ipsum  sectione  secundum  longitudinem  sectionis  superficialis:  secundum  hanc  formam.
And to begin with the incision along line B to line G. So when the moisture is drained, then scrub the crust that contains that moisture, and do not leave anything behind.
For it often returns if anything remains.
Then dip it in Egyptian ointment if present: and if not, in water and salt: and fill it with the same; and leave it until another day. For that corrodes what remains of the crust.
Then repeat the Egyptian ointment on the patch a second and third time if you wish: and if your consent is given that nothing remains of the crust, then you may consider the wound healed with the ointment, for it will not return.
That if the pus contains a swollen lump: then dry it out according to this form, having the shape of a cross: and throw away the hooks between the sides of the incision, and scrub the crust off entirely: and try your skill in removing the cloth that holds the lump.
If, however, it gives you a counter-direction, then do as I will tell you after.
And do likewise with the pus, if hard, from the incision, and with the same cure, as we have said.
And the incision on hard pus is easier: for it has little blood and moisture. And sometimes there are some pustules that are in the head of certain men, where there is no depth of moisture.
Which is this: for I followed over the pustule on the head of a married woman, and found the pustule like a solid rock, hard, rough, white, which could not be broken: and if anyone struck it with anything, he would hurt the flesh.
But in the other pustules, accidents in the head, apart from these pustules that are on the heads of boys, and at the roots of the ears: all of them are shallow incisions.
And so that their perforations are always from the lower part of them, so that the flow of blood may go to the lower parts.
Then, after this, take care of them as is right for them while they are recovering from the cure.
§ On the Section of Staphylas in the Neck.
Head XXIV.
These hernias in the neck, and under the breast, and in the groin; and sometimes they occur elsewhere in the body.
And of those which occur in the neck, one is enough, but many are numerous; they spring from within; and every staphula comes out of its own skin, as we have described in the case of the nods and hernias of the head.
And the kinds of these staphylas are many. For some of them have leaves; and some of them contain moisture; and some of them are evil, and do not yield to the cure.
In that which you see to be of good disposition when you touch it, its color is close to the skin's color, and it moves in all parts, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the arteries, nor is it deep: let it be separated from its upper part to the lower part of the body along a line, b. towards the line, g., and scrape it off completely: and extend two skin flaps with a hook, or with many hooks, if you can bear it, as we have described in the case of the hernias of the head, and take it out little by little.
And be careful that it does not cut the vein, or a nerve.
And let the knife be not very sharp, so that it does not cut your hand with an incision, or disturb you in any way, and do not fall, for it is not necessary.
If you cut a vein or prevent you from performing the operation, then place it in a tree trunk, or some powder that stops the blood, and tightly tie the tree trunk, and let it go until the sharpness of the hernia subsides, and the tree trunk softens: or begin to putrefy.
The blood is cut off with a bandage. So get ready for your operation, until you are finished.
Then examine with your index finger to see if there is anything left of the staph. If so, cut and clean it out.
If it is in the root of a new large staph: then you must not cut that staph out from its root: but you should tie it with strong double thread and let it fall by itself without causing any harm.
Then fill the hole with old cotton that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then take care of yourself.
If the whole staph is cut, you should bring together the two sides of the wound: and then immediately, as soon as you see that there is no surplus.
If you see that there is still surplus because of the size of the staph, then you should turn your attention to cutting its root and taking it out: and administer the suture which we have described.
And as for the staph which contains moisture, pierce it with a superficial puncture so that you can see the site of maturity: and place the puncture from there so that it follows the lower part of the body, as we have said.
Then after the puncture administer the liniment with ointment and similar ones so that it corrodes what is left of the corruption, until the moment when you see the wound healed: then take care of yourself with a nourishing ointment for the flesh, until it heals.
Chapter 43.
Regarding the section of the epiglottis from the food pipe into the throat by accident.
The old people said that this operation of the epiglottis was done, and I did not see anyone in our land who did it: and this is the writing of their teaching.
But in those who have a swollen throat, the section of the epiglottis should be avoided: because it does not help at all for their recovery, since the larynx and lungs are weak.
Indeed, those who have a hot apostema in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both amygdalar glands, if there is no ailment in the larynx, it is necessary to use the epiglottis section, so as to avoid the loss that is made from pre-condensation.
Therefore, when we want to cut this (epiglottis), we should cut it between two circles according to its size, which is the section in the sifac, not in the cartilage: and this place is suitable for cutting because it is separated from the flesh, and the blood vessels are far away from it.
If the surgeon is timid, then he should extend the skin of the throat with a hook. Then he finds the skin, until it reaches the larynx; he should stop the flow of blood, if he sees any from it.
Then he cuts the soft palate that we have mentioned; and it indicates on the section of the larynx from the mucus that is released from it, when it is interrupted, and with the cutting of the voice.
And remove the ring that opens at some time.
When, however, the hour approaches in which pre-condensation is feared, the two lips of the wound skin will be brought together, and it will be sealed alone without cartilage.
Then he administers medicines that make flesh grow, until it heals.
Says Albucasis. Says Albucasis. The summary of this discourse that we have mentioned is not exposed, unless it is clear, that there is a certain apostema in the throat of the sick, and he has almost died because of his disease, and breathes heavily on his place, so that he is saved from death; and for this reason they ordered to remove the ring that opens, until the maliciousness of illness is consumed, and it is a maliciousness of three days, and almost the same: then he orders to tie the ring, and take care of himself, until he heals.
And that which I myself saw, that a maid took up a scalpel, and put it in her throat, and cut with it a part of the canal of the lung.
And I was called to cure her, and I found her breathing, as it is the breathing of a dead person.
So I took off the bandage, and I found blood that had come out from the small lung. So I was convinced that she had not cut her wound, nor had she bled: and wind came out from the wound.
So I took off the bandage, and examined the wound myself, until it was healed: and there happened to the servant nothing, except a hoarseness in her voice: and she returned after a few days in better state of health.
So I say: that there is no fear in cutting the epiglottis.
On the section of the stomach throat.
Chapter 48.
This hernia named in the gut, is a great hernia, and of a second kind as to color, being of the color of the body: and it is common in women.
And it has two kinds: either it is natural: or it is accidental.
Certainly it is not a matter of design in the natural.
On the other hand, it is accidental, and has two kinds, one is similar to pingueculae, and the other to warts. And the other kind is similar to an ulcer that is formed from an inflammation of the artery. And there is a risk, and it should not be assumed to do this with iron, unless it is small: and you test it, and investigate it with an instrument. If then you cut the similar nodule of the pingueculed, and it is not suspended with any wound: then dry up the nodule, as you do to others: and take out the one that contains it, if it is in a vesicle: and if it is not, then examine all of it. Then the care of the place with it that needs to be cured, until it is healed.
Head LXXV.
§ On section above the nodules.
There are many types of nodules, and I have already spoken about all their types in the division: and it is necessary that I should speak here about the difference between a nodule and an ulcer, in order to cause no confusion.
I say therefore, that when an ulcer is hot and feverish and there are keen pains, until the efflux of pus has run out in a stream, and corruption is completed: then indeed the fever and heat subside.
When however a nodule is not hot, nor feverish, nor painful, and it contains its own sacs, which are like beans of the body, and are of the colour of the flesh: and it resembles an acorn, and a nut, and is greater or smaller.
And they are of two kinds: either small or they contain moisture. And the colours of the moisture are many, according to what I have said in the division.
Therefore when you are treating a nodule, you should test it and investigate it with the instrument called an introskim, according to which its form will be known in the chapter which follows this one.
And the method of testing nodules, and all nodules, is to take this instrument and introduce it into a moistened place, which you have opened in an ulcer: and you will then withdraw your fingers gradually, until you know that the instrument has penetrated the skin. Then withdraw the last of your fingers by the measure of the size of an ulcer.
Then remove the introskim, and see what comes out into its opening.
If however moist matter runs out while it is being removed, whatever colour it may be: then dry the spot with a superficial cut, according to what I have said in other ulcers.
And if no moisture runs out in the opening of the introskim, then know that it is fat: so dry the spot on top with a cut which has the form of a cross, according to this form, as I have taught you: and suspend it with an hook, and scrape off the skin completely from all parts with ease: and guard the case if you can over it, so that you may take out the sound with a nodule.
If, however, the belly is broken open during an operation, and it is not possible to extract it whole because many times it has happened that then extract it quickly, until there is nothing left of it.
For if a little or a lot remains of it, it returns the second knot according to many.
That if it hurts you and a little remains of it: then fill the wound with some acute rust powder: and tighten the wound tightly, and put on top of it a hot poultice, and care for the wound along with the rest of the cure, until it heals.
If then there is a large knot: then tear its two lips open, and care for the wound with that which has become inflamed.
If it is then a new wound that pulsates or does not pulsate: then approach and fill the place with threefold poultice, and leave it tightly for two days or three, until the wound putrefies and the swelling subsides: then return to cutting out what is left of the knot.
Chapter XLVIII. On the use of instruments from outside the body for
Regarding instruments from outside the body for section and perforation.
There are three types of instruments for
Of these, there is a large one, and of these, a middle one, and of these, a small one.
Let there be made from iron an octangular frame with projecting ends, so that it may enter the wound without touching.
These are forms of instruments for: and one of these is called a bit, that is, a perforating one: and there are three types.
Of these, there is a large one, and a middle one, and a small one.
They are convenient for piercing through the wounds, exits, veins, and abscesses from which they come out between the bones.
And others are round and sharp, like large needles from which sutures are made, of brass perhaps, or of iron, or of silver, or of gold.
And their better ones are those which are made from citron.
And experience is also made about lead black, which they use so that through it they can experiment with the tubes, whose surfaces they smooth so that they reflect gently and reflect on them with their own reflections.
And there are again three species. For from them are the long ones, from them the medium, and from them the short, according to the quantity of the width of the tube and the tightness of it.
Shape of rings, and there are many species.
For from them are the simple ones, that is to say those which have one depth: and there are three species as you see, great, medium, and small.
And from them are blind rings: and there are three species.
And from them are hooks with two depths, and there are three species: and from them are hooks with three depths, and there are also three species: and all of these are necessary in their place.
And these are the shapes of the scalpels, with which they cut and burn the nodes and abscesses: and there are three species: for from them is the great, the medium, and the small.
Their extremities with which the cutting is done are acute, and other extremities are not acute: and they are not arranged so as to do this, unless it be with them that one does the incision of a node in fear of cutting the skin, or of the nerve: and in order that the sick person may be healed through it, and have some calmness from the heat which he has, more than when one incises an abscess.
They are made from bronze, and they resemble the wire with which alcohol is made: and in the wider end there is a little spathula hidden: and it runs to the inside and outside when you want it, as you see.
The shape of the spatulums which are hidden between the fingers at the perforation of abscesses: and they do not feel them with their hands: and there are three species, great, medium, and small.
The forms of wound healing with which blood flow is interrupted: and there are three types, large, medium, and small.
Let them be made from metal, or gold, round in shape, of nearly the same length, as you see: and let them be thin.
And it is necessary that these forms of the Winds be with you large and small: so that you can cut the blood off with speed in an emergency, and then when there is no medicine present.
However, do not use them to cut blood anywhere in the body, and do not use them except in tender places: such as those of the legs, and of the hips, and of the arms, and of the breasts, and of the feet, and of the groin, and similar ones, from tender flesh, moist.
And when they are made into small instruments like a scalpel, of the same shape as their handle: which cut blood when it flows from a phlebotomy site, or after cutting a vein, or an artery: and sometimes they are made round in this shape.
Chapter LVII.
On the care of the breasts of men which resemble female nipples.
When the breasts of certain men are swollen towards the end of sleep (namely, when they begin to discharge their seed in sleep) until they resemble female nipples, and remain wet with milk.
Those who thus avoid that, should dry their breasts with a lunar section of a loof, from the line A to the line G, then scrape off the milky substance all over. Then fill a sponge with an ink-like medicine. Then bind together the two lips of the wound with a stitch, and take care of it, until it heals.
If however the nipple turns downward and becomes soft through its size, as happens to women: then it is necessary that there be found in its two sides, above, two sections like the moon, each holding with the other at their ends, until it forms a line containing the smaller one, according to this shape from the line A to the line G. Then scrape off the skin which is between the two lips, and take away the milk, and administer what we have said about the stitch and the powders, which is necessary in the care, until it heals.
If you do not wish to make an incision where necessary for your incisions, due to anxiety or because of blood flow: then it is necessary that you fill the wound with a submerged unguent that is corrosive, and leave it until it has corroded what remains from the swelling. Then take care of the wound, until it heals.
On perforations caused by the skin rash that occurred during the time of Titus.
Chapter 58.
These skin rashes that occur during the time of Titus are of two kinds: one is hard, and has a scaly surface, and the other is moist.
These that are moist should be dried out with a lunar section, as shown in the diagram, from line b to line g; and when all that is left in the pustule has been drained, then fill it with old ointment, and leave it until another day.
Then the ointment should be removed, and the wound should be treated with a suitable ointment, until it heals.
If the pustule is of the kind of knots called strophulas, then cut it open, as we have said in the section on strophulas that are equal.
If, however, the sore extends and discharges pus, then administer a cauterization to it, as we have said above.
Chapter 49.
On the incision of a pustule that has occurred through an artery or vein.
When an artery bursts and the skin that is above it becomes stiffened, then often a pustule occurs; and also happens to veins, so that a pustule and swelling occur in them.
And the signs by which it can be known that a pustule and swelling are due to an artery and vein are these: for when the pustule is due to an artery, it is long and deep within the body; and when you press the pustule with your fingers, you feel as if it were whispering.
And what is due to vein, is round in apparent body.
And the section on this wound is an error, and especially what is under the armpits, and groin, and neck, and in many places of the body: and it is great indeed. Therefore, so that its care may be removed with iron, and that which is also from it in the extremities, or in the head, should be removed.
And on this then what is from it from the inflating of the opening of the artery, find in the skin in length. Then open the section with a hook, then the artery: and free it from the tunics, until it is detected.
Then insert underneath it a hook, and let it penetrate as far as another side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places, according to which I taught you in the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
Then prick the place, which is between the two ligaments with a needle, until all the blood that is in it has gone out, and solve the apoplexy.
Then administer the cure which generates pus, until the ligaments fall: then care for it with ointments suitable for it, until it heals.
If the apoplexy is due to a vein section, then you should hold your hand, which you can manage from the apoplexy with the skin. Then insert a hook underneath the place which you held with your hand, and let it penetrate: and let it be in it a double thread, until you bring it out from the other side. Then bind with it the apoplexy with good ligament: according to which I told you in the binding of a thread, from two parts with two extremities.
If however you should know that the thread is to be extracted, then insert a hook with another thread under the apoplexy all around the incision of the blade: press, and tighten your threads in four places.
Then dry the apoplexy in the middle of itself, until it is completely gone out from it: then cut off the excess of the skin, and let go what is bound from it.
Then put a very thin layer of the powder that you dipped in wine and oil on your wound. Then apply the cure, which is made with liniments and ointments, until it heals.
The head of the lower leg.
A post-mortem examination of what happened due to a torsion of the neck.
As happened in the apostema of Arteria and Vena, so also happened in the nerves: what happened to them is percussion, or it happened from excessive work, and similar: and it often happens in the places of the adductors, or calcanei, and in any place where the tendineae move: and it is a gray apostema.
Its color is similar to the rest of the body, and it is in many dispositions without pain: and when it is pressed with a thump, it feels in it a similar kind of fainting.
And this apostema is not aggregated in the deep part of the body, but it is under the skin, and it moves itself to all parts, and does not announce itself to the front, nor forward, nor backward to the back.
What then is in the joints, should not be moved with iron. Perhaps indeed what happens: contraction may happen.
But in that which is in the head or in the forehead, find a skin with a thump. If then it is a small apostema, then hold it with forceps, and cut it off from the root.
And if it is a large one, then hang it on a hook, and scrape it off: then take it off, and join the wound with stitches: and care for it, until it heals.
The head of the lower leg.
Regarding the section of apostemes that occur in the belly.
To some people their bellywind often occurs, and to the rest of their bodies, those little things that they call 'fungus', due to similarity of those to the mushrooms.
The root of these is thin, and their heads are thick, and their lips are loose. And it comes from a few things: and it is from them that it becomes great.
And I too have already seen a man, and in his belly were two small mushrooms, which were more than similar to other things: there was no difference between them, they had white roots, and their lips were spread apart, and they were ending, and moisture always flowed out of them.
So then I cut them open, and I found in weight one like ten and eight ounces, and in another like six ounces; and the operation on them is so that you consider this then, if it is damp, and the color of the mushroom is white, moist, with a fine root: then cut it open with a wide chisel, and let cauterizes be present with fire.
For often is driven out from its section much blood: so then if your blood wins it, then cauterize the body.
That if you see a sick person trembling from the incision with iron, then take a thread of lead which is made crookedly, and tie it up with it: whose method is that which we have said, and let go of him for two days.
Then add to the tightening of the lead. So then do not cease to tighten the lead, when it presses on the mushroom, until it is cut off, and falls by itself without work.
But if the mushroom is large in root, then there is a certain fear and trembling in its incision: above all because it is in the belly.
However, it is possible that you cut in half. Then cauterize the body so that it does not bleed back.
Then take care of the body until the wound heals.
And do not suppose that you cut into a mushroom which is of a fuzzy color, of few senses, of an appetizing appearance: for it is a cancerous pustule: and I have come with a reminder of the crab after this.
Chapter LII.
Of the care of an eminence of the umbilicus.
Ex many causes of umbilical eminence. Or from the sirocco hole, which is above the navel: and comes out of it the hernia, or the intestine, according to what happens in other ruptures. Or from the blood that flows from a vein, or from an artery, according to what has been said above. Or from the hernia, as it was said.
If, however, it is due to a sirocco hole and the exit is bad: then it is of an apθημαtic color, similar to the color of the body: and it is soft, without pain: and appears at different locations. And if it is due to the exit of the intestine, then its location is with that which we have described, more varied in location. When you press it with your fingers, it is hidden: but then it returns, and perhaps there is a sound with it: and it increases greatly at the entry of the sweat, and laborious rumbling.
If, however, it is due to moisture, it is soft, then it does not hide itself when pressed with your hand, nor does it contract, nor does it add.
That if it is due to blood, then, with these signs, an apθημα appears towards blackness from the navel.
If, however, it is due to a natural birth, then it is an apθημα of gray color, thick, hard, and shapes itself according to the quantity of one unit.
If, however, it is due to the flow of air, then the sensation of it is soft.
And the operation in it is, to consider then, if the umbilical eminence is due to blood of an artery or vein, or air: then one should refrain from treating it. For in it is fear and dread, as I have taught you in the chapter in which I said about aptelemas due to an artery and a vein.
That if the umbilical eminence is due to the intestine or a hernia, then you should prescribe to the sick person that he keep his breath, and stand with his back erect. Then mark with caustice around the navel all around. Then order him to lie down on his back between your hands. Then, with a sharp blade, mark around the navel on the spot you marked with caustice. Then extend the midline to the upper part, with a large hook. Then bind him strongly around the navel with a thread, or with a silk cord, so that the knot is tied on the abdomens of the bound man.
Then open the midline that you have extended above the navel. If you have already found the man captured by the ligature: then pull out the ligature and insert your finger into his anus, and push the stool into the inner part of the abdomen: and if you find feces, then take it with a hook and cut off the excess.
If the artery or vein is on the opposite side, then bind him very tightly. Then return to your operation. And take two needles and insert two strong threads into them: and insert the two needles around the spot you have made in the form of a cross, which you make to penetrate.
Then tighten the knot in four places on the needles: and if there is a wound, remove the needle, and leave the spot until the flesh has rotted: and it will fall off by itself: or cut it when it becomes thin and rotten.
Then take care of the man with the ointment as needed until he is healed.
If the navel eminence is made of flesh that has dried up in it, or from moisture: then you must tighten the knot, as we have said. And drain the blood, or moisture, which you have injected into him.
Then take care of the man with the ointment so that the spot hardens up.
Chapter LIII.
Of the cure for cancer.
We have already spoken about the division of cancer into species, and how to treat it with medicines; and to beware of treating it with iron so that it does not ulcerate; and we spoke about cancer generated in the womb, and about the precaution to take when treating it.
And the ancients said that whenever cancer is in a place where it can be eradicated: such as cancer which is in the breast, or in the hip, and those like them, from the member located to extract all of it: especially when it is beginning to start.
When, however, it has been long established, and is great, it is not necessary that you approach it.
For I could not heal from it anyone: nor did I see another who had come to it.
And the operation on it, when it is located as we have said, is, like a prolepsis, and you remove the disease from time to time. Then the phlebotomy itself if the wound is filled with pus.
Then prepare the sick with preparation, in which he is placed with the operation.
Then throw on cancer hooks that are suitable for it. Then close it up from all sides with a wound, according to the examination, until nothing remains of its roots: and let not the blood flow, nor do you tear it quickly off, except express the places, and wipe away the gross blood entirely by hand, or with whatever is possible there.
But if the opposite makes you flow of gross blood from the incision of an artery, or a vein: then cauterize the vein, until the blood is severed. Then take care of the cancer with the remaining cure, until it is healed.
§ On the treatment of water-on-the-skin.
Head XLIV. We have already spoken at length in the division of the species of water, and how it is gathered: and the signs of each kind, and the treatment of it with medicines.
And those who are cured with iron, it is not except a single kind of asclepius: and does not approach the iron of the tympanic species: nor does the hyposarcous species go deep into the body: for that is mortal.
When you have already treated this species of water-on-the-skin with medicines, and your treatment has not been effective: then consider. If a person is already weak, then further weakness is added, or else another sickness besides hydrops: as when there is coughing, or loosening of the eyes, and similar things: then be careful not to treat him with iron: for that is feared.
But if you see a person with a vigor of health, and there is no illness besides hydrops: and he is not a boy, nor an old man: then the manner of operation in him is, that you should stand him upright between your hands, and let him spit out water with his own hand driving it to the lower part of the chest.
Then take a bent pitchfork, shaped like this. Set the two acute ends, one long, and the acute end like a pitchfork. But in him there is something of a hiccup now and then, so that he does not disturb you while you are operating inside the abdomen, and let him go.
Then consider. For if the generation of hydrops is from the part of the intestines, then it should be extended with a section of three fingers' length from the navel, towards the lower part directly above the chest.
But if the generation of hydrops is because of liver illness: then your section should be left from the navel by three fingers' length.
And if the generation of it is because of the spleen: then your section should be on the right side: and there should also not be a section above where the sick person lies, so that fluids do not flow to that weak place.
Then pierce with an instrument the whole skin. Then introduce into that section, and push with your hand with the pitchfork as if you were scaring him out: and let the quantity that is scraped be the quantity of a nail, or around that part.
Then pierce the skin, until the pitchfork reaches a empty place: and there is a place of water. Then draw him out, and introduce into a hole an instrument, which has this form. It is made like a tube: it is made of silver, or brass, or gold, or wood, or tar: it has a small hole on its lower part, and three holes on its sides, two from one side and one from the other; and its ends are incised in the form of the incision of a calamus, as you see: at its upper end there is an annulus.
For when the instrument reaches water, it immediately descends on top of the instrument, and so it evacs water from water in an average quantity.
For if you evacuate it more than is necessary, perhaps a sick person will die because of the resolution of his animal spirit: or it may happen to him that a fainting attack comes close to death.
But you should evacuate it according to the strength of its pulse and according to what I tell you about the dispositions of the infirm from its force and goodness.
Then remove the instrument, and hold back the water.
That is, because it retains immediately by the skin that retains the hole that is over the sifac: of which I have told you, so do you perform it according to that method.
Then repeat the instrument on the other side, if you see the infirm person tolerate it: and remove it too from water in a small quantity.
Do it on days for a while without fear, and guard yourself from mistake: until you do not remain in the water except a little.
But if you are able to be on top of the infirm person, and let go of a large amount of water: then take care of him with burial in warm sand, and with much sweat in a bath and in the sun, and let him wait on hunger: and take care of him with dried doctors, until he heals: and cauterize over his stomach, and his spleen, and his liver, after removing the water: according to what I have told you before.
For the care of infants who are born in places that do not pierce their navels.
Chapter 50.
When any child issues from its mother's womb, and its head is not pierced, or the opening is tight, or it is not in its proper place.
Therefore one should assist with the piercing of that head as soon as it is born with a sharp scalpel, according to this form.
Then put a small clamp from lead into the opening and bind it up: and hold it for three days, or four.
When then he wants to emit urine, remove it, and let it go. Then reduce that person.
And if you do not put lead on, it is possible that the urine which has escaped should not permit the opening to close.
But that person whose opening is tight, he treats it with lead, as we have said, for many days, until it increases.
But those who have an opening not in its proper place are injured. Which is, because out of those who are born, the opening is at the end of the penis: so it cannot urinate ahead, until it raises its penis by hand to the top. And there is no generation for him, therefore his semen cannot reach the mother according to its straightness: and it is a foul disease.
And the method of operation in that person is, so that he lays himself down on his back. Then extend the person's penis with your left hand by a strong extension, and cut off the head of the penis from the proper place with an ace or a sharp scalpel: as is the incision of a pen or as you cut some herb, so that its middle resembles the head of the penis: and let it fall into the opening in the middle according to what should be.
And keep yourself from the flow of blood during your operation. This often happens. So then you have to cut off the blood with it, and take care of the wound, until it is healed.
Regarding the wounds that occur on the foreskin and the scalp, as well as corruption, blackening, and adhesions.
Regarding the wounds that occur on the foreskin and the scalp, as
These wounds of the prepuce and scalp often cause a bad smell from the flesh.
And from it there is one that is evil and one that is not evil.
Therefore, you should hang it with a delicate hook and cut it off entirely until it is completely clean. Then put on top of it a basket immersed in Egyptian ointment. Then take care of the wound after that with ointment of dill and let it heal.
If the Albather is evil and its color is dark, then you should administer cauterization after incising it and shaving it.
If, however, the Albather is caught in the foreskin and not circumcised, and a part of it is inside the foreskin and a part outside: then you should remove the Albather that is within until it hardens, and then take care of the one outside: for if you take care of it at the same time, the foreskin does not heal.
And there are also wounds on the testicles and blackness and corruption on the foreskin. Therefore, you should take care of all that which has been damaged, and what is inclined to corrupt, or that which has already been corrupted.
Then cover the wound with a bandage of honey that has already been crushed with wheat flour and dried with dried herbs.
Then take care of that one with the remaining cure until it heals.
If, however, a flow of blood occurs, then administer cauterization with lunar caustics, according to this form.
For the cauterization is useful for two things at the same time, namely to stop the flow of blood and to heal when it has been corrupted.
If the head of the foreskin is corrodes and destroys it all in one hour: then you should insert a plumbous cannula into the meatus so that it may drain the disease from it.
Yet the prepuce adheres to the head of the penis, and this adhesion does not occur unless the prepuce is healthy, and circumcision is not required on it; and when an adhesion occurs because of a splinter or abcess, one should cut it off with an obtuse chisel until the ligament is released, and free the head of the penis from all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish it carefully, then one should cut off something from the head of the penis and from the prepuce. That is, because when the foreskin is thin, it may be pierced quickly due to its thinness.
Then separate the prepuce, and with a thin linen cloth, which has already been wet with cold water, so that it does not adhere again.
Then cure with wine vinegar until it hardens.
Chapter LVII.
Regarding the purification of infants and treatment for mistake due to accident.
Circumcision is not a cure for continence, like the other wounds; however, as it is the result of our desire and its use is in boys on their own, we must mark this operation as superior and more beneficial, leading to health.
I say, that the ancient ones did not speak of circumcision in any of their books: for they do not use it in their laws, and it is only what we have acquired through experience.
That is, because I have found most of the arts, and the use of phlebotomy and cleaning with a knife, circumcising with a scalpel, and binding with thread, and cutting with a nail.
I have also tested all these methods, and I did not find a better purification than circumcision with a scalpel and binding with thread.
For in purification with a knife, the skin often runs away. For the skin of the prepuce has two tunics; therefore perhaps it may be cut on the upper skin, and the lower tunic may be left untouched: let us then consider how to make an incision in order to cut the other one, and what pain will ensue. And when the cleaning was done by the afecat, that is to say, the finger, with which the surgeons use to cut, does not secure the incision at the extremities of the male member: for perhaps it enters into the pore of him.
But in the cleaning with the nail, perhaps he will hurt the iron, and will ruin your work; and the skin of the boy is short by nature, and many times arise in this way, so that they do not need to be cleaned: and I have seen it too often happen.
But in the cleaning with scissors and a thread with a ligature, good experience has shown me that it is: because the sharpness that is above is like the sharpness that is below. But when you press your hand with the same pressure, the two sharpnesses will be proportional and will make one incision at the same time; and it is made a compression of the same shape, containing the skin of the penis from all sides, so that there is no mistake at all.
And the mode of operation is its own, so that you can guess, especially if it is from those who understand to a small extent, that you do not do; unless you tie the thread on his penis only: and let him go until another day.
Then make him happy and rejoice in all ways that are possible for you to do so, because he receives his intelligence. Then make him stand between your hands which are prepared to stand, and not sitting down: and hide the scissors in your sleeve or under your foot, so that he does not see them at all; and nothing from the instruments.
Then introduce your hand into his penis, and blow on the skin, and pull it up until the head of the penis comes out. Then clean it out with something sharp.
Then bind up the wounded place with a double knot. Then bind below with about the same amount of thread as before. Then hold it with your index finger and press down on the lower ligature to make sure it is secure, and then cut between the two ligatures. Then wash the wound with a little water quickly, and remove the head of the hair. Then let the blood run slowly (for it is better) and put dust on top: and over the dust spread a cloth that has been spread out flat, and wet with rose water, and mixed with good oil from a rose: and leave it on top until another day: and care for the rest of the wound with medicine, until it heals.
The shape of the forceps for cleaning is like this.
The two tips should be pointed, and they should meet together: let there not project on either side of the forceps any sharp points: and the length of the two points should be equal, like the length of the two handles.
But a fall while cleaning is dangerous: for perhaps it will miss the whole skin, or a part of it near the cut.
Therefore you should spread her out from your own body with your finger before the examination of the place: and cut her according to equality.
If you cannot hold it with your finger, then get a forceps and cut it.
If however it has gone past three days, and what is under the hair is swollen, then let go of that, until the swelling goes down, and the scabs have come off with ease, and cut it according to your preparation: and make sure you wash the head from the hairline. For that will not harm it.
So take care with that, when the skin has hardened from the powder, which we described in the book on powders: and if it cuts above the line of the wound, and projects upward, it does not hurt it either.
Then take care of this one with what we have said, until it is healed.
Head LVIII.
On the Extraction of a Peg from the Urine Bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by a pebble lodged in it, or by congealed blood, pus, or flesh grown there, and other like causes which we have mentioned under the different methods of cure.
And if (the urine) is not relieved and there is a pebble in the bladder which has lodged in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bed-ridden. Then he shall put his feet upon his bed and stretch out his stomach from the upper part of his back and shall restrain his desire to defecate as much as possible. Then let him be brought to the back, for the expulsion of the pebble in the bladder towards the rear; wherefore the urine is relieved.
If it is not relieved by what we have said and the patient's condition is dangerous, then let an extraction be made with a instrument which is called a syringe, whose shape is of silver, and let it be fine, smooth, and cut like the feather of a bird in subtility of radius, long in similarity to the palm of a hand and half that length; having a subtile cannula at its head.
And the mode of passage of the urine through it is this: that you take a double thread, and fasten it at its end with good twine or cotton-thread; and push the end into the lower part of the syringe: and strike with the nippers if there be any thread out of the wool, for truly you shall push it into the cannula with an effort.
Then dip the syringe in oil, or butter, or alum, and make the patient sit on a chair, and insert the bladder into the syringe, and his penis with the wet oils, and olive oil, and warm water.
Then introduce the syringe into the penis with ease, until it reaches the root of the penis.
Then double the length by adding to the top from the navel.
Then push the syringe into itself, until it reaches the bladder, and feel that it has already begun to clear up its contents: and do not do this according to this order, unless because of the curvature, in which place you put it, is in that place where there is a curvature.
Then extend the thread slowly with wool. For the thread follows the wool.
Then draw it out and make the thread run through the urinary canal: and repeat this operation with the syringe, and do not cease doing this until the bladder is emptied, and you feel relief of the pain.
Regarding the quality of cleansing the bladder with a clepsydra.
Chapter LIX.
When there is a wound in the bladder, or blood freezes up in it, or pus is gathered in it, and water distills into it along with medicines: then make use of the instrument called a clepsydra, which has this shape.
It is a closed vessel. And within it are three openings, two on the same side, and one on the opposite side, as you see them.
And the space where the plunger is placed is on the second quantity that it achieves without addition, until when it is drawn out with it something is attracted from the moisture: and when it is pushed in, expels it far away: as does the clepsydra, which spills the naphtha, that is, the Greek fire in battles.
But when you pour water into the bladder, introduce the end of the clepsydra into the water, and draw it out with that which pushes it up, for water is drawn into the concavity of the clepsydra.
Then introduce the end of it into the penis, as we described in the syringe. Then push on moisture with it that pushes her because certainly humidity reaches dryness immediately so that the sick feel it.
Form a thin clot so that the wound is covered.
Let it be made of silver or gold: whose head is higher than the corresponding heel by little and below which a pocket is positioned where the ligament falls.
Then take the wool from a ewe, and place moisture on it so that you can form a clot of wool. Then tie her between two pockets with strong twine: and heat her slightly with moisture over fire.
Then insert the tip of the clot into the penis, then tighten your hand on the wound with a tightening motion as the moisture drains, until the sick person feels that the moisture has already reached the wound.
If you do not have a present wound, then take a piece of parchment, and make it into a circle, and pierce it from all its roundness. Then insert a strong thread in these holes, as they turn. Then bring the circle together, like you do with an arrow: when you place it in there that you took from the moisture, and oils, and waters.
Then tie it together with the instrument: and make it like you did with the wound from the expression with your hand, until the moisture has reached the wound.
Chapt. L.X.
§ De the extraction of Stone.
I have already spoken in the division of the species of stone, and the treatment thereof with medicines: and I have distinguished between the stone generated in the kidneys, and the wound, and the signs of all that; and I have described the stone which is generated in the wound by hand, and the section: and this is a stone generated in the wound in itself: and that which is figured on the bush: and I am relating it with evident exposition and abbreviation.
I therefore say, that the stone generated in the wound, often happens to boys.
From the symptoms it is apparent that urine flows from the penis like water of a certain subtlety: and in it appears white sand; and the weak man grates his penis, struggles with it, and hangs it often. Then it stands erect, and moves along with it the anus in many of them.
And it is an easy cure for boys until they reach the age of fourteen years. And it is difficult in old men. But in the young it is medio-grade, in that it lies between that and this; and its cure is easier if it is small, and if not, it is a difficult cure.
But when we come to the cure, it is necessary at first that we should remove all the dung that is in the intestines by using a clister; for he sometimes prevents the examination of the stone.
Then let the sick man take his feet and tremble, and move about downwardly; that the stone may fall into the depths of the bladder or sometimes flow out from its high place.
Then let him sit between your hands and let his knees be under his back so that the bladder may all run downward towards the loins.
Then examine it and feel it from without.
If you feel the stone in the space, then cut it immediately from above.
If it does not come under your hand at all, then you should wipe the finger with oil from your left hand if the sick boy is; or with the middle finger if he is a full-grown man: and insert it in his anus, and examine the stone until it stands under your finger: and turn it little by little towards the bladder neck.
Then press the stone with your finger and push it towards the outside against that place which you examine: and let one minister hold the bladder open by hand, and another let hold up the testicles by the right hand to their upper part: and with the hand let him remove the skin that is under the testicles in the place where the section lies.
Then insert the Spatula incidente, whose shape is this one. And find in it what is between the testicles and the inguinal ring, and not in the middle, on the left side of the birth canal: and let the cut be made over that stone, and your finger be placed in the anus: and let the cutting be done across, so that the outside cutting is wide, and the inside is tight, according to the quantity which it is possible for the stone to come out from there without being larger.
Perhaps the finger, which is in the anus near the cutting, will be squeezed and will come out without difficulty.
And you know that of the stone whose corners and edges there are, it is difficult for it to come out because of that.
And from it comes a soft substance like a gland, and round: and its exit is easy.
So then to those whose corners and edges there are, add in the opening.
If it does not come out in this way, then you must make a cut on top of it: or you may twist it with a awkward movement, the end of which is like the Moon, which twists over the stone and does not slip away from it: or you may insert under it a thin instrument, with curved ends.
If you cannot do that above, then widen the opening slightly. That if something from the blood wins you over, cut off the stone while it is still alive.
If, however, the stone is more than one, then push it into the first large opening of the urethra. Then cut over the top of the stone. Then push a little behind it: and do the same if there are more than two of them.
That if it is very large, then ignorance is how to cut over the top with a wide cutting. Because it has happened that someone is between two things, or so that he dies, or his urine distills frequently: soon, because the place does not consolidate at all.
But give him an expulsion of it until he comes out: or make a break in it with forceps, until you pull it out quickly.
When you have thus completed your operation, then fill the wound with thורות, and with aloe, and with dragon's blood: and bind it tightly, and put a cloth soaked in oil and wine upon it, or oil of roses, and cold water: that an apothecary may be sedated by the heat.
Then wrap the patient's neck well, and do not loosen the ligature until the third day. When you have loosed him, then moisten the place with much oil and water.
Then care for the patient with the dyffinicon ointment and the basilicon ointment, until he is healed.
But if the wound is hot and swollen and there are similar symptoms: let it be known by the emission of blood with urine. And let it be recognized by the exit of blood mixed with urine. Then insert your finger into the wound and draw out the blood. For if any remain, it incites to the corruption of the skin, and the putrefaction of its meat.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, and water, and salt: and oppose to it all kinds of things that are suitable to the cure, until it is healed.
And during the hours of cure throughout the whole body, bind two hips and joints, because medicines laid upon the place cause a swelling.
If it is hard and sits in the meatus of the urethra, and gets hardened therein, and prevents the exit of urine: then care for the patient with it as you go to cut it open. For often there is little advantage from this cure after dissection: for I have tried it many times.
And consider the Perforatorium of the iron worker which is of this shape, triangular ends, acute, fixed on a piece of wood.
Then take a thread and bind it with it under a stone so that it does not return to the urethra.
Then insert the piercing iron into the urethra with ease until it reaches the stone: and move the Perforatorium by your hand slowly upon it: and test its piercing, until you make it penetrate from one part to another.
He urinated and was immediately cleansed.
Then press your hand upon what remains of the stone from the outside of the urethra. For it itself breaks, and passes with the urine, and the sick person is healed.
But if you have not prepared this remedy for yourself because of something that prevents it from being able to pass: then tie a string under the stone and another string above it. Then dry off above the stone in the urethra between the two ligatures. Then extract it itself. Then loosen the ligature, and clean up the frozen blood that formed in the urethra.
And it is not necessary to tie the string under the stone unless it is to be returned to the urethra: and the other string from above, unless when the string is loosened after the stone has passed, the skin returns to its place, and the urethra is covered over, as we have said. Therefore you must tie the upper string, so that the skin returns upwards, so that it covers over with your member, and the urethra is closed up, as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
As for the extraction of the stone in women.
Stone is not formed much in women.
But if a stone should happen to form in any of them, the cure is difficult, and is prevented by many means.
One of them is this: that a woman may be a virgin.
And the second is this: for you do not examine a woman who has taken a lover, if she is chaste, or who has had husbands.
The third is this: for you do not examine a woman who knows the art well, especially the manual work.
And the fourth is this: for the stone is far away from the place of the hand: therefore it needs a deep cut, and there is danger in that.
As for if need compels you to do this, then you must take a woman doctor who is well skilled in the art: and there are few of them.
If, however, you are seriously ill, then ask for a good, skilled doctor; and also a well-informed midwife who is familiar with the matters of women, or one who has some knowledge of this art: so get her present, and especially tell her to do whatever you command from your inquiries about the stone.
In first place that is, that she may see if the woman is a virgin: then it should be that she should insert her finger into the opening of her and seek out the stone.
But if he finds it, he should clamp it under his finger, and then order the midwife to insert her left hand into the opening, and inquire about the stone, after he has placed his right hand on her loins, and сжимает ее сжатием хорошим.
But if he finds the stone, then it should be that he slowly moves it from the opening of the vagina to the lower part with all his strength, until he reaches it with it up to the root of the pelvis.
Then he should wipe over it at the place of the middle opening at the root of the pelvis, from whatever side it is prepared and feels the stone in that part; and his finger should not move away from the stone, clamping it underneath: and let a small section be first cut off. Then he should insert the arm on top of that small section.
Then he should insert the arm on top of that small section. But if he feels the stone, then he should add to the second section an amount proportionate to how much the stone is passed from it.
And you know that there are many types of stones. For from him there is a small one, and a large one, smooth and rough, long and round, having branches.
So you know the nature of it, as I have explained to you on that which you wish to understand.
But if blood is making you weak, then add to the place of the wound three times and hold it for an hour, until the blood stops flowing.
Then prepare yourself for the operation until the stone is removed: and make ready the instruments which I have spoken of in the extraction of the stone from the bladder, that you may aid yourself with them in your operation.
If it hurts you and you know that the flow of blood comes from the artery that has been cut: then put powder on the place, and tighten it with the powder as it is being pressed down: and do not change this; and let go of the stone, and do not draw it out. For indeed the weak woman may die. Then take care of the wound.
When, however, the sharpness of the pain has passed and the place has turned bad after a few days: then prepare yourself for your operation until the stone is removed.
Chapter LII.
Regarding the section on cutting above the hernia with water.
The ramet is not aqueous, unless there is a gathering of moisture in the shell of the testicle which is enclosed by one skin: and it is called a sifac.
And when it is in its own skin, which nature has prepared for it in part until it puts out: that is another thing, and it is the skin of the testicles between the sifac, which we have said: and it does not do this except rarely.
And the generation of this ramet is from the weakness which occurs in the testes: why this substance is discharged towards them. And when it comes about from a blow on the testes.
And this moisture is having many colors. Or, on the other hand, it is a color that declines into sourness, or it is bloody red, or greenish, black, or white watery, and that is what it is that declines more.
And the signs by which one knows where there is a gathering of water are these. For if it is in the shell of the ramet, which we have said, then the swelling is round on all sides like the figure of a ball: and the testicle does not show itself, because moisture contains it from all sides.
And if there is moisture in the skin to itself, then the pustule is round with a part of it, and for this reason men estimate that it is another thing.
If moisture is between the skin of the testes and the white matter, then he faints.
When, therefore, you wish to know the color of moisture, then feel the color of moisture in the pustule with the square (of the finger), whose shape preceded. Accordingly, since it is moved into the dimple of the Square (of the finger), judge about it that it is between itself.
When we come to the cure with iron, then it is necessary that you order the sick person to bleed him if possible, and you will see his body full of blood.
Then he shall lie down on his back on a high thing a little, and put many cloths under him.
Then sit on his left side, and order the minister to sit on his right side, who shall extend his penis between two sides of skin of the testes, and to the part of the eye of the testicle.
Then take a long spatula, and dry the skin of the testes from the middle in length, up to the chest: and make the section according to a straight line which divides the skin of the testes, until it reaches the white matter encompassing it: and examine the wound yourself, or carefully from this, so that you remove it: and sit the wound of yours on part which hangs with more hair: and scrutinize cautiously with the wound according to quantity what is possible for you.
Then pierce the white matter full of water with a wide perforation, and remove all the water.
Then separate between the two lips of the section with a hook, and extend the white matter up, and do not touch the skin of the testes encompassing it: and cut the white matter however you can cut it to you, or with all its totality, but especially its thin side. If you do not know how to examine thoroughly, there will be no security in this incision unless water is applied again.
But if any foreign object comes out of his cut during the time of your operation: then when you have finished the section, reduce the wound. Then gather together the two lips of the skin of the testicles with a stitch.
Then take care of the wound like the rest of the injuries until it heals.
But if there is a corruption of the wound with other color, then it should be necessary that the laces which are suspenders, worrying about the flowing of blood.
Then cut off the testicle with the suspender and pull out the sperm: then take care of it with what I have said.
But if water is aggregated in the two parts, then you should know that there are two branches: so dry one side according to what you have done on the other side equally.
And if it is even with you, as if it were a single operation, then do it: then wash away the blood. And put in the sections of wool dipped in oil, or in oil rosated: and put a second piece of wool which you have dipped in wine and oil on the top of the two testicles, and spread it out over them, and tie the foreskin above with a thread, which has six threads according to this form.
Then two towels are laid and stretched, and they are filled with carmine, according to this similarity: and the ends which are pinched by a thong, or by wet wool: and they are gathered with a tightness around the hips of the arms: and one end takes hold on something on the back until it is behind, and the second end takes hold on the side of the skeleton: and two ends take hold on the two thighs below, and another end takes hold on the other two inguines, and all the end takes hold together in the hips of the arms.
And when this thread is used to heal the wound with a caustic iron place of the section with a sharp knife: and it is like that we have told you: until, when it is discovered, there is milk containing water: then take the caustic, according to this form.
The Greek letter is assimilated.
Then pierce with it that other sifac and it will be kindled, until the whole moisture has gone out.
Then extend that other sifac with a hook, and scrape with a thin caustic torch, and cut off the same as much as you can, until you have entirely removed it.
And let the poultice not touch his skin, lest he be burned.
And know that this operation is healthier, and further from the flow of blood, and better than the operation with incisions.
But if the contradiction that you make in the hour of the incision, or in the hour of the caustic torch, or the flow of blood, or anything else: then it is necessary that you cure what the contradiction that you make from that one with the cure which convient to him, according to what has been premised.
But if he is shy and does not expect to this operation, because of its horror: then administer the incision according to what I have told about it, and it is done.
When you are certified to you from that which we have said about the meanings, that the ramie is aqueous: then it is necessary that you do make the sick sit on a raised seat.
Then pierce the caustic torch in the lower part of his body with a thin blade: and put the piercing according to the length of his body, and let it be an aperture wide, until all the water has run out.
Then put a cloth over the place, and tie him up, and let him go to run out the remainder of the water: then take care of the wound, until the bruise is healed.
But if the contradiction is to the emission of water in the hour when you pierce it: and this one does not do except because of that, because the white cloth makes a contradiction in the wound-hole, and stops the exit of water: then it is necessary that you introduce the cloth into the bruise, or an instrument with which the water of the hydropic is drawn out, whose shape preceded: or add to the operation of the bruise a little.
And know that water returns, and is gathered up after six months, or about them. So when it is gathered up, then he shall turn again according to the same mode, and he will spend his days ill.
Chapter LIII.
On the care of the carnose ramie.
You should know that in this section on the ramie, it is because of the fear that leads to peril in many dispositions. Therefore I am sending her away from me so that she may be saved from this.
And I am remembering the operation on her, and the appearance of the pustules.
I say that many pustules occur on the bodies, from which the testicles are formed: and it comes about from many causes, namely...
Or from acute superfluity, or acrimony, which is excreted into the testicles. Or from a blow.
And the colour of the pustule is according to the colour of the body, and it is not felt to be painful: and the pustule is grey.
And perhaps it is a stony pustule, whose colour is dark, and it has no sensation.
And when it comes about from the nodulation of the arteries, and their inflammation: as I have already remembered regarding this: or from the inflammation of the veins.
So what is it, then, from these, that comes about from the nodulation of the arteries, is recognized by the disposition of the pustules, when you squeeze your fingers together. And it is not necessary for you to touch the individual completely.
That is true, because that which comes about from the inflammation of the veins does not disperse anything by compression with the fingers.
And it is also possible that this appearance should come about on the ramie, and on the other flesh: and it is so, in order to separate the skin of the testicles. Then extend your hand upwards, and remove it with a hook or finger: and free the suspenders from the water, and tie them together with a knot: and cut the suspenders away from you completely on all sides where they are attached.
If then my bone is consolidated with those living tissues, then you should draw it out and cut it off.
And if there is an attachment between any of the sieves or in what is between the veins: then you should free all that attachment and cut it off with a round incision.
But if the birth of flesh is in a place where there is an attachment that is behind it: then you should cut off all of it, and draw out my bone, as we have said.
When then your operation is complete, you should fill the wound with wool infused with rose oil and wine: and then take care of it with the rest of the cure, until it heals.
Chapter LIIII.
On the Care of the Vine Tree, which is with the Viticulture.
The wine is affected by a sort of ferment which is similar to vinegar, and the testes become soft: it makes movement difficult and exercise, and walking.
And in the cure for this sickness there is a fear because of its previous memory.
But we should say that the operation in it should be done according to what the first did.
I say, you should have the sick person sit on an elevated seat. Then push down on the suspenders of the testes towards the bottom. Then hold the skin of the testes with your fingers, with the hand that is nearest to the scrotum: and let another hold it as an assistant, and extend it with a sharp extension.
Then cut it with a sharp chisel-shaped blade in the middle of the veins, until the veins are detected.
Then scrape off all parts, as we have told you in the extraction of the arteries which are in the timbus.
Then fix in it the knot where the double filament is, and tie it again in the first place where the vines are: and tie it again in the last of them. Then dry it off with a middle-length straight scissor according to the length of the body, and extract what is gathered from the foul-smelling, corrupted moisture.
Then care for the withered member with the remaining cure of the wounds, in which you should promote healing so that the sacs that nourish one testicle do not drop off. It is not a bad thing through that.
But if it happens to all the members, then they should extract them for this reason from the testicles with water, so that they do not be deprived of their nourishment, due to the incision, and do not heal or scar, and are not damaged with them.
Of the care of the intestinal worm.
regard
The head of this worm is to be taken from a section that happens in an inch-wide area on the bowels in the part of the groin at the outside of the testicle.
Why do the bowels come out from that break towards one testicle? And this break is either from a fistula or from an extension of it.
And these two species arise from many causes: either from a blow, or from a slip, or from a noise, or from raising something heavy, and similar things.
And the sign, when it is from an extension of the fistula. It is that which happens gradually over a long period of time, and does not happen suddenly: and it is a swelling that is equal in size to the depth: because the fistula compresses the intestines.
And the sign of it when it is from a section of the fistula, because it causes sudden and very painful pain from its beginning: and it is a swelling that is different, visible just under the skin, and is because of the exit of the intestines, and their course towards the external fistula.
And when it comes out with the intestine still alive: and this is called the intestinal worm, and it is alive: and sometimes it makes a hissing sound.
And when it runs into the feces, and stays there: and it is with that for his injuries: because it causes very painful pain, especially when it is pressed.
And there is great danger in using iron for the treatment of this kind of disease: so that care should be taken to avoid any such accident.
And the method of operation is this: you must instruct the sick person to bring his hands into contact with the inside of the wound of his own body, if he obeys the return. Then let him lie on his back between your hands, and wash his legs.
Then spread the skin that covers the skin to the top, and dry the whole skin of the testicles along its length. Then set aside two sections with clips between your lips, according to the way you open the section with them: and the section should be so arranged that it can be removed from it, so as to go out of it.
Then scrape the wax from, and what is under the skin of the testicles, until when it is touched, all its side is white: then introduce your finger into it that follows the testicle, into that which is between the wax and the skin, and between the second wax, and make complete contact with it.
Then move with the right hand to the inside of the skin of the testicles: and while doing so spread the wax towards the top with the left hand: and wash the legs with the wax at the side of the section: and order the servant to extend the leg towards the top: and you will release the adhesion, which is behind.
And ask your hands whether there is anything of the intestines still remaining inside the wax or hard. If, however, something is found of it: then push it towards the lower bow.
Then take the skin in which there is a thick thread, made of ten strands: and insert it at the back of the wax, that is, of the tunic under the skin of the testicles, which follows the section: then cut off the ends that protrude from the strand, until you have four strands. Then make a sort of X with some of them in the form which I have described: and bind them together with the alsifac, about which I have spoken, because it is under the skin of the testicles tightly, so that none of the blood that nourishes them can reach them to give them anything: lest there be a breach in it. And place again the second ligament outside of the first ligament, distant from it by less than two fingers. And after that two ligaments leave out from a tuft, which is under the skin of the testicles, size of a finger; and cut all the rest round, and take off it.
Then dry out in the lower part of the skin of the testicles the section, from where runs blood and pus: as we have told you before.
Then administer the wool soaked in oil and place it on the screw; and administer the ligament that we have described. And when the tuft of white silk that we have mentioned is cauterized with the caustic, after incising it with caution to prevent the flow of blood. This often happens. And leave the ligament, until it falls on its own.
But if its fall is delayed, then soak it with warm water: and place over it that which we have mentioned, until it falls.
Then take care of the screw with the rest of the wound's treatment, until it heals.
Chapter LVI.
[On RAMy's spring].
In this RAMy's spring, I did not see anyone who dared to treat it with an iron.
And first they said that it was done as we have told you in RAMy' which is with the Vine. That is, as the ligaments were used after the incision on it with ease downward: then dry out in the middle, and take care afterwards of what opens it up, until the ligaments fall; and take care of the screw, according to what we have said, until it heals.
Chapter LVII.
[On the incision made in the groin].
When the rupture happened in the groin, as we have said, and the exit was made, and did not come down anything from the intestines; and if it came down, it is little, and returns in every moment: but if it is prolonged with that time, a fissure is added to the tuft, until the intestines go into the tuft.
And this happened because of an extension of the safach, which is in the groin, as we have said. That is, because the safach extends: then it softens, and the site becomes numb, and blood comes out.
And the care for it is with a caustic, as it has preceded in its narration.
And when it is healed with an iron, according to this way: and it is, so that it lies sick on its back between your hands. Then dry the site of the rupture, which has been numbed and blood has come out, with a section through its width, according to the quantity of three fingers.
Then tighten the safach and, which are under the skin, until when it is detected that the white safach, which is under the skin, follows itself.
Then take a ray, and put it on the site where the blood has come out from the safach, and press it towards the deep of the wound.
Then, on the two sites where the blood has come out from the safach, at the end of the ray, sew one of them to each other; then remove the end of the ray.
And do not break the safach at all, nor stretch one out, nor any other, as I have informed you about the cure of an intestinal branch.
Then this cure for the wound. When you cut the file, clean it out, and restore the bone, until it is hardened.
The safach is contracted, and no blood is added to the rupture.
And the caustic is better in this place: for it is closer to salvation.
Chapter LVIII.
Regarding the softening of the skin of the testicles.
The skin of the testicles is often softened in certain men, because the flesh between them is softened, and its appearance changes.
Therefore it is necessary for the one who is asked to heal him, that he lie on his back, and that he apply the softened skin to all the skin that has been softened.
Then, with two sutures, join the two lips together: and if there is any excess of the softened skin, first use three or four sutures, and then a firm one.
Then, cut between the sutures.
Then, care for the cure of the remaining wound, until it heals, and let the threads fall off.
Head LIX.
§ On Castration.
Know that castration is excommunicated in our law; and for that reason it would be well if I should not remember it in this book: and the remembrance of it is necessary only for two reasons.
One reason is that it may be in a medical student's knowledge when questioned about it; and that he may know how to cure it when it occurs.
And the other reason is that we often need to castrate certain animals for our own good, such as sheep, horses, and cats, and similar animals.
I say then, that castration is performed in two ways. Or by friction. Or by a slit and cut.
In that which is done by friction the procedure is this: that we make the animal sit in hot water until its testicles become soft and loose their tension: then do you grasp them with your hand, until they shrink back and no longer show under the skin.
But in castration by a slit and cut, you must hold the animal, and with your left hand press the skin of its testicles together.
Then tie the suspenders, and dry all over one incision from top to bottom until both testicles have fallen: then cut after you have scalded them both, and do not leave on any thread except a narrow seam, which is above the skin.
And this method of castration is better than that done by cutting; for friction may give up a little of the testicles, which might cause an animal to desire copulation.
Then cure the fracture, until it heals.
Head LXX.
To cure hermaphroditism there are two ways.
Hermaphrodite is from the testicles, by two ways. The vagine is from the testicles, because it appears as if there were a space, or on the skin of the testicles, where two testicles are between them, in the form of a small woman's body, with hair; and sometimes urine flows out of it which is on the skin of the testicles.
But in women there is one opening and it is like a small woman' s body, above the chest, like the testicles of a young man, protruding towards the outside: one of them is like a penis, and two are like the two testicles.
And the cure of the three kinds, two from the testicles and one from a woman, is this: for you must burn away the added flesh, until the impression disappears. Then heal those wounds that are left.
But in the second species of men, from which urine issues, and which is on the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor any cure at all.
Head LXXI.
Regarding the incision of the scrotum and prominent flesh in women' s vulvae.
The tenticulus should be cut off, if it has grown, until it heals and its appearance improves; and sometimes it becomes prominent in certain women to the extent of reaching the chest, and goes up as far as the chest when they spread their legs.
Therefore you should hold back the excess tenticulus by hand or with a clamp, and burn it off; and do not cut it out, especially deep in its root: so that blood does not flow.
Then heal that wound, until it heals.
But the middle flesh, which is born between a mother' s mouth, until it fills itself up: and possibly it issues out towards the outside, like a tail; and because of that some call illness with a tail. It is necessary that we cut it as we cut Tentigine, and treat it until it is healed.
On the treatment of a perforation in a woman's urethra.
Chapter 72. On the treatment of a perforation in a woman's
is, that it may be a woman's urethra, or a small opening. and is either a natural one or an accidental one.
An accidental one is from an illness that has preceded it; and the same either comes from born of flesh added, or from a thin scurf, or from a scurvy: and it may be in the depth of the lake, or in the sides thereof, or in the upper part thereof, or in the lower part thereof: and it prohibits coitus and impregnation, and birth, and perhaps prohibits menstruation.
And the knowledge of this is obtained from the inspection of midwives, if the petechia is apparent near at hand.
But if it is not apparent, then ask it with your fingers, or with a ray.
If, however, the petechia is from a thin scurf, and is near both lips: then bring it closer, and tear it off.
And is, that you place on two lips a little ball.
Then put your fingers of both hands together, and let the woman lie on her back with her legs spread wide. Then extend the two lips with force, until the thin scurf is torn open, and the petechia is opened.
Then take a piece of wool, and dip it in oil, and place it on the spot; and let the woman eat it every day, so that the spot does not harden by means of another force.
If, however, the scurf is thick and thick: then it should be separated with a smooth leaf of myrtle.
If, however, the petechia is from born of flesh, then suspend it with a hook and cut it off: and let there be with you medicines that stop the flow of blood without causing pain, such as acacia, and dragon' s blood, and thus the aggregate with alume.
Then apply a large tube of lead, so that the injury heals more quickly and with less pain; keep it in place for several days: then apply liquid licorice, and then treat the rest with the usual treatment until it is healed.
And when a person is born with a defect in one of the limbs: it is therefore necessary that such a defect should occur as follows: while there is no swelling due to cancer, for cancer causes a swelling in the womb; for otherwise there would be a contradiction between iron and fire altogether.
Chapter LVII. On the Treatment of Hemorrhoids, Athahel
Regarding the treatment of hemorrhoids, Athahelil, and botryos of red plague in women.
Hemorrhoids are an outlet for the blood which flows from them frequently and in great quantity.
When therefore hemorrhoids are beginning to form, they become thorns; and I have already spoken in the division of their types and their signs; and I will tell here those that receive the benefit of treatment and those that do not.
I say then, as for hemorrhoids which are at the outlet of the womb and are not visible; there is no benefit to them from iron.
But those which are at the outlet above where the sense ends, are the ones that are cured.
It is therefore necessary for you to enter the cold house. Then extend Athahel with pincers or with a sharp cloth, and cut them off at their roots.
Then dust them with powder over the flow of blood from one that has been cut without mortification: such as acacia and dragon's blood and ochre and the like.
Then hit her feet against the wall once an hour. Then put her in cold water.
If the flow of blood persists: then make her sit in a decoction of sumach and wormwood and gall and the like.
Then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar and make a plaster and apply it to her back.
If therefore the blood is cut off with it, it is good; and if not, let the skin adhere to the back of the wounds, and the nipples, without scarring.
Then take a piece of cloth and dip it in taraxacum juice, or tongue root juice, or bay laurel juice, that is, glans, wine of Cyrene, and let it adhere to the loin.
When therefore the poultice has rested, then take care of the place with ointment, until it is healed.
Albarth, however, is really similar to red caps and has a rough appearance.
Therefore let it appear from it, according to what I have said in the little book equally: and take care of it, until it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
Regarding the exit that happens in the mother.
Various poultices may occur in the mother, such as cancer, and the stone-like apostema, ulcers, blisters, scabs, keratitis, that is, herpes, colic, fistulae, hemorrhoids, itching, ragadiae, and hot poultices.
And I have already said all these diseases and their kinds, and the signs of them, and their cures in a division: it is necessary that I should say in this book about the hot poultice which happens in the mother when it is from the apostemas that gather blood, and know how it is done with the iron.
Therefore let it be considered. Then if the pain of the apostema in its beginning is acute with its pounding, and fire, and fever: and you see it red: if it falls on it, then do not like its perforation: and take care of it with it as much as it is willing to maturation, until, when it has rested, the sharpness of the accidents.
Then it is necessary that you should make the woman sit on a seat that covers her two legs, and lie down, or lean on her back, and put her feet at the lower side of her leg: and let her knees be opened, and place her arms under her knees, and bind each with a suitable ligature to it.
Then the midwife should sit to the right rear, and administer the instrument with which she opens the birth canal.
And it is necessary that when you administer this instrument, you hold the woman's womb firm with your knee: so that the womb does not come out of the instrument more than its depth, and hurts the sick.
But if the instrument is greater than its depth, then you should put a cushion on top of the womb's depth: to prevent the introduction of the entire instrument into the depth; and it should be placed to run in the instrument from the upper side: and to hold the instrument, and to reverse the flow of the instrument, until the birth canal has opened.
When it is thus apparent that the exit has come, and it can be touched by hand, and it is soft and smooth: then you should separate it from its head with a smooth edge.
When the pus is thus drained, then you should put a licorice rod that is immersed in rose water: or in violet oil, where there is some stiffness: and putting the licorice, and remove a piece from the depth of the womb.
And put outside on the womb, and on a woolen blanket that is immersed in water, where there are some red spots: and let it dry.
Then take care of it after two days with the ointment that suits it, until it heals.
And when the womb is washed and the string has come out so that it curls up with water and honey: then bathe in water in which there are red spots, or linden tree, or long aristeology: and then return to the ointment.
Which if the string is hidden inside the womb, then you should refrain from treating it with iron, and more care itself with what we have said in division.
Chapter 70.
Doctrines of obstetrics, how they give birth to the fetus according to the figure that is not natural exit.
It is necessary for the obstetician to know first the figure of natural childbirth.
From the signs then, you will know when you see a woman compressing herself towards her lower parts and smelling the air and resting upon her who is giving birth, and hastening to go out, knowing that this childbirth is in the second figure and the exit of the embryo is above her head and the second with it: or hanging, or swinging from the navel.
When then you see these signs, let the woman compress her abdomen so that the embryo goes down quickly.
For when it has gone down above its head, the second one has gone down with it, and is purified from it by good purification.
But if this childbirth is not like this, it is unnatural, unclean.
For when the embryo goes out on his feet, and the body goes out before its head, and its feet and hands one, or its foot and hand one: or when the head and hand go out, or when it goes out inside: and perhaps turns over its neck, and similar figures that are unclean.
It is therefore necessary for the obstetician to be prudent and careful in all these things, and to guard against error and deception: and I show you all the figures from them, and how the intellect works in it, and explains itself, and makes a noise on it.
When the embryo goes out on its own natural head and becomes heavy upon the woman, and finds it difficult to give birth, and you see its strength already weakened: then let her sit down in a chair, or have women support her: and pour into her a hot infusion of fennel, and with wet oils.
Then the obstetician will insert a small spatula between his fingers and find the second one with it, and dry it off with his nail, until it has gone out what is in it of moisture: and he will press the abdomen of the woman, until the embryo goes down.
If it does not fall, then the woman should be bound with a cloth made of fenugreek sap and sesame oil.
Then you shall order her to compress herself after the enema, and make her sneeze with a mixture, and hold her nose and mouth for an hour. For the fetus will come out at once.
If two hands of the fetus come out first, you should bind them so that you reduce them with ease little by little. If it does not obey in the entrance, then you shall put the woman on a chair, and raise her feet up: then you shall shake the chair on the ground: and the woman should hold herself so that she does not fall by the shock.
If then the hands do not come out, and the fetus dies: then you shall cut them, and take out the remains of the fetus: and tie the hand with a cloth, and take it out with equality: for he will come out.
The exit of the fetus is on its feet. When the fetus comes out on its feet, you should push it up: then you shall turn the fetus little by little: then you shall make it even.
Then you shall take one of its feet, and stretch it little by little.
When they have come out as far as the hip, then you shall order her to compress herself, and make her sneeze with a mixture: for it will come out if God wills.
And if it does not come out with that which we have said, then you shall reduce the fetus little by little, until you put it back in its normal shape. For he will come out easily at that exit.
If it is forbidden to do all that we have said: then you shall take fenugreek sap and sesame oil and gum arabic: and pound everything in a mortar with a good pounding: then you shall wrap the whole with the cloth of a woman, and tie her feet. Then let him sit in tepid water until he feels a pulse under his abdomen.
When you see that his lower abdomen is now warmed, then apply Myrrh to him and support him. When he has held the myrrh for an hour, then let him sit on a chair. Then make him sneeze: and pinch his mouth and nose tight: and apply a gentle compression to the lower part of his abdomen. For the fire will soon come out.
Exit the fire above the knees and hands. When it has exited in this form, then gently insert your hands. Then the woman shall lie over her neck and her feet shall hang down to the ground; and she herself shall lie on a bed and bind her hands. Then gently compress the windpipe of him little by little. Then pull out what is under his feet from the pubic hair, until she is prepared in the lower part. That if the fire does not exit: then take his feet, and move them with a violent motion. Then compress what is over the hypogastric region little by little, until the fire rises to the top. Then insert your hands and make him even smaller: and tell the woman to compress, until the fire exits.
Exit the fire hanging from the hands. It is bound in reducing her hands. If she cannot be reduced: then embrace the woman, and let her walk.
If she cannot walk: then lie her on a bed; and gently shake her legs.
Then administer the ointment which you have prepared from mucus.
That if she takes it while giving birth: then let her sit on a chair. Then study to bind her hands together, and make him sneeze the woman, and tell her to compress herself until he exits.
The baby's exit from its mother's neck, with wide arms, and its face toward the back of its mother's back. It is necessary that the obstetrician hold the baby's hand, then turn it slowly and gently, and equalize it with ease.
When it is equalized, then place it on the cradle that we mentioned above, made of oil and mucus.
Then command him to move slowly. When you have done this, then make her sit down on the chair, and command her to lean to the right side. Then command him to compress: and let her sneeze with a bandage.
The exit of the prepared baby is on the right side. When it has descended to the opening of its mother' s womb in this way with a second finger, then cut the second finger with your nail, until it is discharged from moisture.
But if it hangs over the face of the baby and its neck, then cut it from the navel: so that it is not retained, and dies.
Then push the baby into the inside, until you put it in place: and command the woman to compress herself from time to time: for himself will come out with a soft exit.
The exit of twins, or a multiple birth. You should know that twins are often born: and sometimes three and four are born. But this is unusual, and rarely happens.
Five is a strange thing outside nature, and they do not live alone: and it holds them together, however they multiply, by a second one: and separates them with a slit, distinguishing between them a tied string in the navel of each one.
And sometimes when they go out, they go out like a single baby with a natural exit, easily: and they go out with an agreeable exit, as we have described it.
If some of them are difficult at birth, and they endeavor to the thing we mentioned above from unnatural figures, then take care of them as we have said: and let it lie on a soft bed, and do what it does easily and with delay, and shape it according to all the figure with that which is prepared by nature leading to salvation.
Memory of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and aborts.
When one is formed in the womb and two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten; and I have also seen that a woman who aborts gives birth to seven and another fifteen, all formed.
That which has been measured by the glory of the wise man.
Therefore everything needs to be in the knowledge of Obstetrics. Perhaps it will also come to her like this: oppose it with him what is necessary
Chapter LVII on the head.
On the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you are concerned about the dead fetus that I mentioned in the division of medication and does not come out, and you urge to use the operation with your hand, then you should consider.
If then the woman is healthy and of good virtue, and is not with any of the accidents from which she fears harm: then it should be that the woman lies down on a bed, on her back, and her head is inclined downward, and her legs are raised up: and the minister should hold her by two sides, or tie her to the bed, so that her body does not come out during the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the mouth of the womb with moist oils with althaea mucilage and fenugreek seeds and linseed meal.
Then the Obstetrician should wet his hand with these oils and mucilages: then introduce it into the womb with ease. Then she should ask where the hook is that holds the fetus, and the places convenient for that.
Then consider if the fetus is prepared to descend on its own head: then fasten the hooks in her eyes, or her throat, or her mouth, or her palate, or under her beard, or in her chin, or in convenient places.
If, however, the descent is above his feet, then in the chest, and through the ribs mid-way.
And it is to hold the hook with his right hand: and place the wound in it in which it is between the fingers of his left hand: and insert it with his hand easily, and fasten the hook in one of those places we said, until he reaches the end that he wants to make.
Then fasten in opposition to it another hook or third, if you wish: so that the contraction is equal, and does not turn towards one side.
Then let it be extended with an equal extension, and is not extended only in the direction of the straightness, but also moves on all sides, so that the exit is relieved: as happens when a tooth is being extracted.
And it is to be between that, so that the extension is softened. That if a part is held back from it, then the midwife should put some oil on certain fingers and insert them from that side, so that they turn with it when she holds it back.
If then a part of the fetus comes out, then the hooks are to be moved to another place that is higher: do this until the entire fetus has come out.
If then a hand comes out before another, and it is not possible to reduce it due to its constriction: then it is necessary to wrap a cloth over it. Then pull it out until all of it comes out, cut it or insert it into the joint of the limb, or into the bed: and in such a way that you do in the other hand, and in the two feet.
If then the head of the fetus is large, or if it happens to him that his constriction occurs during the exit, or if there is water in his head: then it is necessary to insert between the fingers a sharp bone, and find with it the head, and remove the water: or break it down with an instrument called Almisdac: whose shape comes from the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter that follows.
Likewise let him make a separation if the fetus has a large head, then it is necessary to cut the skin of the head: or else let him take it out whole, as we have said. Then let him pull the bones with forceps.
If it comes out, and the neck is clamped between the forceps: then let it be found, until the moisture that is in the chest is spilt.
But if it is not complicated, and does not yield to coming out: then let him cut the head quickly, according to what is possible for you.
That if the lower leg is swollen, or there is water in it: then you should let him make an incision, until the moisture comes out.
But if the fetus is above his feet, then its attraction is easy, and its direction towards the mother's mouth is light.
But if it is clamped between the womb, or the chest: then you should let him take it out with the cloth that you have wrapped around your hand: and let him make an incision in the womb, or the chest, until what is in them comes out.
But if the remaining limbs are taken away, and the head returns: then let the Midwife put her left hand. But if the mother' s mouth is open, then let her hand go down into the mouth of the mother, and ask for it with her fingers, and draw it out to the mouth: then let him put in one hook, or two hooks, and draw it out with them.
That if the mother' s mouth is clamped, because of the hot swelling that happens to it: then it is not necessary for him to work on it, but at that time he should administer an infusion of fluids, thick: and administer plaster: and let him sit in water that softens and moistens.
That if the fetus is above its side, then it is possible to make it even: then he should administer what we have said in a single fetus.
If it is not possible to do so, then incise quickly and extract.
And you should not leave anything at all inside for the second time.
Now when you have finished your operation, then administer what we said in the appendix about the hot blisters that occur in the wombs.
If a flow of blood occurs, then let it descend into water of narrowness, and administer the remaining cure.
And I have already seen a woman, in whose womb the fetus was dead: and then she was impregnated on top of that other fetus, and then another fetus died too. Then happened to her after a long time a blister in her navel, and it was inflated, until it opened out: and it began to emit pus.
So I was called for her cure, and I treated her at a long time: but the wound did not heal.
Then I placed over it some strong plasters of attraction: and she came out from her place by the mouth. Then there passed away a few days for her, and she came out another mouth. So I was amazed from there, when there is no mouth in the womb.
I thought that there were bones of a dead fetus.
So I questioned the wound, and I pulled out many bones, with a woman being in better condition of her: and she had already stayed so long time, and was emitting little pus from her place.
And I do not firmly hold this strange thing, except that there is knowledge of it, and help for it, which the doctor of art manages with his hand from the cure.
Chapter LVII.
Of forms Of instruments necessary in extracting the fetus.
Form of the mandible as it opens matrix.
Here is the form of the Strigler, which are equalized by books, and which have two twists on both ends of two pieces of wood. However this Twist should be made so that it is a subtler strigler: and to do this, either from ebony, or from wood of buckthorn.
And the breadth of each bone should be like that of two fingers; and the edge of either side should be like a finger; and the length of each one should be a palm and its midpoint; and in the middle of the two bones there are two additions of the same species, which have already been fixed on both sides, whose length is half a palm and slightly more; and the breadth of each is like that of two fingers or slightly less.
And these two additions enter into the jaw bone, so that it opens with them when you turn your two Vertiges.
Another form, like this one, but finer and lighter.
Let it be made from ebony wood, or teak, according to the similarity of the forks. However, at its ends there are two additions, as you see here above: and the length of each of these additions is like a palm: and the breadth of each is like two fingers.
So when you are going to open the jaw with it, then let the woman sit on a bed, her feet hanging down, and open what is between her shoulders. Then introduce these two additions joined together into the jaw: and you hold the end of the instrument below her hips. Then open your hand with the instrument as you do with the forks, equally according to the quantity that you wish to open the jaw of the matrix, until the obstetrician does what he wants.
Form of the second Vertige than the ancient Form of the Impelling where the fetus is propelled.
Form of Al-Misdaq, where the head turns great: and it resembles a fork, having teeth at its ends, as you see.
And when it is made short, like a fork in this form, as you see, having teeth like the teeth of a saw, which cuts and grinds.
Form of the winnower holding a single spike.
Form Vncinis hantens spinas duas.
The spatula has two edges and is used to cut the baby's head apart.
The two spatulas are also used to hold the baby's body.
These instruments are all used, and the more they multiply in kind and number and are prepared for use by skilled hands, so much the faster and easier is their work, and the higher their reputation among men.
Do not therefore despise these instruments, since they are at your disposal, prepared for use by you. For their necessity is inexcusable.
Chapter LXVIII. On the removal of the placenta.
§ On the extraction of the second born.
When the secondborn is retained after childbirth, then you should take care that it does not hold on to its own. Then, when it has been conditioned, you must make it sneeze; and tightly grasp your hand over its nose. If, therefore, it goes out through this way, it is good.
If not: then take a club, and pierce in the lid an opening; and put into it herbs that open the mouth of the womb, such as calamus, rue, aniseed, camomile, fennel, cassia-wood, and centaury; take all these herbs, or some of them, and dissolve them in water, and place them on fire.
Then put a wicker into the opening of the lid, and the other end in the mouth of the womb; and let her hold it until the vapor produced by the warming reaches the opening.
Then make it sneeze, as we have said. The secondborn will come out with ease.
If, however, it remains after this treatment and does not go out: then instruct the midwife to dip her hand in oil from sesame seed, or in althaea mucilage. Then he inserted his hand into her vagina and examined her with his fingers. When he had found her, then he took hold of her and opened her little by little.
But if it were attached deep within the womb, then he should insert his hand, according to what we have said above, until when he has found the second [child], and slowly removes it, so that the womb does not come out by a sudden tug: first of all, it should be turned so as to face the right and left sides: then the amount of tugging should be added. For she will obey at that time, and move about, and be freed from the attachments.
If the opening of the womb is contracted, as we have already described: take care of her with a storm, and wash out the hole with herbs.
But if it does not go out with all that we have said, then be careful not to tire yourself out by repeatedly trying to remove it.
It is true, however, that when she leaves the opening of the womb, there are some things that need to be done for the woman. Then clean her with a ointment of four drugs. For after a few days it will rot and dissolve and come out.
But when it has rotted, a bad smell arises from it towards the stomach and head, and damages that one with its stench. Therefore, let appropriate vapour treatments be given to it.
Some ancient people have already experienced the effect of nasturtium vapours, and dried fig vapours.
The form of an instrument that is used to vapourise a woman while she is retening the second [child] and the monthly flow.
Let it be made from the bark of an oak or a linden tree; and let the end be wide [in diameter] over fire; and let the vapour be placed above plums; hold it until that vapour is consumed; and then let another be prepared.
If the anus is not pierced
If the anus is not pierced
Many boys are born, and their anuses are not yet pierced, which have now been rendered soft by the subtle sirocco. The midwife should therefore pierce it with her finger: and if she will not do so, let her pierce it herself with a sharp spatusula: and let her take care that she does not touch the snake.
Then put on top of it wool dampened with wine and oil. Then care for the wound with ointment, until it is healed.
If you suspect that it will become infected, then put a lead pipe in the opening for several days, and remove it when the boy wants to defecate.
And it has already happened that the anus has become infected from the consolidation of the wound, or pus. The consolidation should therefore be removed, and then care for it with that which we have said above from the cure of the anus and lead.
Chapter LIII
Of the cure of fistulas which occur in the lower part.
The fistulas which occur in the lower parts are the swelling and grossness which occur near the anus of a single part: and there is one fistula or several.
When therefore that swelling has become old, it opens, and from it issues a watery, white, or subtle pus.
And when they are sometimes penetrating fistulas. Therefore the penetrating ones are known by that which issues from them on account of defecation, and windiness, when an infirm person has defecation: and perhaps they issue from them naked.
And there are fistulas sometimes penetrating into the space up to the hip, and up to the pubic bone. And from them sometimes penetrating up to the joint of the hip, and up to the swelling at the end of the tail.
From this therefore when it is known that there is a penetrating fistula up to an organ, and not from one which does not penetrate, it is known if you put your finger on the organ: and try to insert a subtle thing of brass or iron into the fistula from bronze: since there is no tortuosity.
If there is a twist in it, then introduce yourself by trying with thin lead, or a feather from the wings of a horse, until you feel the attempt, or a pin in your finger.
If you do not feel it thoroughly, and there is no discharge from the wound, nor is it putrid or dry as I have said: then you will know that it is not penetrating: so approach to cure.
And when the fistula penetrates as far as the skin, or to the muscle of the urine: then the sign of it is the emission of urine from it, and its prohibition from this so that the place with the medicines consolidates.
If it really penetrates as far as the joint of the hip, or to the bone of the hip: then the sign of it is that it reaches with the attempt as far as there, if there is no twist in it as far as the mouth: and the discovery of pain on the circumference of the part, and that it discharges pus from it always: and that it does not scald in it with the medicine, nor consolidates with the ointment.
And in these fistulas, all of which penetrate, there is no cure at all: and the cure of them is work and vainness to him from foolish doctors, for a form is made on it.
In that one, or if it is not penetrating, and not old, hope for a cure with a scar: for I tell you, and I have already proved: and there is, let the sick person lie in your hands on his back: and wipe away the hair from his legs up to his hips, and his hips are inclined towards his belly. Then introduce lead or air into it, if there is a twist in the fistula, until you know where the attempt reaches.
But if he feels it about some part, then you should introduce your finger with the index towards that part.
But if you feel in your finger with the index already penetrated through itself by itself, besides that you feel between your finger and the skin, or meat: then you will know for sure, that it is penetrating: so do not work on it, because its cure is not as I have said.
They said, however, that he heals some men of flesh, and from the medicine which he expects will help him, that is to say, like the earlier one, he burns the fistula with a fine fire according to its length, and inserts it into the fistula until he reaches a certain place. Then repeat that again twice, or three times, until you know that all the added filtered flesh which is similar to a feather of an owl has burned away.
Then take care with a smooth paste in butter, until the burned flesh comes out; and then take care with an ointment which generates flesh and hardens it.
If he heals then, it is good.
And if not, then he will not heal with any other cure.
And if it comes out with a little pain and does not reach your finger, which is in the anus, and there is thick flesh or pus between it and the bandage; and you see a fistula on the skin surface that follows it, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and keep drying what is in the fistula until you reach the place where the end of the bandage reaches, and let the bandage come out and fall.
Then clean those filtered flesh which are similar to a feather of an owl so that nothing remains of them.
If, however, it hurts you and flows between you and the operation so that it separates those flesh; then better is it if it heals and becomes quickly healed, by burning it with fire or with sharp medicine.
For the burn creates good habits, to the burning of those added flesh and to the cutting off of blood, and drying up of moisture.
Then take care with a smooth paste in butter, or ground clovers, until the place puts out puss, and the burned flesh comes out with puss.
Then take care with a hard- generating ointment, which creates hard flesh; and there are medicines in which there is styptic and drying up.
When I am about to eat, then I am about to heal; and do not count on repetition.
But if the fistula has reached the depth of the pelvis and is extended beyond the confines of the body, then introduce your hand into the rectum and question it.
But if you feel that there is an obstacle between you and her, or some defect of the hymen, or flesh is close to insertion: then it is not an operation in that, unless according to a second opinion of trust and hope.
That is, because it deals with two ways in it: or as if you were cauterizing her herself, as we have said: or separate her, until you achieve the desired concavity so that it is possible for you to introduce your finger and cure from nearby. And do not proceed much with the section, lest you fall into the deep pocket of a muscle, and happens to the end of the exitis without will. Then take care of that cure with it that we have said.
Perhaps she will be healed: or it will extend the defect and clean it up to the bottom of the body, as we have said, or with a finger or with another acute instrument. Then cleanse those tissues that are in the section, until you can reach them with inspection.
Then try to restore the wound of the whole body with the section, and open a hole where it is consolidated: and remains a fistula opened in the inner part of the anus, and will be easier on the weakness.
And when it follows in this way: and that is, when you introduce the finger into the fistula: and is in the side of the anus near the surface of the body with skin and margin of the anus: then take hold of the finger at the tip, which is like a needle's eye, namely, the prepared thread, according to this shape. And introduce into it a string with five threads and around it. Then introduce the finger with the thread into the fistula, until you achieve the desired concavity.
If then it has penetrated into the margin of the anus from within, draw out a thread from that opening: so that you can insert your finger into the anus, and pull off the end of the thread, and join the two ends together at once: and tighten each one, and let go of it for that day, or two days: and whatever the thread has penetrated into the flesh, tighten it well, until those tissues which are between the two ends of the thread fall away and drop: then take care of the wound, until it has healed over and become sound.
If, however, the opening of the fistula is not penetrating: then make it penetrate wherever you prepare it for yourself, unless it is in a deep place. For you should not make it because you are making it due to a snake, so that you do not fall into it yourself.
Then make it as we have said, until it is healed over.
The form of the needle with which the fistula is found, whose point is sharp and very keen, and one side is not acute so that it does not hit that which is unnecessary, as you see.
Chapter LIII.
Regarding the suture of hemorrhoids, from which blood flows from their incision: and take care of fissures.
There are hemorrhoids in two ways. Or they are within the anus, similar to coal or plums: or almost like grain. And from them there are small ones and big ones: and blood flows from them always, and there is one that comes out, and many come out. And they are outside the anus, and at the ends of it.
However, those outside the anus are, according to most accounts, very few moist things from which runs yellow water, or a little blood with a constant flow: and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment for that which is within the anus is, as you command the sick to loosen it: and it is pressed out, until the anus comes out, and appears white to you. Therefore also and suspend with hook: or hold them with your nail. Then cut them next to their roots.
But if they do not hold fast on the hook, because of their moisture and their own柔软性: then grasp them with a rough cloth, or with a twine of thin twine, and pull them out with your fingers. Then cut them, and sprinkle over them some warm poultices after the cut so that they stand in place of poultice. Or cauterize them according to what has gone before in the chapter on cauterizing. Then take care of them with the remaining cure, until they are healed.
That if the anus of the expulsion does not obey, then clisterize the sick clister in which there is little mordicatio to let it flow with him who is in the anus, and make it obey the expulsion more quickly, when it expresses itself with the sick.
But if they are extrinsically athelil from the anus, then their case is lighter and easier: and you may grasp them with your nail, or grasp them with a hook, and cut them. Then take care of them with that which I have said, until they are healed.
And who hates the cut with iron, then you should administer a sutura to them according to this way. Take a twine of yarn, and insert it into the wound. Then extract the athelil from above, and let the needle enter with an acuter into the root of it from one side: and wrap around the two ends of the thread, on the lower part of the needle, and make them run across: and tighten the athelil with a strong knot. Then tie a knot in the twine, and remove the awl.
Make it with all the athelil, and let go from them one: and let not his own be cut away from him, so that there is a superfluity of blood.
Then place over some cloth soaked in rose oil or olive oil, and place the sick person on it: and order the sick person to rest. Then let go of him, until he falls.
And when the sutures have fallen off, treat them with ointment and other cures until they are healed.
[On the treatment of wounds.] [For often when dried stool comes out, and nature tightens up.]
[When they are somewhat dry, and do not respond to medical treatment; then you should cut them with a scissor, or with your own nail, until they are moist, and the upper crust [of dried excrement] that prevents them from being consolidated is removed.] [Then treat them with care, according to what should be done.]
[If they do not consolidate: then treat them again with a more aggressive treatment than before, until they bleed profusely, and then treat them with care, until they are healed.]
[On the treatment of scurvy in those who are not infected by the plague, and in those who are infected with scurvy, and also for the treatment of the foot rot.]
[Head 82]
[Know that scurvy is a round nodule, of the color of the body, similar to a claw on the head: it develops throughout the body, especially in the lower parts of the feet and toes: and causes pain during walking.]
[It should be cut off what is in the shape of a claw, and held with forceps, or with a clamp, and completely removed from its root.]
[Then treat it; and if you have a cautery, treat it as described in my chapter on the head.]
[But of the dry scurvy there is one little eminence, rough, filtre-like, round on top of the skin.]Si quoddam uel magne facit in pedibus aut in digitis, non est iidem cum in corpore: sed si in corpore fit, curatur [If something makes a mark in the feet or toes, it is not the same as when it is on the body; but if it is on the body
[And its treatment is to spread the scaly skin and cover it with a cloth; or to tie it with silk thread, or with down, until it falls off.]Cum ergo est incisa, et stridentia, et non cadere vel exire: tunc oportet ut cum rasione ve-semem, aut cu-m uncine, donec resipientes sim And if you see, you cauterize him according to what has been said before with fire, or with sharp medicine: and now the athelial that is spread out are eradicated, and not those who do not spread out with an instrument which I say.
But the ant also is an eminent small filtered one, thick, on the surface of the body, waddling into the depth greatly: and when it comes to him cold, it feels in it a similar stinging of an ant, and becomes in the whole body: and most of it is made in the hands.
And its cure is, that you take a tube from a goose feather, or a strong swan feather: and put that tube on the ant, until it contains a circle of tubes from its parts. Then you rotate your hand with the tube, until you separate what is in the circumference of the ant: and put that on a deep place of flesh, and eradicate the ant from its root.
And if you see, do that with a tube of air, or iron, according to this form.
Let it sit on the upper limit, pulling a soft covered thing, so that it eases the pressure of its grip and its rotation.
And if you see, cauterize the ant according to what has been said before in the cauterization of Athelial in the chapter on cauterization.
Chapter LXXXIII.
Regarding the forms of instruments that are used for douches in ailments of the goose, and for the relief of venereal disease and colic.
When the douche is made of silver, or of gold-plated brass, or of fine brass, or of mallet.
And when they are made from these small instruments, and from the large ones, according to those in which they are administered.
So what is administered in the cure of young boys who are weak or aching, should be small, and those whose anus is weak or painful, such should be the douche.
The large douche.
Suture the small cyst. Cannae ite, v.s., caput superius in quo ligatur uter sit amplum secundum hunc modum: et sit ei distinctio ut ligetur uter sicut uides, et extremitas eius inferior quae intromittitur in anum, sit surda, id est, non aperta, lenis, ualde, traens ad subtilitatem: et in uno laterum eius sint duo foramina, et in lato altero foramen unum.
And let the width of the foramen be according to the thickness of the rays, and thicker in parts, and let the uter in which they are placed be from animal fat: or from a piece of parchment that is according to form as if small: whose root is one palm.
And let there be many holes through which it passes, and let the space between each hole be as long as a finger's length. Then insert into those holes a strong thread from raw silk, which is from ten threads or so, and bind it together with the thread so that it is like a bundle of reeds. So when this uter is placed in it, let it be fastened in the head of the cyst with two distinctions by strong constriction. Then let the cyst be sewed up with it.
And this is the form of the uter as it is depicted here, and the holes.
The quality of the sewing up with it is this: so that the uter be filled, or animal fat from medicine which is heated according to the tolerance of the nurse, and let it not be hot or cold.
Then let the sick person lie on his back, and raise his legs up: and place it under him, that is, a cloth over which men sleep, or a mattress.
Then dip the end of the cyst in oil, or in chalk milk, or in mucus of fenugreek, or like it. Then insert himself into the anus with ease. Then let the attendant take him by both hands and squeeze it with great force, until all the contents are emptied into the cistern in the intestines.
Then remove the clister and raise his lame legs towards the wall.
If the medicine makes him want to defecate, then he should hold it as much as possible. And if he sleeps all night with it, it is more effective for recovery.
But if you use the clister to relieve his ailments and bring on his bowels' movements: then repeat the clister, until he is healed.
If there are hemorrhoids or itching in the anus, then let him use the clister very gently, softly, with the clisters that are used by boys.
And this should be the form of a subtle clister that is tightly wrapped around what has a skin covering it.
Chapter LXXVIII.
I have already spoken in the division of the treatment of wounds that suited the book, and I now speak here about this treatment with the hand, and with the aid of a second medication.
I say, therefore, that wounds differ according to that by which they are made, and according to the site on which the wound falls.
So then the kinds of wounds that are caused frequently are like the impact of stones: or the cut of a blade, or the strike of a lance, or a piece of wood, or an arrow: and similar things from among many.
But wounds that are caused by sites of the body are, for example, a wound that falls on the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the belly, or the pelvis: and similar members of the body.
And I am telling about the treatments of some wounds, so that I may set forth the reasoning and rule for the remaining wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds: because remembrance of composers will come at the beginning of Chapter Three.
I therefore declare. I therefore declare. When there is a simple wound in the head and there is no fracture of the bone: consider then, if it has been caused by a stone or something similar, and it has already broken the skin alone: and it is a great wound, and be careful about subsequent healing pustules of heat: then proceed immediately to phlebotomy on the head: and do not delay that: and draw out of it according to the quantity of its strength: if there is no impediment to phlebotomy, especially if it is blood which is coming out from the wound in small quantities. And let there be phlebotomy from the opposite side of the wounded area.
And let there be phlebotomy from the opposite side of the wounded area. And let the sick person refrain from drinking, and wine, and coarse food.
If, however, something prohibits him from fasting, then he should abstain from food, and do not approach meat, nor wine.
And place on the wound if it happens that there is a warm pustule, a solution infused with oil of rose alone, or with wine in which there is stenosis.
If, however, you are free from a warm pustule, then place on the wound if it is young with its own blood, and do not change it: and if it has already changed it itself, then place on it some ointment, until it heals.
If, however, the wound is large, or has been made with a knife, and similar: and if its edges are not joined together by pustules, then join them together with a suture, according to what I will narrate about the wounds of the limbs concerning their sutures.
If, however, the wound has already been detected from the bone, and hangs down, and there is no hold of it, except in a small suspender: then cut it. Then take care of the wound with medicines, and restore in it hard flesh where the skin is, and command the sick person to eat food in which there is coarseness, such as are heads of corn, and cooked wheat, until it has become like a pulse: and like things for them.
If it putrefies in the wound and does not adhere to the bone: then incise the whole putrefied part and throw it away: and then care for it.
But if there is an artery in these wounds or a new one from which blood flows and does not stop even with medicines, then inquire about the artery. If you have not cut it open yet, then dry it up with Spatem or tie it up. What if necessity forces you to do so before the above [treatments], then burn it, until the blood stops flowing.
But if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment of them is easy and light: so that dust over them this dust: for they harden before they change [into a putrefied state] with air.
The method of using powdered incantation. Take part of olive oil, and two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of non-extinguished lime: mix them very much together, and sieve them: and fill them with the powder, and tighten them tightly so that they adhere well to the wound, and are congealed with blood.
Then tie it up from above with the powder, and let it go, and do not remove it until it is healed, so that it does not open again. For this medicine will not get rid of it until it has been healed.
And whenever it does this calcification by itself, for you do not have olive oil and dragon' blood at hand either; the same action is performed on many large wounds when it is placed on them and tied up, and are wounds with blood of their own that have not changed with air.
What if it has already been altered by air in some way, especially during the summer season, then this powder's intention is not in position: therefore care for it with what we have mentioned, so that you place on it a kind of digestive ointment: or place on it a paste made from barley flour, made with water and honey, until it discharges pus. Then, care for those remaining wounds until they heal.
If, however, there is a fracture of the bone and it is small, then extract it with the Wrist: and I will already be saying the cure for fractures of the skull in that which is to come.
Regarding injuries to the neck.
If, however, an injury occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment between it and a simple injury to the head.
If, however, an incision has already been made into the nerves of the neck, or into an artery: then if it is a nerve, there is no skill in its treatment unless it is taken care of so that it causes a sharp pain, like a twinge, and makes one blind, and gives similar symptoms. Because they hurt the nerves, and make them jerk.
And do not put anything cold on a wound at all: for the substance of nerves is cold, and its continuance is with the brain, which is a higher member: and let that be treated by physicians with lene, like a calx poured out with sweet water sometimes infused with oil, or with rose oil, and alumen, when it is rinsed off as well with sweet water: and also with other wet minerals, in this way, and with moist ointments.
If the wound is large, then apply a stitch: or cover it with powder. Then care for the wound, until it heals.
If, however, the depth of the wound is great, or it has occurred in a sinus lower down on it, where pus has already accumulated: then pierce it with a sharp instrument in the low place.
If, however, an incision has been made into a nerve, and the blood flow from it is successive: then separate it, or dry it up, and tie it up: or cauterize it, if necessity compels it to do so.
If, however, an injury has occurred to the spine with a spondyl or two, and they have healed in such a way that you cannot tell where the injury was: then join the skin together with a stitch on either side of the wound, and do not touch the wound, but reduce it to its natural shape. Then tighten the wound with a strip and leave it for a few days. Then treat the wound with ointment until it heals over.
If the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then examine it: if there are any bone fragments inside, remove them all, or as many as you can; and if it is not prepared (for treatment), leave it until the tendon rot and separates from its exit.
If the tendon is fresh, then powder the wound with the powder that you have made. If it has entered into a tendon and formed a fistula, then treat it with what is written about it in the chapter of its treatment.
Surgeon's knife.
If the wound is from a lance or a dagger and you can see its depth, then examine it carefully. If the tendon that has been wounded ever comes to be free from pain, then know that the tendon is healed.
If it is not deep and is fresh with its blood, then do not put powder on it at first, nor tighten it up so that the blood does not flow into its depth and return to its heart, causing injury; but rather put on the wound a tempting ointment, and loosen it twice a day.
But if you do not have ointment available to you, then put on a cotton poultice that is wet with ointment, so that it soothes the wound as it drains its secretions: and let the patient sleep on the wound, so that the accumulated secretions flow into it.
But if the wound has been there for three or more days and no spasm, bad tremor of the heart, or constriction of breath, and the other symptoms of it are good, then know that the tendon is healed. Then treat the wound with care, and with the rest of the cure, until it heals over.
If indeed the cure is successful and it has already opened up again, then you know that a fistula has already formed. Then let the cure of itself from this chapter.
And if the wound is from an incision of the knife or chisel and it is simple on the surface of the breast or back: then let the cure be with it that preceded from the suture, if it is large; or with dust, if it is small.
But if it has already made an impression on the bone and has come from it a splinter: then investigate the wound, and approach to remove those splinters, if they are separate. If not, then let them go, until the splinter rotten, for the extraction of them is allayed.
But of the remaining wounds and injuries in the other members, the judgment in the cure is the judgment of that which we have said.
About wounds of the belly, and exit of the intestines, and their coming out.
The rupture that has happened in the belly is great, and medium, and small.
So when this great one has gone out, or the number of intestines.
Why is there an introduction and a suture more severe and more difficult.
And a small rupture also can be difficult in another way. So, that your reduction may be more difficult, if you do not approach the introduction of its place immediately: for it swells, opens up, and thickens: why is the introduction difficult?
Therefore, this being so, the rupture is a good one: for when it does not cause difficulty in the reduction of the intestine, as it happens in these two species.
Know that the suture of the belly is according to four ways.
Two common sutures meet in the suture of the belly, and in the suture of the remaining wounds of the body: and two other sutures separate to each other communicate with the other wounds. Truly they are more proper with suturing the ankle: and I tell you one as well as another with explanation and announcement.
I say then, because when the injury is slight, and something comes out of the intestines, and it is difficult to reduce it: then it is for two reasons. Or because of the slightness of the break, as we have said: Or because there is swelling in the intestines from cold air.
When then is it so? Then you must heat the wound like this: so that you dip a sponge or a damp cloth in warm water alone. Or you make it up in water with squill, and hyssop, and pepper, and pound it with the intestines, until the swelling goes down.
When then does the ankle do that has a sty: and it is better than water alone in solving inflammation.
When then you see the swelling already resolved, then wet the intestines with the water in which the ale is cooked, or make it bad. For by this the entrance is relieved when it is small.
If, however, the retreat of it after this cure is excused, then find in the disruption a little, with the instrument where they scrape the hemorrhoids.
And the first cure is better when it is prepared, than the section; and there is no pressure to cut after need and want of the instrument.
It is one part of it that is bent, sharp, and the other not acute, and the tip is slightly less so than the Spatemil's sharpness; and this is similar to a claw, as you see.
When then does the ankle get larger, and the intestines are drawn in, then you must reduce it according to its natural form in its own place, if possible about it: for it is better.
When then is the disruption wide in the lower part of the ankle: then you must place the sick one on its back, and raise its legs with its head. And if it is in the upper part of the leg, then place its head, and make its chest higher than its lower parts.
And likewise if the break is in one of the two parts of the leg, then place your intention, and always keep this in mind, that the part that has the wound should be higher than the other side.
And so it should be, that you handle those who are large wounds, and those who have medium wounds.
In small wounds, place it according to what is prepared for you.
Then make sure that the minister who holds the entire break in his hand is present between your hands: and spread his lips. Then detect from him who follows a thread something after something: and this is the common method of sewing one thread.
And it is, so that you take an acute angle, or a number of acute angles according to the width of the wound. Then let go from the end of the break the amount of the fingernail, that is, the doctor: and fasten now one more than what you put into it in the two ends of the skin, with the two ends of the thread that is under the skin from the inside, until you make it penetrate from the other side, and you have already joined the two ends of the skin, and the two ends of the thread: and there are four orders.
Then tighten with a double thread around the acupuncture from both sides, sometimes a few times, until the two lips of the wound have been joined together as they recede.
Then let go of the bulkiness of the finger as well, and fasten now another one: then make it straight with a thread, as you did with the first acution. So therefore do not cease to do this with him who has the break, until you complete the constriction of the wound completely.
And let there be an acute angle between the bulk and the slenderness: for the acute angles cut the flesh quickly: and the gross ones are difficult to enter into the skin: therefore let there be a medium angle, and in slenderness, and in bulkiness.
And it should not be that the needles are inserted into the two ends of the skin of the nearby part by much: so that the flesh does not quickly get hurt, and the wound does not open before its own consolidation, and the sutures are also not elongated when they are sewn, so that the wound is not kept away from consolidation.
Then cut the end of the needle so that it does not hurt the sick person when he sleeps: and place on them little pieces of leather from all sides, which hold the ends of the needles: and let them go until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And this kind of stitch with needles is much more convenient for small wounds. For it is enough in the stitch of these that one needle, or two, or around them.
But the second common stitch is to join with the stitch the four ends: the two ends of the skin, and the two ends of the thread in one thread, with a needle in which the fillet is wound equally in thickness and subtlety, and
Then when you pierce with the needle the four ends, bring them back from the part from which you started in the same way, so that the thread is caught from above on the skin: so that it is a stitch, like the stitch of cloth, and place between each stitch the thickness of the little finger.
This kind of stitch is known by men.
And with this stitch I sewed the wound of a man on his belly, which had been cut by a knife, and the wound was large enough for a palm: and about two palms of middle intestine came out from inside, and there was a break in the middle of the abdomen.
So he reduced that after twenty hours had passed.
The wound was consolidated in the space that had been around fifteen days: and I took care of him, and he recovered: and after that he lived for many years, in his own condition.
And the doctors judged that he would not recover.
And from a miracle it was that I did not cure him with ointment. For I was in a place where the ointment was not available, and there were no medicines. I then put on the patch twice a day, and I kept washing it with honey water until it healed.
But two kinds of stitches, I will speak about according to the narrative.
And is, as you begin with sharp stitch: and introduce it from the outside to the inside part.
And when the needle has penetrated into the skin, and has gone into a loop according to the length and width of all the body: let go of the end of the thread on the outside in which you have introduced the needle, and make it penetrate from the inside part to the outside on the opposite side.
And when you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate again in the same end towards the inside: and let go of the end of the thread that is in this side, and make it penetrate from the outside part to the inside: and let go of the end of the thread, which is in this side, and make it penetrate with your penetration so that you make it penetrate into the end of the thread, which is in the opposite side, until it penetrates all of itself.
Then also from this same side, and pull out the thread with the end that is outside, and bring it out of the skin where it has penetrated.
Then also reduce it into that skin, and pull out the end of the thread that is outside, and bring it out of the skin where it has penetrated. Then also make this end go around in that side with the other end towards the inside: and bring out of the skin what is from that part, and make it go back and forth until it is all outside according to that example.
And the height of this stitch is as the sutures of the skin: so that the end of the thread that goes around from one side to the other, makes a loop; and so let go of it from one side, until you have completed it all.
Secunda species suterae propriae, quam dizit Galen.
The text translates to: "The second type of sutures are those which Galen mentions. This is the description he gives, that they should be applied in a way similar to the way in which one joins together all the parts by nature: and they should apply one end to another, and one end to a third. And this is what I will tell you.
You should fix it so that it penetrates into the inner part, leaving it from the outside: and you shall leave the two ends of the suture together. Then, turn the wound around, so that it penetrates from the outside to the inside on both ends of the suture, that is to say, from each side.
Then turn both of them around as well, and let them penetrate from the inside to the outside, on both ends of the suture, that is to say, from each side, so that they penetrate on opposite sides, which are next to each other.
And this method of stitching is better than the common simple stitch, and it is a stitch whose precursor was remembered.
This is therefore the speech of Galen as well.
And some said: The suture of the hand with two fingers. That is to say, you should insert one thread into both of them: and begin with the insertion of the needle from your side, for that is where it is, and let it penetrate all the way to the other side; following the sutures of those who are equal in their nature.
And you should know that when the break is in the middle of the hand: then the suture of that hand is more difficult than that of the other places of the hand.For if one will begin to stitch from the place where the break begins, and will go towards the center of the hand, he will have a hard task: for he will need to
Judgment in fact of medicine for the wound, is judgment of other wounds.
That is to say, for when you have got the wound fresh with its blood, before it changes itself; and you reduce its intestines, and its own flesh, and make it fit: then place it over the powder of the scar.For this powder is good for the scar: and it will give strength to the scar and make it firm.
If the bone has been damaged by air: then place on it some ointments that are present with you until the pus forms: and let the threads fall, and become firm the Sifac, and mirach. Then care for that as is the cure of other wounds, until it heals.
But if you do not have with you the medicines, then place on it immediately, so that the pus begins to emit, and change the dressing every day as I have taught you, until it heals.
For you do not need other medicine in many dispositions when wounds are simple.
But if you should be in a time that the wound communicates with the main members in injury, then it is necessary that you dip the wool in oil of moderate heat, or in rosewater: and place it in the circumferent places which are between the hips, and under the armpits.
That if it feels pain, or punctures, or putrefaction in its intestines (for this often happens) then cleanse the body with wine vinegar, black, warm: especially if putridness has already set in the intestine, and a penetrating discharge has reached the perineum.
And you should know that what is from the large intestine is easier to heal: and that which is from the small intestine is more difficult to heal.
But the intestine which is called Jejunum does not accept healing from a wound that has befallen it at all: and this is because of its multiplicity, being from blood vessels, and its size, and because of the softness of its body, and the nearness of its nerves' nature.
But if that which proceeds from the wound is clear, and you have succeeded in collecting it: reduce it according to your reduction, by which you reduce the intestines equally.
But if it has passed the space, and has already become dark or light: then it is necessary that you tighten it with a thread above the place which has been darkened by it, so that blood does not flow out. In zibro enim sunt uenae et arteriae.
For then cut what is beyond that ligament, and place the two ends of a thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside itself: so that its attraction above you is alleviated, and its extraction from the zib is facilitated, and the pus of the wound is released.
Remembering the wound that happened in the Intestines.
When the rupture happened in the Intestines, and it was small: then it is possible that, in some people, it can be restored: for I saw who was wounded in his belly with a lance blow, and he had an old wound on the right side of his stomach, and it had become a fistula, and exuded a discharge, and there was a hemorrhoid.
So I applied the treatment, until I was not confident in its cure: and I did not hesitate to examine it, until it was cured, and the site was consolidated.
After I saw the site had been consolidated, I feared on the illness that could happen to the belly after a bad accident: and it did not happen to him from that accident. And he remained in better conditions, eating and drinking, and enjoying himself, and entering a bath, and exercising himself in his diet.
And some experimenters said, for when a wound happens in the Intestines, and it is small: then it should be bound according to this way. And it is, that you take big ants' heads. Then gather two lips of the wound, and place one ant with an open mouth over the two lips of the wound. So when you hold it above it, and squeeze its mouth, it is cut off, for it adheres and does not release itself.
Then place another ant next to the first one, and do not stop doing that with the ant after the second amount of wound of all.
Then reduce the stump, and cut the sinew. Now if any remaining head of the bowel is attached to the intestine, remove it until the intestine is complete and healthy, and do not cause harm to the entire gut.
And it is also possible that the intestine be tied with a thin thread: which, when removed from the animal, remains attached to it after it enters the bag.
And it is as if you were to take the end of this thread from the intestine, and cut away much flesh. Then tie the end of this thread with a thin, wrapped thread. Then insert that thread into the bag, and sewed to it with the intestine. Then reduce the stump to dissection.
And this method of sewing with a needle and thread is not but second to the first in trust and hope.
You should know that the sinew is great and wide, especially if it is in one of the small intestines: then it is not a skill but cutting, and its healing is entirely incomplete.
Regarding the care of the scrotum and fistulas.
You should know that every sinew, or when it has grown old and aged, becomes a wound, does not heal, and always discharges pus, and does not close: then it is called a fistula everywhere that it may be, and we call this very thing by the name of Zuchema.
And a fistula is second only to the truth in being filtered, hard, white; it does not cause pain, and has stiff feathers: because of this it is called by some as risatus, that is, feather.
And it is sometimes moist in hours when it discharges pus. And perhaps it splits the moisture at certain times. And when this moisture is much, and little: and thick, and thin.
And I have already pre-empted in the division, then when I said sinews, that every wound which does not heal, and does not grow in it flesh, is not but for one of causes.
One of these is due to the scarcity of blood in the body; or because of the malice of his disease; or because between himself and his lips there is hard flesh, which prevents the birth of flesh; or because it is full of noise and filth; or because the wound in his sebo is putrid, and the matter that is shed from it is of a bad quality; or because the remedy is inappropriate for its cure; or because corruption falling upon the region is the kind of pestilence, or by virtue of the region itself, as happened in Caesaraugusta; in which place it becomes difficult to digest the sicknesses, and the healing of ulcers through nature is delayed; or because in him there is only one jaw, or a small number of bones.
And I have already shown you all the causes and signs of them, and the treatments for them with surgeons divided up: and it is necessary here that I should show you the treatment of the fistula and the zuken, which is carried out by means of a surgical operation with the hand.
So you know that the fistula happens in all parts of the body. For from them are the fistulas which reach the great veins and arteries, or nerves, or intestina, or urethra, or some of the ribs, or some of the vertebral bones, or some of the joints of the body, such as the hands and feet: and from them are those which reach the vicinity of principal members, and similar ones.
Which, however, of these fistulas is according to this mode, is from a difficult sickness which does not receive healing, and is an occupation with it, a labour and ignorance. Quod autem de Fistula scis, quae ex Aegritudinis, est per uiam operationis curanda, et non per injuriam: nam in illis uel in uesica, uel in intestinis, uel in costibus, uel
That, however, of the fistulas do you know, which come from sicknesses, are to be cured by means of an operation, and not by injury: for in them or in the urethra, or in the intestina, or in the ribs, or in the vertebral bones, or in some of the joints of the body, there is a depth which does not reach these places which I have mentioned; and you hope, and trust in the healing of them, and examine them with your hand: then take a piece of brass or iron, if the fistula tends along the straight line, and investigate it with that.
If, however, there is a curvature in the fistula, then investigate it with a thin lead probe. For lead nhẹly allays the pain of the body, and it eases the curvature around the tortuosity.
That if the fistula has multiple openings, you cannot make a sign over it with a probe. So apply a clister from one of its openings through one of its openings.
For humidity which the clister applies to it, goes towards other openings, and runs out of them.
Then inquire, according to how you are able to: that you may learn that there is an opening, or a nerve, and it is a fistula distant or near: or is a fistula with many openings, and it lies over all of it, with your greatest power: when you ask the question, which asks about the sick, and find out the pain by pressing with your hand to the spot, and similar signs and causes of symptoms apart from the explanation.
When you have thus stood over all of them with a true station, then proceed to the cure according to confidence: and is, when you consider then, if it is a fistula near appearing, or in a safe place far from an opening, or from a nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places which I have told you: then stop up the fistula according to what has been said above, and remove what is in it from filtration, and rotten flesh, which comes out of its opening from the flesh, or the fat, and similar things: and cure it, until it heals.
If, however, the fistula is in a deep distance, and is in a straight line: then it is necessary that you should separate it in depth as far as you are able to do. Then cleanse it completely from all of its corrupted flesh.
Then administer a solution of the iodic in acute medicines: and introduce it into the fistula as much as you can comprehend with iron: and do so sometimes, until the corrosive medicine has eaten away all that is left in the fistula's concavity from corruption.
Then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh, until it is healed.
But if it does not heal by means of that, then cauterize it according to what we have said.
But if the cause is a fistula and it has been certified by you: then examine that person and dry that person up according to what we told you: if it does not restrain you from anything of new growth, or nerve, or main member, as we have said.
But if a tooth has been detected in it and there is some corruption and blackening: then shave that tooth, until the whole corruption is removed. Then care for that person with the ointment that incarnates the flesh, until it is healed.
That if it does not heal and discharges pus as it did before: then you should know that you have not achieved the total eradication of the corruption.
So examine it again and carefully feel the area, and thoroughly clean it with your last strength.
Then restore that person. But if it is healed, then it is good: and if not, then you should know that that corruption is deep in the distance of the body, which you have not succeeded in reaching. It is therefore not within your control to heal it, unless you let nature take its course.
But if the corruption is in a small tooth and it is possible for you, attract that tooth with slender instruments which suit that purpose.
But if there are many bones, then carefully feel all of them, and do not let anything go with your strength.
But if it causes you any opposite sensation from moisture, and there is no fear or mistake in cutting them: then cut the moisture and flesh, if they are there, and free the bones.
But if you do not have the preparation to remove the bones at your own time, then place over the joint what will decay that person: and let it go, until it decays what is around those bones from flesh and moisture.
And guard the limb so that it does not heal badly. And tighten the wound as you sewed in your operation. By placing a bit of lime on top of the wound, if necessary, rub it with sulfur after having dipped it in oil; or dip it in Egyptian ointment, or some other kind of ointment.
For when those certain humors putrefy and the bones separate from them, their removal relieves them and attracts them away.
If, however, there is one large bone, such as the leg or hip, and it is rotten, then cut off that part with a saw until the blackness and corruption is removed. Then restore the limb.
If, however, what is rotten in it is a large part and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to cut off the limb, and to cut into it all the way until the place where the corruption lies: then care for the wound, until it heals.
And I will tell you about the injury that happened to the man in his leg as an example and a help for your operation.
He was a young man of about thirty years of age, to whom pain came in his leg from within the body, that is, from the insides, until it reached the bone, and there was an ulcer, large and open, and he had no external cause.
So the time went by with him in the error of doctors until the ulcer was opened wide and many substances gathered there. And his treatment was delayed until the leg was closed up and many holes were made in it: all of which discharged pus and the humors of the body.
He was then treated for two years by a multitude of doctors, and there was no wise man in the art of hands, until I was called upon to see his leg, and saw that the matter that was flowing out of its orifices went away with a great course: also all his body was very weak, and his color had become cerulean.
Therefore he inserted his hand into one of the orifices and his hand reached the mouth.
Then I examined all the openings: and I found that they came to an end within him in one joint of his leg.
Then I bent on and cut through one of those openings until I reached a bone part: and I found it decayed: which was already decayed, and rotten, and putrid, and pierced all the way through to the marrow.
I sharpened the end of what I had found, and made it smooth from the corrupt bone.
And I left behind that which was not bone, but only decay; and I sharpened and made smooth what remained. And I had now cut away all of it.
Then I set the wound with medicine made from a long-dried poultice. And this was not made firm.
Then I tried again, and found a second bone above the first detection: and I found that corruption continued to the bone; and I sharpened what seemed to me also from that corruption.
Then I tried to set the wound. And this was not set.
Then I tried again to detect it, and did not cease striking the bone in pieces, and trying to set its wound; and it was not set, until I struck out of the bone a little palm-sized piece, and pulled it out with its marrow.
Then I set that wound with medicine, and it was soon healed; and this repetition of the operation and sawing through it was not necessary, unless for the weakness of the nurse, and her lack of tolerance, and her fear of me over him: for it happened to him in all hours from bad discharge of pus.
He was then healed by sound health: and there grew up a new bone in place of the old one, and his disposition in his body was good, and he regained his strength: and he did not do him any harm in walking at all.
If however the jaw is prominent in the place of the body already broken: then it is necessary that you hold him thus: and he is: that you take the ligament, and tighten him at the end of the prominent bone: and order someone who extends him upwards: and put another ligament from wool on the first one. Then bind the bone on top of the meat, which is below the bone: and extend its end so that you pull the flesh downward: and you cover the flesh over the place where you want to cut it, so as not to hurt the saw when cutting the flesh.
Place the board below the bone slightly: for when you do this, it does not prevent you from cutting the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that it be a little higher than the corrupted place, so as not to appear on the appearance of its own sense, and forcing the force of its own device: and another screw should appear in its appearance.
That if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, a part of it continues with another part: and the corruption is in the middle of it, or in one of its parts: then you cover all the meat with all its parts. Then place the board below.
Then cut that from the first part where there is corruption, until it continues with another part of the screw: and let the screw be of about the same length as the corruption, according to what we have said.
That if the corruption is in the joint, cut that joint that is corrupted, and then cut the bone where it continues from another part:
But if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no other connection but an abrasion.
That if the corruption is in the knuckle of the hand, or in the knuckle of the foot: then the matter is difficult to manage greatly. But you should ask how the corruption appears to you. And scrape it off, and clean it up according to how it appears to you in any way that is possible for you, and with whatever skill you can master: when it does not make you a contrary vein or nerve.
And know that incisions and saws are many for incision of these bones according to the position of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness and fineness, and their size, and their smoothness, and their hardness, and their rarity. Therefore it is necessary that you prepare the tool suitable for this operation for all kinds of operations.
And know that these operations require a lot of time when studying the instrument you hold in your hand. And knowledge of the methods of this art is a witness to the methods of diseases: for then you will discover through yourself that which suits him from instruments for every disease.
And I am confirming to you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you set out as examples on which you cut, and a proof of what you experienced on others.
Form of another saw.
Form of the rasors joined together. Let the head of this razor be shaped like a star's claw: and its points be shaped like the points of an elk-fang.
And it does not suit you unless you join with it the heads of the razors when they corrode, or a wide and large mouth; and it is wide and great.
Form of the larger razor.
Form of the wide razor.
Form of the razor with a concave shape.
Form of an alternate thin razor.
Form of an alternate curved-end razor.
Form of the small, thin razor for the tip of the finger.
This is like a radio, and the ends are like a saw: it is shown in many places from the reason of the bones.
The shape of a saw which agrees with its sawing that which is pierced out from the bones.
Its ends are triangular, its corners are acute.
It fits from India. And likewise it is necessary that all which we have said of the saw should be of the chisel and of the saw.
About the incising of the ends and the locking of the bones.
The ends putrefy, or for an extrinsic cause, or an intrinsic one.
When therefore you have been wounded by that corruption with the cure of medicines, and it does not confer the cure: and you see that corruption extending to the member, where there is no consequence of corruption; then it is necessary that you should extend the cut to the place where the consequence of corruption follows, in order that the sick may be healed from that death, or from that greater malice which is the defect of the member.
And the sign to which that happens is that the member is disfigured, until it is healed: that it is burned by fire, or putrefied after being red: until it is extended to that corruption which follows that member, and creeps into all the body.
Therefore approach with its incising, and likewise if the cause of corruption is from some venoms that are pierced: like the scorpion marine, and the bee, and the nettle, and others similar to them.
If therefore the corruption, or the piercing is in the end of a finger, then cut the finger, and do not leave space for the corruption to run, so that it may run up to the remaining hand.
And likewise if that happens in a hand, then cut it from the root of a sharp tool, and do not leave space for the corruption to run, until it takes up into the arm of the sharp tool.
And if it has grown into that, then cut the arm at the elbow joint.
If however corruption has passed over and you see that he is surrounded by pus: then in him is death the nurse. And besides that cure, it is a matter of amount of virtue.
And also do the same with the foot, when corruption appears in the nail, then cut it right at one knuckle: and if it goes into the sole of the foot, then cut the whole foot. But if it ascends to the knee, then cut the leg at the joint of the knee.
That which if corruption has already reached above the knee, then there is no hope in it but to cut off, and leave it to death.
And the mode of cutting a limb, or of stretching it out is, that you may tighten the ligament below, which you wish to cut: and tighten another ligament above the place. And stretch one minister of the ligament downward: and stretch another minister of the ligament upward upwards. And you shall separate the flesh that is between the two ligaments, with the spatus or chisel, until all the flesh is exposed. Then cut it, or stretch it out.
And you should place a sheet of linen cloth so that it does not touch the sound part, and cut off the wound with an edge, adding a hot poultice: and apply to the sick a poultice of cold.
But if while you are working blood flows inwards, then cauterize the place quickly: or put on it some powder that stops the blood. Then go back to your own medication, until it is complete.
Then bind the wounded limb with a proper ligament, and take care of it, until it heals.
And I will tell you what happened to the man in his foot, this same thing that I am telling you.
That is, because it happened to the man's foot, that was burned by the same fire that makes ash; and that corruption first began in his toe, until it came to his whole foot.
So he cut away the cord from itself, when he saw the corruption touching a member with a great swelling, which was caused by pain and burning; and he cut it himself at the joint, and he recovered.
And after he had passed a long time, that same corruption happened to him again in the little finger of his right hand.
Then he came to me, and I tried to restore that superfluity with him as soon as I put on the hand with the medicines after purifying his body; and the superfluity did not recur, but it began to heal in another finger: until the corruption began to spread in the hand.
So he called me to cut his hand; and I did not want to do so, hoping that the same superfluity would recur on him: and I was also afraid of death when cutting the hand itself. For the strength of the man was above death.
Then he turned away from me and returned to his land; and he came back to me about it, for he was eager, and he cut off all of his hand; and he recovered.
And I did not bring this account until it should be an aid to those who suffer from such a disease: and that it may be understood what is meant, and according to how it is applied.
On the Treatment of Syphilis and the Quality of Clustering with Medications
When it happens that an apostema occurs in some flesh member, and the space of the apostema is prolonged, until it makes a collection of blood; then it breaks, or pierces, and that which is in it is discharged out, leaving behind a hollow place like a well: and the skin that is on top of it is as thin cloth: and does not impring on the last in its corruption, nor prints on the mouth, nor the ligaments: it deserves to be called Sinus: but it is not called Fistula: nevertheless, if it prolongs the space thereof, until it prints the corruption on some of these members, then it is called Fistula, or a fistula.
And the cure is that you should strike off his skin as it has grown back; and above all when it has become thin, and like a piece of cloth; and trust that it will not adhere to the place because of its decay.
If, however, you hope that the skin will adhere, and does not bring about that last corruption: and if there is a thickness of flesh there, then cure him with clister: and it is, as you consider, towards the navel.
Then if it is large, and the pus that is discharged from it has a foul odor: then clisterize him with the Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, and oil, and myrrh, taking equal parts, mixed together in an ointment: and let it boil over fire until it turns red: and let it come to the consistency of honey.
Then take from it what you need: and dissolve it with water and honey, and clisterize it with that navel: and tighten the opening, and let the medicine enter into it for two hours.
Then extract him with the expression: make him spend days until the navel is cleaned up, and the foul smell is gone away.
And when you clisterize him with water of ash, when this medicine is not present with you: and it is, that you take the ashes of willow wood, or the ashes of holly tree: and pour them on top of it. Then dip it in, and clisterize it with that, until you trust that the navel is already cleaned up.
That if the sick person does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine, and water of ash, then clisterize him with water and honey, in which has already been mixed some crushed myrrh. Or clisterize him with honey and wine mixed, since of the property of honey is to clean and wash away, and wine makes the navel adhere, especially when there is an abundance of astringency and dryness.
When you do this sometimes and trust that the corruption of the sinus is now far away: then cleanse him with what he does to give birth to flesh in him.
And is, that you receive from the plaster dyafinicon: and dissolve him with oil of rose, and wine stimulative: or cleanse him with some medicines, and other ointments, whose properties I wrote in the treatise of ointments.
That if the orifice of the sinus is strict, in which the cannula of the clister does not enter: then enlarge it with iron a little: or put in it licorium infused in Egyptian ointment, or in basilicon ointment, until it is enlarged.
And similarly if the orifice is also wide, then gather his lips with a suture: and let go from it a quantity in which the clister is to be added without addition.
And similarly if the orifice of him from which runs pus is raised upwards: then dry him up in a lower place that is in him, so that the pus runs down from it: for when pus is stopped up in the depth of the sinus, it prevents flesh from being born in it.
That if you are not able to dry the sinus all around below it according to what you want: then try, that you prepare the member with a preparation which runs from it with ease according to how you prepare it for yourself. Try, that you do not retain anything of the pus at all in it: and receive medicines consolidatives which are put on a mark, suited to what you want. And extend them over a linen cloth. And let there be such a quantity of the cloth that it may come into communication with all of the sinus. Then cut with forceps in the direct orifice of the sinus hole, a little larger opening of the sinus. Then extend from the ointment soft things over another cloth according to the quantity of the hole: and put it on him at a distance from the orifice of the sinus, that the exit of the pus from it may be eased: and do not remove the large cloth, until after some days a drop.
That which is above the opening of the sinus, that one who is moved at all times, so that he goes out when it is gathered in him from pus; and know that, that which runs out of it virus, is much or little: or digested or undigested.
And when you consider this place again of the sinus itself, does the lord feel pain in it, or is there no pain in it? And does he feel a puss in it, or not?
But when your treatment extends thus far, and you see the matter which comes out above the opening of the sinus, then know that the sinus is already attached, or approximates to attachment: so then loosen it in the morning, or on the third day: and when you loosen the wound, then change the cloth, and renew the ointment.
But if a virus comes out of the sinus after a long space, then do not despair of its attachment, for the healing of it approaches, since there are those who delay the generation of flesh in their wounds, and those who act in the opposite way.
But if a pus comes out of the sinus after many days, then know that the sinus does not attach.
But if the attachment of the sinus is prolonged, and its duration is prolonged: then add to the drying of medicines, that the doctors may make them, so that they are in their substance wet, and in their virtue dry: as the unguent of dafinicon, when it is added thereto an excess of addition by the zegi.
And from the greatest of these, when it is cured, that you take the unguent of dafinicon, and dissolve it with olive oil, and rub it on the old wound to the equal substance of its substance.
Then confirm the wound with it, and use it.
And this same action of this is done when the unguent of dafinicon is not present with you, honey, when it is heated up, and you use it. Take myrrh and aloes and olibanum; prepare a whole mass, and sprinkle it on honey while it is still hot above fire. Then spread the paste over the poultice and tie it over the wound: and add to it the honey with which you have been mixing, until it has thickened: then sprinkle the powder on the poultice and put it on again, and tie it up.
And sometimes add to it long aristolochia, and the roots of the star-lily, and there is a lily; and herb powder, and centaurea. Use them simple, or in a mixture, prepare it thoroughly, and screen the paste: and sprinkle on the honey that you have mixed: and use it.
If the infection persists with this treatment and does not heal: then you will know that there is corruption in its depths; or it has already made an impression on the bones, or on the other hard members, or on the ligaments: then treat it with fistula treatment, as has been said.
As for the cure of the finger called panaris and the scraped nail, and the incision of the digit, and the section.
Panaris is a swelling that arises under the nail of the thumb or of the foot, and possibly also under the other nails.
And when it has persisted and its treatment has been neglected, and has become a sore with pus that is hot: or has rotted, and has sent out pus until it corrupts the nail's root; and possibly also has corrupted it completely, and possibly also has caused its corruption to reach the mouth, until there is a foul odor: and makes the end of the digit thick, and darkens its color.
And when you treat the wound, keeping to what we have said about its division, and your treatment does not bring relief: then you must cut off all the excess that remains under the nail. Then cauterize the nail afterwards. For the cauterization is very hot.
If the bone is truly sound, and the nail also is sound, and the additions of the waxy nail have already compressed the flesh toward the inner parts, and have begun to prick it, and are hurting it: then you should put on a fine radium under the angle of the nail that pricks the flesh, and push it upwards: and cut into the flesh with ease, and put over it what remains of the flesh from the medicines burning, burned until it all moves away. Then the care for that with the nail, until it heals.
If, however, the corruption has already impressed on the bone, then you should cut into that bone and take it out: for it does not heal at all while it remains in it.
If you see the corruption and the corruption running into the finger, then cut it at one of its joints, according to what has been said above as a reminder. Then the care for that, until it heals.
If, however, the nail has been worn away, or struck: and there is a severe pain in it, then you should let blood from it first. Then dry the nail with a sharp Spatula across from above to the nail bed.
And guard, so that the cut does not go down to the flesh which is under the nail, for you would make happen through it a very painful pain, and it will be a cause of birth of flesh added in place.
Then the care for that place with him who sits and feels the pain:
The finger which is added and born in some hands of men, perhaps is meat-like all over: and perhaps there are bones in it, and perhaps has an nail: and perhaps its birth is in the tendon joint, or is birth in some joints of the finger. So then that which is born in some joints of the finger does not move: and that which is born at the tendon joint, perhaps moves.
Therefore, whoever has this flesh from which it is cut, its section is easy. Which is, so that you hit him at the root of himself with a sharp instrument.
But whose birth is in the root of the joint, his cure is difficult. Therefore, abstain from cutting him.
But in that one who is born in the finger at the last of the knuckles, then you must hit him with a round incision from the beginning of his flesh all the way to the mouth. Then close the mouth with one of the convenient screws. Then take care of the wound, until it heals.
But the consolidation which happens in the fingers one-by-one, it often happens or from the birth of man, that is, he is born with it, or from the consolidation of the wound, or from the burning of fire, and similar things.
Therefore, you must remove this consolidation, until the fingers regain their natural shape. Then put between them a chisel, or rags soaked in rose oil: so that they do not consolidate quickly, and separate them: or put between them a thin lead plate, until the spot consolidates as it should.
And likewise, if a consolidation happens in some fingers with the palm, then dry out that consolidation, according to how it is prepared and suitable for the form of the limb.
As for the incision:
The veins are swollen, large, and full of melancholy fluids which occur in many parts of the body: and most of them are in the legs, especially in those who walk a lot, and carry burdens.
Therefore, you should provide strong extraction of the body from black cholera by sometimes extracting it strongly.
Then draw blood from the patient with a wide-mouthed bottle.
The cure of these veins with iron is in two ways. One is, so that they rest, and black blood is extracted. And another mode is, that the vein should be kept open and all taken out.
The sectioning is however done in this way. First wrap the limb with warm water until the thick, foul blood has resolved. Then tie the leg tightly around the hip from above to the knee with an underwrap, and make it tight with strips. Then dry the limb in one, two, or three wide sections.
Then let the blood out with your hand from the lower part of the leg up to the upper, and from the upper part let it flow to the lower; first let the phlebotomists draw the blood. Then dry the limb down to the bottom: until you see that enough blood has come out and that the strength of the blood is bearing up.
Then tie him up; and order him to refrain from foods that cause black cholera: and again allow the bloodletting and phlebotomy when the veins are filled, and it hurts the sick person.
The elevation is however done in this way. Scrub the leg with a brush if there are many hairs on it. Then dip him into a bath, or wrap him around the limb with warm water until he feels hot and the veins are pulsating; or exercise him hard, if there is no bath available, until he gets warm.
Then dry the skin in one direction along the vein from top to bottom: or at the end of it near the knee, or at the lower part near the heel.
Then open the skin with a hook and scrape off the scales from all parts until they are gone; and at their appearance, you will see them turn red to black. When you have thus washed it, you will see it white as a cord.
Then dip it under the radium, until it is poured out and dried on the skin: hang it with a blind hook, soft.
Then dry off with a cloth close to that cut-section with three fingers. Then scrape the skin from the upper part of the loin, until it appears. Then clean it with rags as you did, and hang it with a hook as you did at first.
Then dry off another cut-section, or multiple ones, if you wish. Then clean it again, and make the last cut near the heel.
Then pull it out to the section above it.
And do this, until you have pulled it out from the upper section; or with higher sections, until when it has completely come off: then cut it.
But if it does not obey you when you try to pull and clean it: then insert a sharp tool with a double blade, and tie it up, and pull it out; or insert below it Radium: and roll your hand over all of it, until it has completely come off. And cauterize, so that it does not bleed. For if it bleeds, it will be difficult for you to clean it well, and it will enter the body's damage.
When you have completely pulled it out: then place it on the wound-place soaked with wine and rose oil, or oil: and care for it, until it heals.
If the vine is contracted, having a twist to its parts, and it does not correspond as we said according to its rectitude: then you must find on it for all of its twists, and the locations of its inverting.
Then hang it with a hook until you have completely cleaned it; and be careful near the cut-section on you, or wound: for it will be difficult to clean you, or to pull it out. Then preserve your prudence.
Form of wound that heals.
Form of the blind hook.
It is not as delicate as the other fingers, nor are its extremities acute, so that it does not hurt when it touches; and it is pliable, soft: for if it were slight, it would injure with its slenderness; but there is a surplus softness in it, as we have said.
On the extraction of a vein from the leg.
This vein is generated in the legs in warm countries, such as the Al-Jazira and the lands of the Arabs, and in arid, warm lands, scarce and tender, that is, in places where grass does not grow and trees do not spring up.
And perhaps it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And its generation is from the putrefaction which occurs under the skin, just as it happens within the bodies of snakes and worms, and worms are generated between the skin and flesh.
And the sign of the beginning of this vein is that which occurs in the leg, a painful swelling. Then the spot becomes sore. Then the vein begins to issue from the spot of the sore, as if it were a root of a plant, or an animal.
When this extremities begins to appear, then you should twist around upon it a leaden rod, the weight of which is equal to two drachmas and a half, until it reaches two drachmas; and remove the leaden rod from the leg.
Whenever this issues out anything to the outside, twist it around upon the lead, and mark it. That if it is prolonged for a long time, then cut off a part of it, and twist around the remainder. And do not cut off its root before it has completely issued out. For if you cut it, it will contract, and go into the flesh; and it will cause an ulcer to form, putrefaction in the place, and a bad sore.
For this reason it is necessary that they should be gently pulled out, little by little, until they have come out of their very ends and nothing remains of them in the body: and from this vein emerges in some men which is in length five palms and ten fingers. And now it had reached me, for he had come out of twenty palms.
But if you are injured during your treatment: then insert a ray into the hole and pierce it with a long ray along with the body until all of what is in it has come out, and administer decay to the place with medicines for several days. Then take care of yourself by taking care of the wounds.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears in the joint of the foot or in the foot itself: and many openings happen to it, and a branch comes out from every opening.
Take care therefore of herself, as we have said in the division, and with that which has been mentioned above.
Regarding the cutting above the worms that are born under the skin, and it is called the evil boil.
This evil is called in our country the evil boil: indeed, it often happens that boils, and is a small wound between the skin and the flesh.
And he showed himself all over the body, going up and down: and it was evident to the sense when he walked with his leg or his arm, until he broke out somewhere on the skin and came out.
And its generation is from the corruption of some humble humors. As happen worms and snakes, namely earthworms, and roundworms in the stomach.
And they are afraid of its malignity. For when he walks in the body and lifts up his head and reaches out to a place: then perhaps it opens within him, and comes out, and destroys his eye; and this happens many times.
But when you are caring for him and removing him, then that should not be done except by his walking and the appearance of his own feeling.
So it is necessary that you hold what is above him, and what is below with strong constriction by the ligament. Then dry over him, and remove him.
If it is buried in the flesh, and not to harm him itself: then put on the place of cautery with fire, until he dies.
And greater what is feared, is his corruption, which corrupts his eye, as we have said.
But if you see him already coming to the head near the eye, then tighten under it with good tight pressure. Then dry over him, and remove him.
And it is necessary that he uses his own purification of his body, with physicians who dissolve bad putrid humors.
And let him guard himself from food that generates putrefaction.
On the section on sickness of Nakir.
This sickness is called in our language Nakir: and it is a pain that happens to some member: then it passes from one member to another.
And I have already seen him myself, according to what I tell you. I was called to a woman who is sick in some parts of her body. And he held out his arm, and I saw an inflammation in the armpit in the neck vein.
And after an hour had passed, I saw one inflammation running with fire, like fire, rising to his shoulder faster than it could be: so that it was like flowing silver, when it runs from place to place.
Then the pain left that place, and it was fixed in his shoulder.
Then he sat for an hour, and it ran in the rest of his body, until it came to another arm.
Then he told me that it was running all over his whole body, according to what I saw.
I marvel at the swiftness with which he replaces one member with another. And I too did not see this sickness in my eyes before that one so quickly. However, I saw many who suffered from a painful disease that was replaced by a member, and I did not see it with my eyes like I saw it in the woman.
And I do not think that it was because she was from those who are found from the wounds of dry eyes, and that is why the sense of sight appears to be so swift.
And it is necessary for those who are pleased and have moist bodies, unlike the woman, to not appear in this way according to this reason.
When you then begin to heal him and the patient feels pain, if it appears to your eyes as we have said, then raise it above him and move it quickly: and dry it out over him until he comes out of that swiftness: and burn the place.
If, however, you do not see it with your eyes: then heal the member with the drying of the body, and with that which drives out the winds, and with carminative pills when you apply them, and with those of the fern and others.
On Extraction of Arrowheads.
Arrows differ according to their species and according to the places in which they lie in the body.
However, there is a difference between them: for some have large points, and some are sharp; and some are cased in the skin, and some are bare. And of these there are three angles. And from those there are tongues. And from those there are stars.
However, those which lie according to the members, are according to two modes. For limbs are of two kinds, those which are joined to the principal members, such as the brain, and the heart, and the liver, and the lung, and the kidneys, and the bowels, and the bladder, and similar ones. When then falls one of these limbs on you, and appear to you the signs of death which I will tell you about later, then it is necessary that you should remove from him that arrow which is lodged in him, for death comes to him where he is lodged in many dispositions. And when these evil signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden deep within the limb, then extract it, and care for the wound.
For when the signs of brain injury occur when the arrow enters the skull and pierces the bone and comes out above the brain, it is: for there come from it violent fever, scotoma, dizziness, redness in the eyes, swelling, language paralysis, spasms, confusion of thought, and memory loss. And perhaps blood comes out of the nose or ears. And perhaps speech is lost and language destroyed. And there comes out of the wound's place a white, slimy fluid similar to pus. And there comes out of it something similar to meat water.
If then these signs appear to you, then refrain from cure, and extract the arrow if it does not come out.
The signs of an arrow that falls into the heart are: it is near the left nipple: and it feels as if it were fixed fast to a hard thing, not to a soft thing. And perhaps the arrow has a movement similar to a pulse: and black blood runs from the limb. And it follows that cold sets in to the limbs, and cold sweat, and fainting fits. Know then, that death is certainly coming near.
And the sign of an arrow which wounds the lung is the flowing of frothy blood from the limb: and the neck turns pale, and changes color when it is touched. And it breathes out a great, deep breath: and seeks the attraction of cold air.
If the arrow falls into a wound in the chest, which is within the rib cage: then it is close to the lower back; and there is a great pain with a sharp sighing breath, with a sigh; and all the shoulder muscles move.
And if the arrow falls into the belly, then perhaps it has come out through a sore caused by undigested food.
And if the arrow falls into the belly and comes to rest within it: it may come out through a sore caused by stool, or by a knuckle, or by an intestine that has already been torn. There is therefore no hope for his recovery or for the extraction of the arrow.
If the arrow falls into the bladder and comes out through urine: and if it proceeds from there to the outside, and the pain is stronger over the sick body; then you should know that it is a deadly wound.
The rest of the limbs, such as the face, neck, throat, jaw, arm, shoulder, hip, leg, and foot; and also the aids, ribs, spine, and cradle bone, are healed according to many different dispositions; but if the arrow does not hit an artery or a nerve: and the arrow is not harmless.
And I will tell you that I saw such things about these arrows, so as to indicate by means of them your recovery.
That is, because a man has an arrow that falls into his tear eye, at the root of his nose. So I removed it from him on the other side under the fat of his ear; and he was healed, and there was no injury to his eye.
And I removed from him another arrow that had fallen into his ear fat under the lower eyelid; and the arrow was now hidden, and I could not get it out except for its end, which was stuck fast to his wood; and it was a large arrow of the arrows of the Turks, with a soft iron point, in which there were no bars.
He was a Jew, and no accident befell his eye.
And I took another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And it was an Arabic arrow, and that is where the ears are. So I followed it up between two arrows; and already it was submerged in his throat. So I was careful when I took it out: and he remained healthy.
And I took another arrow from a man who had fallen into his belly; and we thought that he would die of it.
After he had therefore lain forty days, and nothing changed in him of his disease, I followed the arrow up; and I was careful on it, and I took it out; and he remained healthy, and no accident befell him.
And I saw a man to whom the arrow had fallen on his back, and a fracture was set on it. After he had therefore lain seven years, the arrow came out at the root of his hip.
And I saw a woman to whom the arrow had fallen into her belly, and a fracture was set on it, and the arrow remained within her; and nothing changed in her of her disease, and the woman did not find any harm in any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man, to whom the arrow had fallen on his face, and a fracture was set on it, and it remained, not finding him much pain; and similar things were many.
And I took another arrow from the prince of the king, which had fallen on his nose, and already was declining a little to the right side: and the arrow was completely concealed.
So I was called in to cure him after the loss of the arrow until three days later. Then I found the arrow's shaft very tight.
So I probed it with care, and I did not feel it; but he himself felt the prick and the pain under his right ear. I therefore hoped that it was just a dot at the extreme end of the arrow.
So I bound the wound with a plaster in which there was healing power and the ability to draw out poison, confident that the place would heal, for it seemed to me that a mark of the arrow would appear on it so that I could cut it off: but nothing like this happened, indicating that the arrow had already struck
So I bound it with a plaster for many days: and nothing like this happened, and the break healed in the meantime: and it remained weak because of the removal of the splint for one day, until he felt the arrow in his nose on a certain day. And he told me that.
And he told me that. So I applied an acute medicine to the wound for many days, until it opened up: and when I tried to touch it, I felt a very slight spot of the arrow still adhering to the wood.
Then I added to the opening of the wound by applying that acute medicine, until the end of the arrow was clearly visible: and time passed me by with him for about four months.
Then when the break had healed and it was possible for me to insert my fingers into it, and move them, and it did not come out: then I did not desist from trying, and devised means for it, until on a certain day I managed to take it out with crooked forceps, according to the form of their shape at the end of the arrow, until I took it out. Then I restored the break.
And the doctors say that the cartilage of the nose has not been restored. So I restored it, and the break healed soundly, and the wound healed completely without any harm to him.
And I will tell you about the quality of taking out arrows: so that you have a rule and a sign about it which I did not mention.
For since the parts of this art and their distinctions are not understood by telling: nor does that book understand it, and the skilled craftsman compares little with much: and when something is missing, he finds a new operation, and a new instrument when things outside this art happen.
I say, therefore, that arrows do not exit from the body except by two ways. Or by attraction from the place from which they entered. Or by the opposite side.
And those which exit where they entered, or are proceeding in a fleshy place: and are attracted and exit.
That if it does not obey to exit at the time in which it falls: then it is necessary that you should let go of it a few days, until it putsrefies the flesh which is around it: and the attraction of it will be alleviated, and its exit.
And likewise if it is blocked in a bone, and does not obey to you to exit, then let go of it too for a few days: and again bring it out with the attraction and movement every day, until it exits.
That if it does not obey to you to exit after days, then it is necessary that you should perform in the circumferential direction of the arrow in the bone with a sharp instrument until it increases. Then attract it, and pull it out.
If, however, the arrow is already hidden in the body, and concealed and hidden from sense: then seek it out. If you feel it, then draw it with some instruments that are suitable for drawing.
If you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the bone and the length of the arrow in the deep: and there is no bone, nor nerve, nor vein there: then find it until the bone becomes enlarged, and it becomes possible to remove the arrow.
What if there are ears that need to be held onto: then free the flesh from them on all sides, with all your skill as you can, and use any tools if it cannot be done by holding the ears in a fracture, and their twisting, until they heal.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow, wherever it is, then use the twisting of your hands with forceps to all parts, until you make it heal: and the last subtlety, so that the arrow does not break, and it becomes difficult for you to attract it, and its extraction.
What if you cannot reach it in one hour: then leave it for a few days, until what is around it decomposes. Then repeat it: for indeed bandages If however the opposite causes you to have a flow of blood: then administer what we have said in our book on treatment: and guard your skill from incising bone, or nerve, or string.
And administer skill in every way that is possible for you to remove the arrow: and let it be with ease, and tranquility, or slowness, and firmness, as I have told you.
And it should be that when you take out the arrow, it is broken according to its figure, according to what was at the time of the arrow's injury in itself. Since it is more careful. What if you cannot do that for you: then administer what is possible for you in figures.
The arrow that comes out from the opposite side, or has already gone out a little to the outside: or makes the tip of the arrow stick out by the sense from the top part of the skin nearby, and you see it sticking out: then cut off over it, and make the section according to the quantity that hold in it forceps.
Then attract me: for she herself becomes easy to bring out.
If however it is retained in the bone, then turn your hand around according to the curvature, until it presses the Arrow on the bone and strengthens itself for itself: then pull it out.
And if not: let it go for a few days: then repeat it, until it goes out.
That if the Arrow is in her, then push her with that.
If however it has fallen and the impulse needs to be given: then introduce into her a smooth instrument so that her smoothness enters into the end of the Arrow: then push her with it.
If however the Arrow is smooth, then push it with an instrument entering within. For the Arrow is relieved through that.
That if the Arrow is poisoned, then let there be given to him a whole piece of meat in which is venenum: if you can do that. Then take care of her with it as far as it goes to that.
That if the Arrow is falling in the breast, or in the belly, or in the bladder, and it is close to something that can be touched by trying, and it is possible for you to cut above it: then cut, and then take it out with care from the incision of the flesh, or of the nerve, and then remove it.
Then tie a string around it, if you see it, and take care of that, until it heals.
And this is the form of the pincers, with which the Arrows are removed.
Let the ends be similar to the ear, which have been made like irons: when they grasp onto the Arrow, they do not let it go.
And there are many kinds of them, great and small, and medium ones, according to the quantity of the Arrow's size, and its thinness, and the narrowness of its wound.
Form of the Pincer that pushes inwards.
And form impellentis surdi.
This is the end of the sentence and does not need any translation as it has already been translated into English above.
This is the end of the sentence and does not need any translation as it has already been translated into English above
Uenae phlebotomandae, quarum cucurrit consuetudo in corpore, sunt triginta.
This is the end of the sentence and does not need any translation as it has already been translated into English above This is the end of the sentence and does not need any translation as it has already been translated into English above This is the end of the sentence and does not need any translation as it has already been translated into English above This is the end of the sentence and does not need any translation as it has already been translated into English above This is the end of the sentence and does not need any translation as it has already been translated into English above This is the end of the sentence and does not need any translation as it has already been translated into English above
This is the end of the sentence and does not need any translation as it has already been translated into English above
This is the end of the sentence and does not need any translation as it has already been translated into English above This is the end of the sentence and does not need any This is the end of the sentence and does not need any translation as it has already been translated into English above This is the end of the sentence and does not need any translation as it has already been translated into English above This is the end of the sentence and does not need any translation as it has already been translated into English above This is the end of the sentence and does not need any translation as it has already been translated into English above
And salutations: and it is new that is between the annular and least: and there are to him two branches.
And on the leg and on the foot there are three new. One of them is that which is under the thumb on the wrist from the side of the wood. And the second is Saphenous: and its site is next to the heel bone from the side of the house. And middle nerve: and its site is next to the heel bone from the side of the wood.
And on the other leg there are three similar new.
§ About the phlebotomy of two veins after the ears.
The phlebotomy of two veins which are after the ears is an oath to ancient catarrhs and hemorragiae and sahafati and bad sores of the head.
And the quality of phlebotomy is according to that which I tell you. And it is, so that he brushes the head: and rubs the occiput in the site of two veins with a rough cloth with good friction. Then he should tighten the neck of the sick man with a scarf, until two new appear. And the sites of them are after the ears in two depressed sites of the head. So ask them with your finger, and where you feel the pulse of them under your finger, there are the signs with the caustic.
Then take the phlebotomist's scalpel, and he is that which is called Incidentes. Then introduce him under a new vein in the cut, until the phlebotomist reaches to the mouth. Then wash your hand with new blood and cut on the upper side, and pierce a new vein with the cut of the incision. And the length of the incision is the quantity of two fingers spread out, or about that: and make to come out from the blood as much as you can.
Then tighten it with a cloth, and let it go, until it is healed.
And he also preceded in the beginning of the book the incision of ears, and their cauterization.
But two arteries which are in the two temples for venesection as a means of preventing an old haemorrhage, and also to prevent the swelling of the eyes and the palpitations caused by excess fluid flowing out acutely into the eyes.
And the quality of venesection depends on what I tell you now. The neck of a weak person should be stretched much until two veins appear clearly and then touch them with your finger. Then, for the signs are with the caustic.
Then, after applying the caustic to the skin of the vein at the top with your index finger and inserting the venesection instrument below, pierce the vein above. And cut it as you did in the two other veins, and let the blood flow according to the amount required.
Then remove the tourniquet after an hour and place your finger on one of the veins. Then put a cotton wool ball over it and press strongly with your finger on top of it and then remove the pressure slowly until it is healed.
And the memory of the incision of ears and their extraction preceded at the beginning of the book.
But the means for preventing an old ailment of the face and also to prevent haemorrhage and redness and bad ulcers are as follows:
And the quality of venesection depends on what I tell you now. The weak neck should be tied up with a bandage until one vein appears. Then take the instrument which is called the fossorial.
Then place the acute tip of the fossorial which is on top of the vein and hit it with a comb or something else in this way and let the blood flow according to how much you want. Then dissolve the perforation with medicine, and bind it tightly until it heals.
And sometimes when it opens with a blade. However, it is not necessary that the phlebotomist be of acute ends, like the other phlebotomists, but rather that he be of broad ends. And phlebotome it according to the incision: for the mouth is near; and perhaps in that [part] the phlebotomist breaks when he is thin.
The procedure for the two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the eyes is to put a ligature on them near the eye, and perhaps in the eye itself; and to stop the blood from flowing by wrapping it up.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is so that it binds the neck of the one who has the fever with a ligature when he bleeds. Then phlebotome them: and you stand over his head.
And do the phlebotomy according to the incision a little along the length with the phlebotomist a little and the edge a little, for there is no flesh in that place. If then the phlebotomist is thin at the end, perhaps it will break.
Then make it run out with blood as much as you need. And put a sheet over them, and bind them by night, and then dissolve them.
However, the veins of the nose phlebotomy are to be used for an acute fever and a rushing pulse, and the sicknesses of the face, such as a headache, and the redness that occurs in the face; especially when it is old.
And the quality of the phlebotomy for him is so that he binds the neck of the one who is sick. Then take the nose of him with your left hand, and take a thin phlebotomist, long; and bind it in the middle of his nose, between what distinguishes the nose according to its straightness. For the old do not appear to the sense there, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
And you should, when your hand is being taken by the phlebotomist slightly: and make the blood run out according to your need. Then bind it up a night one. For itself is restored quickly.
The two, however, of the Guide on phlebotomy is to constrict the feverishness, and to initiate leprous disease, and melancholy diseases, and impetigo and bad ulcers, and corroderents, that is, snake-bites.
And the quality of phlebotomy is so that it constricts the sick under both of them with a ligature in his neck: and the artisan stands over the head of the sick person, and the sick sits sitting on the chair.
Then the old phlebotomy is done to the width of the broad phlebotomy slightly. Then extract from the blood a measured quantity, or according to that which you see from necessity which is to that. Then do likewise about the other old.
Then solve the ligature, and constrict two old with a medium stringency: so that the sick person does not pre-focus. And let it go until morning. For the wound is healed.
The Guide on phlebotomy of Al-Ghafir. The veins, however, of Al-Ghafir phlebotomy is to provide for the alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gingival: and bad ulcers: and cracks of the lips, and bad ulcers, also which are in the nose, and around it.
And the quality of phlebotomy is so that you make the sick person sit before you: and constrict his neck with a ligature. Then roll the person's lips, and look at two old: of which one is on the right side of the mouth, and the second is on the left side of it: and the demonstration of both is by the darkness of amber. And this is true: because the ears are covered with a fine black skin. So cut both incisions as you cut.
But if there is doubt about them on you, and you do not know which are the ears: then intend to the incision of the larger ear, and make known more clearly.
And also do for the two veins that are in the upper lip: and indeed much more runs with this custom: and cut the two veins that are in the lower lip.
De Phlebotomia: Veins under the tongue after phlebotomy. The truth is that the two veins that are under the tongue phlebotomy is to say, that phlebotomy of the head is to the pre-cautions which are in the throat, and the sickness of the mouth, and the sickness of the face.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that it sits sick between your hands before the sun: and make him swallow the juice, and look at his tongue on one side and on the other side: and the color of both turns into blackness.
So phlebotomy either one or the other: and take care, so that you do not put your hand in their blood-letting. For under them are arteries, and perhaps it happens that the flow of blood comes from those arteries.
But the three veins that are phleboto- mized in the bed, are in which the phlebotomy runs with custom in all men.
And the phlebotomy of the ears is made according to two ways. Or by piercing with the phlebotomy on the side: or applying to the subtlety of the turning away: or cutting with the phlebotomy on a chisel, and it is sharp. And this is its form.
And of them are species wide, and subtile according to the width of the veins and the narrowness of the ears: Form phlebotomy with a knife sits wide, as you see it. It is appropriate to open new wounds, full, coming from outside, visible, thick, and those that contain thick, turbulent blood.
And this phlebotomist is less in width, and more subtle at the extremities.
It is appropriate to perform a phlebotomy of thin veins that contain pale yellow blood.
basilica, which is one of the three veins suitable for phlebotomy, is the iujiumentum. Because it draws blood from the ailments that are below the throat and neck, which are below the chest and abdomen; and it is appropriate for the phlebotomist to be careful when performing this phlebotomy, because an artery is underneath. If he then makes a mistake and adds the phlebotomy point, he will cut into the artery, and will cause a flow of blood. Therefore it is appropriate not to perform phlebotomy with the phlebotomist's knife: but rather it should be done with a cutting action using the Alnesil.
That if the basilica does not appear by way of a manifest appearance, then it is appropriate to remove it and change it for another, or you can seek out one of its branches; or perform a phlebotomy at a place where one of its branches passes. For she is revealed by way of a manifest appearance, and it is cut with the Alnesil phlebotomist's knife, as we have said.
But if you wish to perform a phlebotomy of its very same blood, then it is appropriate to touch the point before the brachial artery is tightened, so that you may find the place of pulsation. Then, mark the spot with caustic substances, then the arm, and cut a convoluted wound with the Alnesil phlebotomist'a knife, as we have said. And make sure that the impact does not fall through the space from the site of the artery.
And when you see that the knot is tightened, and there is swelling at the place that you have marked with caustic substances; then this swelling is swelling of the artery: so remove it from that spot.
If you see blood rise up at venesection, like a boy's urine, and it is thin blood, red: then you will know that it is from the blood of an artery. Then therefore, and place your hand on the long space, and then take away your hand. But if blood is cut away (for it is often cut away): then bind the arm firmly, and let go of it: and let him who is ill rest from his motion: and let him sit on a chair.
And let him not move himself for several days, until he is healed.
But if blood does not cut you, and does not allow you to medicate yourself at the moment: then cut an artery for you, if it seems to you. For its ends do contract, and blood is cut away.
Or take a piece of an awl, and find it: or take half, and bind it to the tight spot going down, with thread and flour up to another day.
Then if blood is cut away, it is good. Then if not: then take care of the person with the reminder from the place where the blood was cut away: and cutting away his blood is not difficult in many dispositions, because of the small wound, and possibility of a bandage from the arm.
But the veins of Fuscus are a phlebotomy aid, which draws blood from the upper part of the head and lower body: since it is composed of the branch of the Basilica and the branch of the Cerebrum, as we have said.
And it belongs to the phlebotomist to take her, so that he is afraid of venesection from her, for a nerve is under her. But if he adds into the venesection a phlebotomy, and finds a nerve, it happens to her that she is in a stupor, and it is difficult for her to recover, and perhaps she does not recover thoroughly.
And this nerve often appears to the sense. But if it is hidden in some men, and is fine, and does not show itself: then you should put your phlebotomy on them by which they are phlebotomized, with the cut of Alne-sil, and the removal of nerves with your strength.
That if it is between two nerves, then find a nerve in length.
On the head. But the phlebotomy of the cerebral vein is a holdback, because it draws blood from the head, and contributes to eye illnesses.
And it is necessary in this own vein, if you want, that you phlebotomize it by pricking with the phlebotome oil, or with the phlebotome myrrh: because it is salutary for all veins, because it is not below an artery, nor a nerve.
But it is necessary for you to phlebotomize, that you take the skin off with the phlebotome only a little on the head, and seek a easier place: and it does not hurt him, if it is not found with the punch first, so that it returns over it with phlebotomy sometimes.
But perhaps he is apustulated when he is not phlebotomized in the first punch, but it does not hurt him that apustulation in some.
On the usefulness of Phlebotomy and precautions to be observed in it. The quality also of Phlebotomy, and the accidents of it out of it, on which you should think.
First therefore of its is that you need to know, that phlebotomy is administered not, unless in the conservation of health, and perseverance of it, and precaution from advent of illnesses.
And let there be made phlebotomy in one veins of three which are on the bed, that is the cerebral, and the fusca, and the basilica. And let there be made phlebotomy in the beginning of spring on fast, in truth, and summer: and in autumn, and winter after meal, when apparent signs of repletion.
And let phlebotomy be done on the first day, or on the third day, after three hours have passed.
But phlebotomy which is administered to the sick does not have a determined time; but when it provokes convenience and necessity for it, at night, or day, and at all times, and at any time.
And it is not necessary that the boys should be bled until they are fourteen years old. Nor should a pregnant woman be bled until the seventh month. Nor should old people be bled who have already passed sixty years.
But when anyone wishes to have phlebotomy done in any way: it is necessary that he should clean his intestines before phlebotomy with a laxative, if there is much retained dung in them: so that the blood does not attract venereal diseases from the intestinal secretions that are harmful to the main members.
Nor should a patient who is constipated be bled, that is, nausea: nor intoxicated people, until they have removed the intoxication from them. Nor a sick person with hydrophobia.
And let phlebotomy be repeated after a fever, a bout of sickness, a flow of blood, an increase in sexual intercourse, labor, exercise, vigils, fasting, or any other thing that dissolves virtue from the body or from animals.
Then consider with care the humors before that, if the blood is thick with food and drinks, and medicines: if possible for him.
Then apply a hot bath, if he does not prohibit it for anything: or exercise himself in some exercise, to make the blood subtilize.
And place phlebotomy on his chest in his secret place about the third day of the week, as we have said: and consider, so that his chest is emptied of all animal evils on that day: such as anger, fear, and worry: and of all bodily evils, such as labor, pain, excesses, and similar things.
And so that he may make those things present which are related to his habit, out of aromatic substances, and odour, and mirth, and similar things for the possibility of quantity.
And then the phlebotomist will sit on top of the arm, which should be higher than the arm that is being phlebotomized: then he will take his own arm, and rub it with his hand twice, or three times. Then he will tie the ligature with a thong, and wrap it around twice.
And the constriction should be tempered, because the constriction is uneven, or by excess in the constriction, then it prevents the flow of blood: or in softening, then also it prevents the course of blood.
Then after the constriction, so that he rubs his hands together in a clockwise direction, until they are red and feel warm, and reveals the sensation to the touch.
Then the phlebotomist will wipe off the phlebotomy with a little old oil of his own.
Then he will place his index finger of his left hand on the vein under the spot where he intends to perform the phlebotomy, just a little: so that the blood does not run away, and the sensation of pain is prevented. Because the veins are those from which blood flows like a string when phlebotomy is performed: and they are the ones that are full of blood: and when you place the phlebotomy on it, it is squeezed under the phlebotomist, and the phlebotomist is deceived, and does not open the vein: and if he opens it, it is constricted: therefore, so that he may tighten it, and be alert in all these things,
Then he will place the phlebotomy. If then one vein opens from a single vein, then it is good. And if not, then repeat the same vein below that place a little, or above it with some haste: if not, then the spot will not be stimulated.
That if it is stimulated, or it hurts, then release him for a day, or two days: and do not tie the ligature. The hot poultice would attract the abscess. And let there be no bath.
Then let him draw blood, if he wishes it.
If the opening is small, or the blood flows finely: and beware that you do not lose an excessive amount of blood: then repeat the phlebotomy at the same place according to the direction, and add a little to the procedure.
And do it with speed, before the place becomes infected: for the place will become infected in many people during a small procedure.
But if you see that he has already been lanced, then do not touch the place at all, for you would not excuse yourself from doing anything before me. And put on the place some of the feces of oil: for it soothes the course of blood. And it is better in this place than the person's own oil, and than any other oil.
And similarly administer the feces of oil in all your phlebotomies, when you phlebotomy veins at a time when the course of blood is forbidden: and they make it myrrh, and saffron, when it is put from one of them on the place.
For blood becomes finer and thinner, when it is thick.
If it happens that there is a large abscess at the place of phlebotomy, for many times it happens, especially if he has not been phlebotomized except at this time, or if there is a small opening in the vein, then tie and put on the place a sponge Infused with water and salt, gently heated: and string it for an hour: for it will be resolved.
And you should, so that you make the thing after the departure of blood from the vein of its own, with its complement, or from another vein.
That if there remains in the place after a few days of blackening, or viridity, it does not harm that thing: and if there is a wound, put on the place some of the oil, or dissolved myrrh: or some of the juice of mint, that is, calamus or something like it.
And often too there occur ruptures and eminences at the venesection of the basilica.
So put your hand upon it; and then if you find it soft to the touch when you press it with your hand, then that eminence is a bad one. So cause you to put something of that which we have said upon it. For perhaps blood will flow from it of the artery.
But make a plaster with it where there is a stain so that the place may heal. Then take care of the wound with the rest of the cure until it is healed.
And it is necessary so that every man should take the blood of an ox according to the quantity of its strength. And that which appears from a red hue on the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it not go out until it turns red; and likewise if you see it thick: then let it not go out until it thins out: and likewise if it is sharp, then let its sharpness be taken away.
And it is necessary for the one that is full, strong, and resistant to the extraction of blood by a single stroke, so that the venesection of the leg may be increased, and that the phlebotomist should stand on its side: and in the one that is weak, that it may be on the contrary.
And it is necessary so that he draws the blood out through a vein, and that there be a closed passage: and it is better if it is administered in venesection of the leg, that it be a transverse cut, not a puncture.
And this method of venesection is salutary from the flow of blood, and from the cutting of the nerve: and it is more praiseworthy, and healthier than venesection by width and length.
And to whom it is customary to have syncope at venesection, let him eat before venesection with moderate bread in grape juice: or wine-skin if it is warm: and let blood from the three veins, or four.
If the complexion is cold, then before phlebotomy he should take food infused with honey syrup, or with a syrup infused with spices, or with a scented syrup.
If syncopes occur during phlebotomy and the cause is multiple exits of blood: then he should drink a broth of meat water, and syrup with subtle odor: and apply aromatics with algarrobite, and open his chest with it: and use all the things we have mentioned in the chapter on syncopes in case of draining.
But if he wants to stop the arm from bleeding and let his blood out slowly: it is necessary for him who has phlebotomy because of a lot of drain, and his strength is weak, that he should let his blood out little by little through a quantity of strength in continuous days.
But if he wants to stop the arm from bleeding and let his blood out for the second time, and his body is strong: then he should do it after seven or nine hours from his first phlebotomy.
But if he wants to draw blood from his body towards the opposite part to which he tilts: it is necessary for him that he stops it on the second or third day.
In which body there is already much blood heated and it becomes acute and causes a fever to occur: it is necessary for him to let out blood in one beat, and extract a lot of quantity: and increase the opening until the syncopes occur: after you have kept all the conditions of phlebotomy: and put your hand on its pulse at the site of blood flow, so that death does not occur at the place of syncopes. Because this often happens when the phlebotomist ignores it and falls by negligence.
And it is not good when you want to stop the arm and let your blood out for the second time, while the opening of the vein is already closed, and the exit of the blood becomes difficult, so that it rushes on him with a sudden movement, and it extends quickly. This is bad for a long time; then cut off itself, until it bleeds again.
Or remove with the acuteness of phlebotomy that which has coagulated from blood in the orifice of the rectum, and put on top of it some dissolved salt in water. And put on top of it some from the Tyrocum or the Sageene, and put the compress on gently, until the blood comes out.
But if the anal opening is already wide open, then let it go, and do not squeeze it, until it closes up.
That if necessity compels to the bleeding again, and there is no excuse, then either phlebotomize the person above that place, or in another arm in another anus.
But the vein of the arm is phlebotomized at the place of the Fossa and the Basilica, if they are not found, and are hidden, because it is composed from them.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is such that the sick person puts his hand in hot water, until it turns red, and the anus appears clearly.
Then let a slightly tight ligature be strung over it. Then let the second phlebotomy be made little by little, not acrosswise, and not along its length; and let the opening be wide enough, and your phlebotomy be such that you phlebotomize it above the incision of the hand just a little bit.
That if the exit of the blood is stopped, then again put the hand in hot water, and let the blood run into the water, until you satisfy your need.
But if you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from the repetition of putting the hand in hot water. And indeed the course of the blood in hot water is long in the time of winter.
And this phlebotomy of this anus is healthier than all other anuses, because there is no pulsating under it, and there are no nerves.
Phlebotomy of the right hand of salutellae is for those with liver illness.
And the quality of phlebotomy is such that you tie the hand with a ligature, or your own hand, after you have introduced it into warm water, until it gets red, and shows a strong sensation. Then phlebotomy her while. And if you cut it completely, it will not hurt that one at all.
And preserve, so that you do not lose your hand with phlebotomy. Under it are the nerves of the fingers bare from the flesh.
Then repeat the hand to hot water, and let the blood run in her. For if you do not repeat her in hot water, the blood will clot in the hole of the vein, and it is stopped from flowing.
But when you extract a quantity of blood as needed, then put oil and salt on the vein so that it does not congeal quickly.
And likewise it is necessary to do the same with every tightly bound branch.
The grip of phlebotomy is on the left hand, for it is suitable for illnesses of the spleen; and likewise do the same with its phlebotomy as you did with the second one equally.
The grip of phlebotomy, however, is for illnesses that are in the lower part of the body, such as those of the bladder, and retention of the monthly course, and illnesses of the kidneys and old boils and similar ailments from sickness.
And the quality of phlebotomy is such that you introduce the sick foot into hot water: and make a friction on it until the vein bursts; and tie above the ligature with a bandage. And the place of the vein is at the heel, visible towards the thumb: and many branches grow out from it on the face of the foot.
So phlebotomy her in a larger branch of hers, or at the heel in gathering of hers; for it is better and healthier.
If you make a phlebotomy on that part [of the body], then caution is needed so that the nerves underneath do not affect the face of the foot.
And place your phlebotomy where you want to make a phlebotomy from behind, so that you don't hit it: and set up the phlebotomy Nobile.
But if the exit of blood is prohibited, then wash that part of his foot with warm water: and let the blood run out of it until it empties.
That if there is a mistake with the phlebotomator in the first cut, then let it remain with phlebotomy to some extent higher, because the place is healthy, and do not fear from it evil when you caution the nerves, as we have said.
And also with the saphenous vein of the other foot evenly.
But veins of the sciatic region, as we have said, are located near the heel from the outer side.
And the tension of that phlebotomy is, at the pain of the ankle, when it is due to warm blood.
And the quality of that phlebotomy is, so that it enters into a weak bath, and refreshes: and tighten his leg from the ankle up to the heel with four fingers, with a long thin thread; for it does not appear unless for that.
When it does appear, then make the phlebotomy for you as possible according to your art, or according to the transection: and it is better, or as if you hit it with an incision, or cut it off with a section. For that part of his body is healthier, and it itself is very hidden by many people.
For that part of his body is healthier, and it itself is very hidden by many people. That if you do not make it known by sense at all: then phlebotomize some of his ramus, and that is what appears on the back of the foot, and towards the earlobe: and caution the nerves, and let a quantity of blood run out as much as you want.
Then tie it tightly, and put it on the part where you made the phlebotomy, and tighten the place. He heals quickly.
On ventilation, and on the quality of use thereof.
Vents are made from horns, and from brass, and from iron.
And ventilation is made in two ways. When there is scarification and extraction of blood, and another kind of ventilation is without scarification.
And this type of ventilation without scarification has two ways. For it is with fire. Or is without fire.
And the ventilations that are given with scarification and extraction of blood are four-and-twenty parts of the body. Of these four-and-twenty parts of the body, one is the Ventosatio Alnocrati, and it is last of the head: and Alkehel, and that is middle of the neck: and the vents of Alhagdahim, and they are two laminae of the neck from both sides together: and the vent of the mind, and it is under the mandible at the bottom of the mouth: and the vents of the two spatulas: and the vents of the two claws: and the vents of the two cheeks.
And this type of ventilation does not draw blood from small veins scattered in the flesh, and because of that its strength does not drop out of them, as is the case with phlebotomy. And it should not be administered that ventilation whether with fire or without fire in any disease that is caused by accumulation until the whole body has been drained.
If necessity requires ventilation because of a disease, or for the habit, we shall administer it at any hour at the beginning of the month, at the end of it, and at its mid-point, and at any other time.
That is to say, because there is a man who, when blood accumulates within him, finds relief only through ventilation, and he has a gray hair, and he sweats.
And from them comes the swelling and redness on his face, head, and neck. And from them comes the itching in his face, forehead, darkness, and dullness in his eyes.
And from them comes the place of his wound. And from them comes who has many laughs. And from them comes who has a taste of blood in his mouth: or he spits it out with his tongue, and spits up the blood. And from them comes who has many dreams. And from them comes who sees in his sleep blood and redness, and those slain, and plagues, and things similar to them.
When then do we see anything from them, and especially if it is in the third month of the year: then do we make the wound heal, after having let pass two hours of the day, or three.
The treatment for the wound on the neck is this: for it brings with it a burden in the head, and because it drips down to the eyes. But it should be after the whole body has been emptied.
And this is called a local phlebotomy on the head.
And it should not be used by one who has a cold complexions, or in whom there is catarrh. For it brings about a great injury.
And for this reason, those who are elderly should not use it, and in whose head there are cold diseases.
But whoever uses it with diligence, forgetfulness comes over him.
And for this reason you should order the wind-sucker to lay his hand with the wind blowing slightly towards the lower part, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Ventosation, or alcohol, is a local phlebotomy on the purple color, and also on the blue color, and because of it brings about sneezing, constriction of the windpipe, and the裂开（裂开） instrument of constriction, and coughing, and swelling.
It is necessary that Ventosa Alchehel be driven forth a little further, because if it is put below, it generates weakness in the heart and the stomach.
Ventosation however has a cure for the accidents of headaches and eyes and hemicrania and perforations and pain in the roots of the teeth; and is a place for phlebotomy.
And you should order the Ventosator not to put his hand on the scarification: so that he does not cut an artery and a flow of blood occurs.
But if it is under the chin, it brings about alcohol in the mouth and corruption of the gums and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and stands in place of phlebotomy for Alieherich, which are in the two lips.
But if it is a spatulum, it has a cure for alchafacham, which is caused by a rebound and heat.
But if it is an internal part of the body, it has a cure for phlebotomy of three veins, Basilica, Fusca and Cephalica: because it itself draws blood from all the small veins in the flesh; and these small veins draw the blood from other larger veins until the attraction reaches the three veins.
And you should order the Ventosator not to make a lot of scratches: because it is a bare place of flesh, and under it are nerves and arteries.
But if the Ventosation is done on top of alchausos, it brings about hemorrhoids in the Anus and ulcers from below.
And you should order the Ventosator so that there is a great Wind and that it is made of iron: because the place does not admit to strong suction, and perhaps the fine ones are broken by the Wind; and the large scarification is made.
But the fine Wind diminishes with a clear appearance: because it draws blood from all the body and brings about old pains in the kidneys and bladders and urinary bladder; causing menses and colic and heat; and stands in place of phlebotomy of two veins, and alhorcobeni.
Indeed, the body becomes very weak, and causes fainting in many people.
And the treatment of the two cracks of the wind is close to the treatment of the wind.
The quality of the position of the winds is that you should place the wind in the first place empty, and moisten with moderate suction: and do not continue the position of the wind, but put them quickly, and shake them quickly so that the humors come to a place of arrival equal: and do not cease to repeat that and continue, until you see the place already red and swollen, and appears the redness of blood: then therefore scrape, and repeat suction slowly. Then consider in the disposition of the bodies.
For he who is among men with tender flesh, rare pores, should cut himself once, not more: so that the place does not ulcerate.
And instruct the wind-starter so that he amplify the scraping and dig a little: and moderate suction in convenience, and quickly, and movement of his own.
That if there is grossness in the blood, then you should cut yourself twice. In fact the first opening of the subtlety of blood, and its moistening: and in the second perscrutation of the exquisite extraction of thick blood.
If, however, the blood is fecund very much, then let the scraping be done for the third time: so that the last result is obtained.
And to the last, when we want to extract blood slowly, slightly, one scraping is sufficient for us. That if we want multiple extractions of blood, then we scrape with multiple scratchings.
And if we measure that the blood is thick: then it is necessary that scraping be done with a deep scratching: and an equal end in the scratching, is the depth of the skin.
What is that which should be administered from oils at the position of the wind, and what does the wind-starter caution?
In that, indeed, whose skin is thick, tough, dark, and whose pores are tight, it is necessary that the places be anointed with open, soothing, and resolving oils: if it is in the time of summer, such as is the oil of several, or olive oil, or almond oil, or oil from sweet almonds, or oil from pumpkin seed.
And if it is in the time of winter, then oil of narcissus, or of lily, or of chamomile, or gin: and similar ones.
If, however, there is a lot of superfluity, cold: then oil of wormwood, or of balm, or of almond, or of annatto, or of saffron: and similar ones.
If, however, it is ventous, with open pores, and tender flesh: then it is necessary that oil be forbidden to it, and these places should be washed after fanning with rose water, or cold water, or water of amaranth, or water of pumpkin, or water of portulaca: and similar ones.
But he whose blood is very humid should wash the ventose places with vinegar, or with myrtle water, and sumach: and similar ones.Et si superfluitas est in pedibus, in calcis, aut in uiris: tunc oportet ut superius locos mictis urini et moco, et similes suis; et quod superius mictur
And if there is a lot of superfluity in the feet, in the shoes, or in the feet: then the ventose places should be washed with old wine, or with water of samsou, or with decoction of anet, or of chamomile: and similar ones.Et si superfluitates sunt in capite uiri, aut in labibus: tunc oportet ut superius mictur urina et moco, et quod superius sint alii similes; et quod
And it is necessary that the fanning be done in a bath, or in a bathhouse; and it should be administered after leaving the bath for an hour, or two hours.Et si superfluitates sunt in uiris: tunc oportet, ut mictur urina et moco, et quod mictur non sit prope uiris sed per horam, aut per horas duas; et quod
And it is not fit that any should sleep after dressing.
What is the need for one to be bandaged or bled before dressing?
And after that, you should consider first of all: if the person is jaundiced and their blood is thick, then their sharpness and inflammation will be due to a lack of cooling, like granatum muzum: also dill with vinegar and lettuce, and secaniabin, and juleb: and similar things.
And put on his food porridge, and meat that is sour, and cooked foods with apples: and similar things.
And if his complexio is cold, he should take syrup of honey, or of almond, or alsecaniabin made from seeds: and he should drink medium-strong wine, which is between new and old: and let him be instructed to eat a little food. And put on his food porridge, and hempseed, and paschal eggs, that is to say, many birds: and let him eat pigeon loaves.
And it is necessary that the drink of dressing and phlebotomy be more than the food, and that it be given in wine to some men in Horica tyeroca or a remedy made from musk, that is to say, muscata, or alesselithe before dressing: and before phlebotomy, or after: so as to strengthen the main muscles, and refine the blood. And it is not fit that they drink it warm in hot wine.
Of dressing without scraping. Dressings that are without scraping are dressings that are put on top of the liver, and the spleen, and the podagram, and over the navel, and places of the testicles, and the pixie anchae: because these limbs do not suffer from scraping on themselves.
And it is not asked for them, unless there is an outbreak from a member of blood to the limb: as we put dressing on the breasts in the sickness of blood flow from the nose. And we use them so that we can heal a cold, sore member in the limb: as we put air on top of the bowels, and the navel. For it itself tightens up the member, and warms it, and removes the pain because it has healed that cold sore.
Also, we put air on the kidneys when there is an accumulation of dung or stone. For with his own power it may well open up a discharge, or remove a stone from its place.
And also when it is put on the liver, and the spleen when there is a cold sore in either of them.
And these Wind-sores are dealt with by means of a cut only. And sometimes they are dealt with by fire.
And sometimes they are given with warm water when there is a pleural illness; and that is, so as to fill the Wind- sore with warm water, or water in which have been boiled herbs suitable for the purpose.
The form of the Wind-sores dealt with by fire.
Let the width of its opening be two fingers wide, according to the shape we have made; and let the quantity of it in the depth be half the palm: and let it be in the back of its place which is about the middle of it, a little hole, according to the quantity that is put into it: let there be also made, of copper, brass, or iron, an equal rod across it, so as not to hurt the limb at its position over it; and let there be in the midst of it a wire of copper, or iron, through which a candle with fire is held.
And this great Wind-sore may also be made, larger than we have described, and a smaller one, according to the illness and age of him who uses it.
For the Wind-sores are different in boys, and in those who are weak, from those in men, and in those who have large bodies.
The quality of this wind-sucking application with fire on the arm, that is, to light a flax candle or a small candle with a wick; and put it in the middle of the wound above the skin, so that the fire surrounds the lower part of the wound, so that the body does not burn.
Then place it on the arm, and let the finger be placed over the hole that I have said, until we hold it in place: while we hold it, remove the finger, and the vapor will come out of that hole immediately and the wound will open.
Then light the flax again in the same way, and repeat it if you want to.
But in the wound that is applied to pneumonia with water, there is no cross-section and no hole; it is only filled with water and placed on the arm.
And this is its form.
And this wound, the more it is big, so that it takes a lot of water, is better.
In suspension of blood sugar.
Sanguine sugar are not applied to many members, unless the position of the wound allows it, due to its smallness, such as the lip and the gums, and similar ones. Or on a naked member, stripped of flesh, such as a finger, or a nose, and like them.
And the quality to be used is this: to come from blood sugar that are in sweet water, cleaned from putrefactions.
Then they are left to rest in sweet water during the day and night, until they become thirsty, and nothing remains in their stomachs. Then the body is emptied in the first place with phlebotomy, and with wind-sucking. Then wash the wound with water, until it turns red. Then put on them.
When they are filled, and fall down, and it is possible to suck the place with wind-sucking, then it is more effective in healing: and if not, then wash the place with vinegar. Then, with much water, and knead, and squeeze.
If the course of blood is prolonged after the loss of blood and it remains bloody: then pour a cloth made of linen into cold water, and place it on top until the blood clot is removed.
If the blood increases, then sprinkle powder on top of it made of dried blood, or eggshells, and things like that from astringent: until the blood is cut off.
Or they place on top of the place half of the ground up bark of oak tree: and they leave it, until the acorn sticks to the place, for the blood is cut off.
And it should be that if the need requires a repeat of the bloodletting, when possible, change them.
If, however, they prohibit bloodletting by suspension, then clean the place with fresh blood. Or tie them up now in places, until someone leaves. Then they are placed on, for when they feel some of the blood, they stick immediately.
When, however, you want them to fall down, sprinkle on top of them some dried aloe, or salt, or ash: and they fall down immediately.
This chapter is also often needed in the art of medicine, and it is restoration of a fracture, and dislocation of accidents in bones.
Know ye, O sons, that this chapter is for the most part lost to the medical men who are dull-witted and of the herd, and who have never examined the old book, nor read a letter from it.
And for this reason it has come to pass, that this mode is secret among us. And I was not occupied with it at all, and I was not qualified in it unless because of the length of reading of the old books, and study over their understanding, until I drew out the science from them.
Then, by experimentation and study, I measured the length of my scar.
Then, I will describe to you from that in this chapter all of my knowledge: and, regarding what was the experiment of mine, after I had abridged it for you, and released it from the occupation of elongation, and abridged it by its end of abbreviation, and showed it by its end of decline: and I formed in it many forms from forms of instruments that are administered in it, because it is from the addition of decline, as I did in two previous chapters.
Chapter II.
It is necessary, that we say in the prolog of this chapter, that summa of discourse and chapters, to which an understanding is considered at first by the artist on the veracity: that is, so that you, and who are ready, know or learn this noble art, and others from you.
I say, then, that when it happens to someone that there is a fracture, or dislocation, or twist, or a fall: then you should properly, first of all, prepare to phlebotomize him, and solve the wound, or both at the same time: if not forbidden by anything, such as the weakness of virtue: or he is that boy who has something from those things: or he is an old man of senility: or it is a time of great heat, or great cold.
Then, be satisfied with your food, cold drinks, and feathers, and hair: and forbid wine, and fatty meats, and what fills the belly with blood. Until you are secure from heat of apoplexy, and do not wait for the flow of matter to a limb: then return the sick to their usual customs with which he runs.
When the mouth is broken, then it is necessary that the sick person be fed with food rich in nutrients, thick, brown, and full of flavor: just as food made from wheat cooked with water, and rice, and heads and feet and entrails of fowl, and eggs and fish that are fresh: and strong wine, and similar things. For with this regimen the healing of a fracture takes place more quickly and better.
And know that bones which are broken, when they are in the hands of a man who is in the first age of old age and decay, cannot continue nor consolidate themselves according to their nature always, by reason of the drying up of the limbs of them: but they consolidate themselves and continue such as they are at the end of lightness, like the bones of young boys' small arms.
However, nature adds something to the broken bone from every part a little glue, in which there is thickness, by which it clings and binds itself, until it is joined together, and bound together, until it comes to the end of strength and firmness, as it was at first, until it does not prevent its operations: and for this reason it is necessary that you put nutriment on the sick food, in which there are thickness, and flavor, and thickness, as we have said.
And know that the species of fractures are various, according to the diversity of the limbs: for a fracture of the leg is different from a fracture of the skull, and a fracture of the breastbone is different from a fracture of the spine, and likewise each limb has all its parts very different: and I come with a reminder of every kind of fracture exposed in its own chapter, distinct from the other. And the species of fractures of bones also differ in themselves.
For a fracture is made by an arc, except that they happen in a star. And when a fracture is made according to the length of the bone: and there are fractures of his stagium, that is, stars, and additions coming from, as there are in the stem, when it is caught by a knife for writing. And do not proceed: and is fracture with ulna and disruption in the head: and is fracture small crack.
And all kinds of people are skilled, or their own instrument in restoring him, according to what will come to his memory, distinguished in their places.
And from this it is known that the break in the bone, its curvature and eminence: and its appearance to the sense, and its sound when you press it with your hand.
So when there is no apparent curvature in the place, and no sound at your touch when you press the bone with agitation, and it does not cause great pain: then it is not a fracture, but possible that there is a curvature or a small crack: so it is not necessary to move it with your hand and squeeze it all, but rather put something from the doctors, for their memory comes about, after the time that suits the place: then tighten the tightness slightly.
And you know that the place when it arches and is split into two, apart from what happens in it of satchels, but all its parts are removed from each other: then you should start to correct it from your time, straightening it before it happens to it a swelling of heat.
But if it happens to him a swelling of heat, then let go of the bone for a few days, until it rests the swelling. Then make the bone equal by any way you can of softness and skill.
And you know that the restoration of it, and its equality, is easier than of bone, in which satchels happen.
Then tighten it, according to what comes to your memory about it.
But if in the bone are satchels, then necessary is the extension of this broken member from two parts, if it sits with a hand, or with a foot: or with your hand when the member is small: or with two ropes, or with a rope and a hand.
And set your position so that you place the limb on an equal place, according to its natural figure, until when the parts of the broken member are extended: then take care, that you return them with all your inventiveness, and in whatever way you can in their places: and be careful, according to your strength, that no pain should happen over the weak by your operation, or any fault: and take care, according to your strength, that you apply one two bones with his friend, according to better forms.
And it is necessary at that hour, that you try and touch him with your own hand. If then you see there anything different, straight it out, and make it equal by the quantity of your strength.
And be careful about the sudden extension, and the strong compression, as many do with the stiff. For often it happens through their own operation that they make the limb hot with a fever, or contract it in the member: for we have seen this thing often from their operations.
Then join on after the healing, and on the relaxing of the operation, and on the tightening of the limb, and peace, and calmness: and warn the weak person over it. And make the limb rest, so that it does not move in the hour of its strength, and its sleep when it is in a state of resolution, and agitation, and its movement at its last power. And be careful, so that the limb does not take a position with which it follows pain. That is, because when it feels the pain of the limb's position, or injury: then it is necessary that you change it to a position other than that from which it does not feel pain.
And be careful with him, so that his position is equal and straight: so that no tortuosity happens in the limb when it is restored.
And the quality of a broken member's tightness is according to what has been said.
Be aware that broken limbs differ in their length and size and shape.
Of which the shorter members, such as the arm, and the finger, and the thumb, and the like, then it should be, that there is a spread of soft cloth, thin. But of which the thicker members, such as the hip, and the leg, then it should be, that there is a spread of broad, hard cloth in them.
Since the wide ligament connects the large member, and tightens it with equal tightness from all sides, so that it does not enter it a stain.
Then begin after you have drained to place the ointment suitable for that, in a soft cloth over the site of the fracture. Then begin to spread three or four times over the site of the fracture, depending on how much the member is stretched, and lightly tighten your hand with the ligament.
Then move it along with you to the upper side from the site of the fracture, and tighten less than how tight your tightening was, which you tightened the broken place. Then stretch yourself out with the spread from the site of the fracture a little, and soften the tightness gradually, until you have recovered from the place a large piece.
Then take another clean one, and spread it again over the broken site with spreads. Then move it along with you to the lower side from the fracture. And let your operation be in the tightness of the spread, and in the softening of it, according to what we have said in the first spread above.
Then place between the spreads a soft cloth, or a cloth, with which it is even the curvature of the fracture, if there is any curvature: and if not, do not place anything in it.
Then spread again over that other clean one. Then make the stars of the spreads even immediately, if there is no swelling or fever at the site.
If, however, there is swelling or bruising: then place something on top of it to support that bruising, and remove the swelling: and let it go for a few days. Then bind firmly to it then stars.
And the stars are from the middle of canes broad, rasped, formed wisely: or they are from wood where cribs are made, which are made from pine, or rags, that is to say, branches of palm, or calix: and let the width of each star be according to this form, and let it have this figure.
However, the star that is placed on top of it should be wider and longer by a little bit than the other stars: and the length of the star should be according to what is suitable for the member in size and beauty.
Then bind the stars together with another string, starting from the first one to form a group. Then tie from above with a string that is slightly less stiff: and it should be, so that your stiffness covers the fracture spot more: and the less it extends from the fracture, the stiffer it is.
And it should be, that the middle strings in thickness and softness are made of soft linen.
For if the strings are thick, such as is the case with strings used for stiffening of wooden frames in surgery from twisted linen chords, it is a great mistake: because the stiffness comes out of shape with them.
And thin strings do not suit either: for you will not get the desired stiffness with them.
And it is not suitable that there be less than a space of a finger between each star.
That if a sick person is laid between the stars after the stiffness has been applied to the healthy places: then place something soft under them, such as fluffy cloth or red wool, until there is no pain from it.
When there is a fracture with an injury, and there is a break in the skin, I return to this chapter to remember it in detail.
You should know that not every broken limb needs to be fixed with splints from the first day. That is, because the limb when it is big, it should not be placed on top of the splints, unless after five days, or seven, or more, according to your security from blood clots.
And this is the way that the ancient ones used to fix it, which are placed on top of the fracture and dislocation.
The common short way of doing the plaster, for restoring the fracture, suitable for many cases, especially for women and children; because it is not hurt by heat or cold.
And it is so that you take from the flour that is ground, and there is a dough that hangs on the walls of the gristmill next to the rolling mill: and make it as it is, except that you add chalk to it: and put its coating not thick, nor thin. Then use it.
The other way of doing the plaster, for restoring the fracture and dislocation and torsion. Take almsgiving, and lauds, and acacia, and cow's milk, and mug; and honey, of all kinds of myrrh, and aloe of both sexes, of the XX parts of alethah, as much as there is, and add it to the chalk, and mix it with water of alethah: or add it to the chalk if the case is warm. Then use this plaster. For this is a good composition, it restores the broken bones quickly, and suits many people.
The other way of doing the plaster, which also suits the fracture and torsion. Take mug, and almsgiving, and white aloe, of all kinds of myrrh X parts, and of acacia VI parts, and of bolus Armenian XX parts; twist them together with much grinding, and add them to the chalk, and make it with water, or add it to the chalk: and administer.
The mode of applying plasters for joints, and bones separated from their places: and to assuage the pain, the injury, the cutting of the bone, and the fracture. Take wool wetted with sour milk, and let it be submerged in vinegar and oil cooked, and let it be placed on the place.
And in this plaster, there is no virtue of restoration, but it is good in the sedation of hot swelling: and it drives away pains by itself.
The mode of applying plaster, which restores a broken bone. Take leaves of fig and leaves of wild papaw: and dry them all, and make a plaster of both.
The mode of applying a short plaster, applied to the restoration of a fracture of a bone: and when you wish to resolve a residual swelling. Take the root of marigold, and of chamomile, and of flowers of violet, and of herb-weed, all one half: dry them all, and make them with wine, if it is not a heated member.
If it is indeed heated, then make that with coriander seed juice, or with water, and use it.
The mode of a stronger plaster in the resolution, which is greater than this, when it happens that a swelling is harsh on the restoration of a member. Take the root of marigold, and of flax seed, and of poplar bark, and of mealy-seed, and of sweet grass, and of violet flowers, and of chamomile, all one half: dry them all, and make them with water of willows, or with sweet water, or with wine. All this depending on the calor of the member, and on the quieting of heat.
Hippocrates indeed did not say in his book, that a plaster placed on a broken member should be made from the ash of the oak and oil: nothing else: and he related, that it should be between harshness and softness.
But Galen did use, that plasters be placed on a broken member at the restoration of it, in which is an drying up of heat, such as myrrh, and aloe, and olive-oil, and things similar to these from which we have spoken.
The mode of poultice which is beneficial for injury and pain. Take mutton, and chickpeas, and hair of man's teeth, or feathers of birds, and herbs, and equal parts of salt: they are to be ground, and rubbed together, and made into a poultice.
But as to the quantity, according to what is necessary, so that it remains a dressing, and then dissolves away, consider this then, if pain does not occur, nor itchiness, nor does a broken jaw move from its place: then do not take it away after many days. If it happens to him that there is a stinging itchiness, or a troubling pain, or inflammation: then do this, and dissolve it away in the hour itself, and take off the poultice from him: and receive a cloth of wool, or a sea sponge of wool, wet with water: and dip it into the lukewarm water, and wash with it the place, until the itchiness is calmed down, and the pain is soothed.
If it happens to him that there is a stinging itchiness, or a troubling pain, or inflammation: then do this, and dissolve it away in the hour itself, and take off the poultice from him: and receive a cloth of wool, or a sea sponge of wool, wet with water: and dip it into the lukewarm water, and wash with it the place, until the itchiness is calmed down, and the pain is soothed. Then let go of the member to rest for one hour. Then put over it a woolen cloth, soaked in vinegar and oil, or oil rubbed with rosewater: and bind it on for the night, so that he is safe from the heat of the sun, and the swelling of the member has ceased, and the pain of his has gone away.
Then repeatedly examine him to see if he is healing well, and the poultice is small: but do not bind him with your own constriction first, and soft things, until he has healed.
If you see that the swelling, and redness, and pain, and inflammation, and all the other accidents have entirely disappeared, and there is no need for the poultice or constriction anymore: then do this again as you did before, equally.
If not one of those things which I have said happens to the member: then do not take it away, unless after three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when the member has been left for twenty days all over, according to what appears to you from the healing of the member, as we have said, until such time as the fracture is healed, and the coagulation of the blood on it is approximate: also add to that then more constriction than your first constriction: and add also in the swelling of food, according to what preceded its remembrance.
If, however, you see the place of fracture already drying out and becoming more extensive than necessary: then you should know that nourishment is forbidden to reach it. So wrap the wound with warm water at all times and leave it open for three days and then apply a little ointment.
Therefore, in this operation, nourishment runs to the limb and is quickly healed.
But that which the careless healers do from a broken limb, when they do not restore it at first, and then restore it according to its need and restoration according to its bend, is a mistake in their operation and a great fear: and if it had been right, the ancients would have said in their books, and they would have operated with it.
And I did not see any of their legacy in this at all, and it is better that it should not be done.
[On the Making of an Injury in the Head.]
(There are various kinds of fractures and many forms of it; and its causes are separate.)
For the fracture is from a punch which passes all the way through to the other side, which is beneath the bone, as it does in the axe in the wood: and for that reason this kind of fracture is called the axial fracture.
Or a blade cuts some bone, and it hits its face, but the cut does not go through to the other side: and this kind of fracture is called the Kalaan fracture, that is, an absolute Let-down.
And there is a joint of two fractures, or a large one, or a small one.
(And from a fracture is a crushing, or a grinding): and its cause is a punch with a stone, or a fall on a stone, or similar things.
(And this fracture is also penetrating, which is about to break through a skin, which is beneath the bone): or it is on the surface of the bone: and these two fractures are also small or large.
It is from a fracture that is hidden in bone and subtle in hair: and it is a small crack, and for this reason this type of fracture is called Capillaris.
And from these is a fracture that happens by accident or by the hitting of a stone, and similar to these, which make a layer of bone go inside, and makes a concavity: as happened with the caldaria of air when it was hit and some of them went inside.
And most certainly this happens in the heads of moist bones, such as are the heads of boys.
And all these types of fractures are separated from each other, and I will add something about this whole thing in its place.
And we know all these types of fractures by detecting them and inquiring about them with the help of a probe, and by removing the corrupted flesh that is on them.
The Capillaris species is recognized in this way, that it is detected on the bone and scrubbed and applied with caustice to it: for a fracture appears black.
In the cure of a fracture, consider first the enferms: then if you see from the enferms that it means a clear indication on fear, such as a fever of cholera, and extension, and loss of intellect, and loss of speech, and syncope, and acute fever, and exit of eyes, and their rubor, and similar things to these in many conditions, without a doubt he will not be healed: and if you see that the enferms are not frightening you, and you hope for his recovery: then begin to cure him.
That is, if a person comes to you wounded for the first time: and it is on a cold day, then one should study to remove the bone before the 24th day according to all conditions.
And if it is on a summer day, then one should remove the bone before the seventh day, before it corrupts what is under the bone from a pannicle, and those accidents that we have described.
If the fracture of the bone has reached the meninges and is small, then draw it out with attraction; then you must break the broken part and grind it according to what I have told you.
And then you must shave the head of the injured person: and find out on the bone in any way possible for you: and according to the shape of the wound, and what is more suitable for the sick.
If you encounter a flow of blood or a hot sweat when you are examining the bone, then oppose it with what is necessary. And fill the place with cloth soaked in wine and oil; and let the joint rest until the sweat subsides, and be safe from the flow of blood. Then begin the treatment of the bone and removal of it.
And make it as one or two ways.
The one way is to break the bone with a sharp chisel: and this is its form.
Then give another Incisory wider by the same width: and this is its form.
Then also give a wider Incisory, as wide as the second one.
The second way is to have a number of Incisory tools with different widths, some wider and some narrower: and let the latter be at the extremities of their sharpness, and made of iron or metal; and use ease in striking on the Incisory, so that it does not hurt itself and hurts itself.
If the bone is strong and hard, then you must drill around it before administering the Incisory with Terraz (an instrument), which do not go deep: for they are not called so unless they do not pass the edge of the bone to that which is behind it: because Terrizo is a round extremity on it, below its sharp head, like an edge, and a small circle prevents sinking into it, and going through the thickness of the bone.
It is fitting that you should receive from these Terribles a great number, each of which corresponds to the quantity of thickness of bone, until the present one is entirely in your skull: whose extremities are acute in length and brevity, according to the quantity of thickness of its skull.
And this is the form of the three Terribles, or trepanations.
But the quality of drilling around the fractured bone is: as you place the Terribles on the bone and rotate your fingers, until you know that the bone has been penetrated. Then exchange the Terribles for a different place, and put whatever quantity of thickness is around any hole or circle it.
Then cut with the Incisors whatever is between any hole from the bone: and make it thinner than you can on it from the edge of lightness, as we have said, until you eradicate the bone, or your hand, or with some other instrument that you have prepared for it: such as tenacles, and fine pincers.
And it is necessary that you should take every precaution, so that the Terribles or any of the Incisors do not touch a sipha, or anything else.
When you have thus drilled around the bone and separated it from a sipha, if it should be continuous with it, and you extract it, then you must file it, and make the same end of it as remains in the bone with some other similar instrument of the Incisors. However, it is necessary that it should be thin and thinner with the other Incisors.
That if there remains a little of the bones left, and it is difficult: then take them with ease, with whatever is near you from instruments. Then care for the knots after that with oil, and the ointment which we have said.
And another way of operation is simple, quite far from fear: which Galen said, and praised it much: and this is the words of his. It is necessary that you first, when you begin to handle the bone part from the place where the fracture is greater and more evident: until such time as you have handled it and placed under it this lens-shaped incisor, whose form this is.
And the lens-shaped part, does not affect anything at all: and the sharp part of it moving on both sides of it from lengthwise, as you see: so that the lens-shaped part is placed on a chisel, the face of it striking sharply into the bone.
Then strike on the incisor from one side with a small mallet until you hit the whole bone with ease, as it turns over: and you will be safe from panic, for there is no danger of anything happening to it, which you truly fear.
And if the healer was not a fool among men, and rather ignorant of it, and not asleep, then if there remained anything attached to the bone from the pannicle in some places, he would hit it himself with the extreme end of the lens-shaped incisor, and set it free from it with ease. For it is freed from it without harm, and without fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate as far as the pannicle, and that which is cut off from the bone is the face of it, and there remain in it roughness and subtle knots: then you should remove this roughness and pluck out these knots with fine rasps, so that it is possible for you to administer them at all times more convenient for them, and straighter for them, according to which the surgery leads you, and that broken bone, and its form. And you should administer in your ration, at first the root of the bone, with a wider rasp of these rasps. Then use after it a finer edge of the blade.
And you should administer in your ration, at first the root of the bone, with a wider rasp of these rasps. Then use after it a finer edge of the blade. And you should not stop doing that according to continuity, until you reach the point of administering them thinner, and finer of all.
In every other case of remaining lung cracks and thin fractures, you should give treatment according to that which leads to its correction.
And this is a thing that is not hidden above all, to which in this art any study is useful, and stands on that which we have written and shown in the case of large fractures.
But if a patch has been placed and retains the wound: then you should take a piece of linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and immerse it in rose oil, and place it over the wound's opening. Then take another piece of cloth, doubled or tripled, immerse it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth: and make it so that you can do this more easily than the other, so that it does not chafe.
Then apply a broad bandage over it: and do not tighten it, unless by the amount that holds the wound only: and leave it with this treatment for one day or two, until you are secure from fever. Then dissolve it, and administer after it the medicines with which there is no need of dryness: such as lilies' roots, herb flour, thorn powder, and similar things: and it is, that you make a powder of these medicines, which you sprinkle over the wound like those which are dry.
And administer universally in it all medicine of its property, which is to cleanse and not to bite. And take care, according to your skill, that the wound in your cure is clear: and is not in it an ointment, nor any sort of dirtiness.
And take care, according to your skill, that the wound in your cure is clear: and is not in it an ointment, nor any sort of dirtiness. And do not leave any wart aggregating therein at all: because when a wart aggregates over the haircloth of the skull, it corrupts it, and makes it putrefied, and brings about great evil after that: and this has already happened to the scalp's skin, when it is washed away from it, especially if its care is neglected, and there is blackness on its surface.
Therefore, consider then, if happen accidents to the sick which we have said, know that is certainly dangerous.
And if the blackness does not happen, unless by medicine which is put on himself, and it is in the virtue of its medicine, to make him black: then you should take from honey a part, from oil rose three parts, and with them linen cloth. Then put the patient on a bed: then care for the patient with the species of cure which are appropriate, until he is healed.
Of restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that they do not break from the nose unless both parts of it are at the same time, or one of them: since it has two bones: for the lower part is cartilaginous, does not break, and does not happen to him except by wearisome, and twist, and roughness.
If it breaks one of the two parts of it, then you should introduce your little finger in the nasal opening, and align the fracture with your little finger and thumb, until the nose returns to its natural shape: and do this with ease. And be careful, so that does not happen by your operation on him a pain on the sick.
That if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and does not reach to that finger: then you should adjust the end of the rib, where is a small thickness.
If, however, the fracture is in both parts, then you should make it similar to him: and attend to his restoration on the first day of the fracture, if it is possible. And if not, then after seven or ten days at rest from the heat.
Then introduce into the end of the nose a piece of linen cloth if the fracture is in one part: or introduce two pieces of linen cloth if the fracture is in both parts: and let it be in the piece of linen thickness such a quantity, which fills the nasal opening.
And certain restorers of antiquity said, let licinia be infused with butter, and be exchanged every day. That is not true to me, but it seems necessary that licinia be infused with alum, however, when combined with the powder to be ground. Then remove the licinia, until the bone is hardened and the cartilage is strengthened.
And when a feather of a goose is introduced into the nose instead of licinia, after it has been wrapped with a soft cloth: and so it is, that it holds the fracture of the nose more firmly together, and prevents the sick from breathing in.
And this is not necessary. If you want, do that: and if you want, do licinia.
That if the nose should be again injured while you are working, apply an cold poultice to the nose, or one made with a herb called hyssop, or with a little oil of rosemary, or with a little dandelion.
But if the cold poultice does not work, then it is necessary that the nose itself be wrapped with a sisam flour paste, and with thuris powder mixed with alum. Then put a soft cloth over the nose, and do not bind it with anything at all.
But if the nose bones are broken or crushed, then it is necessary that you split them open, and remove the bone with the appropriate instruments. Then cut away the flesh, and take care of the nose when it is infected, and hardened with the plasters suitable for it, or with a ointment.
That if a nail is stuck between the nose, then it is necessary that you care for the nose with licinia: and administer a brass tube until it heals.
Of the restoration of the lower jaw, when it is broken.
When the lower jaw is broken, and not with a nail: examine then if it is only a fracture of the side, and not a break in two, and take care of the internal parts: then it is easy to know it.
If there is a fracture on the right side of his nose, then you should insert your left index finger into the hole: likewise, if there is a fracture in the left jaw, then insert your right index finger: and push it in with ease to the outside with your other hand from the inside of the bone, and align it in place.
If the fracture of the jaw has already separated into two parts, then you should manage to pull apart the two sides, according to the straightness: until it is possible to align it.
If an injury has already occurred to the teeth, or a dislocation or fracture: then you should tighten them together with a gold wire, or silver, or silk thread. Then place the poultice over the fractured jaw. Then place a doubled cloth over it, and an uneven-sized wooden splint: or a fragment of skin, the same length as the jaw.
Then bind it from above, according to how you have prepared the ligature for yourself, and allow the application to remain in place until it is destroyed: and instruct the patient to use tranquillity and calmness: and provide him with soft food to eat.
If you think that something has already changed in the shape by some amount: then approach it, and dissolve it on the third day. Then straighten out what has been moved from it, and cover the jaw with a powder that is ground, mixed with chalk or flour, after you have removed the poultice: and place a thin woollen cloth over it.
While that adhesive poultice remains attached to the jaw and its position of the bone does not change, let it be: and do not remove it, until healing is complete: or tighten the fracture. This fracture is often tightened with three seven-day periods.
If a cold sore occurs while the adhesive is still in place, then administer to it what we have said many times in its treatment, until it disappears.
If there is a fracture with the ulna, consider. I have already separated the fragment from the bone, or with a saw: then I made it very small, so that you can remove the fragments of sawing together with him when you want to remove them from the instruments.
If in fact the opening of the wound is tight, then I increase it with the phlebotomist according to the quantity that you need.
Then when you remove these saws and there is nothing left of them, then close the opening of the wound if it is wide: and if not, put over it from the placards that fit on it, and let it heal up until it is well.
The restoration of the fork when it breaks.
Many things are broken from the front part of the shoulder, and the break in the fork is made according to one of three ways.
Or if it breaks and separates into two, except that they happen in the sawing: and it is easier to restore it.
Or thus, so that they happen in the bone sawing: and it is more difficult to restore.
Or thus, so that there is a fracture with the ulna.
And the operation in it when the fracture is without the ulna, is, so that you make the two ministers present, so that one of them holds a support to follow the broken fork, and the other extends the neck towards the side.
Then you make the fracture of your fingers equal, until it takes on shape according to what is needed: and it does not stand out in it, nor is it convex.
That if you can bear to extend more, then it should be so that you put under a ball from a cloth or wool: and let the size of it be according to the quantity that you need: and extend it, and smooth out the fork, and crimp the ball with your hand, until the fracture is equal, according to what is needed.
If you cannot bring the end of the Furcula to the outside because it goes deep inside: then let the sick person lie down on their chest and place the middle part of a feather under their shoulder blade; and press the shoulder of the sick person towards the lower part, until the bone of the Furcula that is in the depth comes up to the top: and then set the broken bone straight with your fingers and make it equal.
If you feel a creak in the Furcula and it moves: then you should find something to put on top of it and take out the creak with ease.
If it is stuck in the bone, then take one of the incisorium instruments that you prepared for it and place it under the Furcula after you have placed a lever on top of it to lift it up; and this instrument should be made of wood or iron. And this is its shape.
It is joined to the ear which is not hollowed out.
And its width should be according to the position of your shoulder and its size. The length, however, should also be according to what is possible for you to operate.
And it has two ends, as you see: and one end should be wide, and the other tight.
If the wound you made while extracting the bone's creak is wide and dries quickly with warm air: then join the two edges of the wound together with a stitch.
And if the break is small or you do not have warm air to dry it: then fill the wound with rags and powder according to the amount of the wound's length.
If warm air comes, then pour a mixture of rose oil and vinegar and wine on it and place it on top.
The rigor of the bone is what it is like when there is no wound and no break, that is, when you place a paste made from pounded flour with ash on top of the bone. And set a stump of wood upon it. Then place a ball under its toe, if you can tolerate it. Then take the blood, that is, the bag which the Saracens hold, which is long and very thin: and let its breadth be that of a palm or about it. Then place a double layer of cloth on top of the stump and a pad. Then take an Astrolabium from a thin board, whose breadth is that of three fingers, and whose length is similar. Then wrap it in a cloth. Then wrap the cloth with the Astrolabium in the place of alchemy which lies over the fracture and the spot. Then place the alchemy over the fracture like a turban, and wrap it over his neck, and under his healthy toe, and under his unhealthy toe: and reduce it on all sides, and see how the constriction holds the fracture fast: and this is that it does not cover you above, and in whole, so that it does not move the Astrolabium from above the broken nose. And for this it is necessary, that you should see the sick one every day. Whenever therefore the ligature softens, and you see the Astrolabium start to move: then straighten it, and tighten the ligature.
Then place a pillow of medicine behind his back, and under his healthy toe next to his pillow in the night, so that it aids him from its side when he turns. Thus is broken the fracture of the forearm by elevation of the shoulder.
Or bind his arm to his neck: and do not loosen the ligature, if it does not happen to dislodge by itching, or from a change of position, until twelve days have passed.
Then mend the pad, if you see his face towards that. And add to the constriction, and let him go, until it is restored and has clotted.
The fracture of the femur is also pulled and strengthened after a few days: and sometimes it happens in some people with less strength.
On the restoration of the fracture of the spit.
Rarely does the spatula break, and in its width place; and do not break from it except its edge.
But when it breaks from it place, and breaks in the middle of it, and is not known that except by touch: then according to what is the shape of the fracture prepare the preparation. And reduce it to the natural form at all your skill, which is possible for you.
Then put on place powder of grinding with alum, and a stopple of wood, and put above pulse from a doubled cloth. Then put on top of it a thin plate of metal from a thin board according to the quantity of the spatula of all, or larger than that a little.
But if the bottom is crushed under the plate in some place of the spatula, then make it equal with the stopple of wood, until the plate falls down according to the equality.
Then wipe above with long-haired alkimium, with a pressure of it, and a firmness of the plate, until it does not move away from its place.
And consider the ligature every day. Whenever that is softened the ligature, tighten it, and make the plate equal if it moves away from its place: and lie on the injured side on his healthy.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days, or in twenty-five days.
But when this number is completed, then dissolve the ligature: and you are in safety. For that itself is from bones whose community is not feared, and their solution.
But if it proceeds from an ossicle, and stings under the skin: then cut above on it, and take it off. And do as we have said in the fracture of the fork from the seat of the pus, if anything happens from it.
About restoring the fracture of the breastbone.
The breastbone sometimes breaks in the middle, and this rarely happens. The extremities of it are most often broken, and they are destroyed by accidents of it.
When it is broken in the middle, which turns downward toward the lower part, a severe pain takes place, and difficulty in breathing, and perhaps a cough, and he may spit blood, and there seems to be a fracture of the bone, and this is not hidden from feeling, The restoration of it is so that he shall lie down on his back: and let him put under his armpits.
Then he shall press his shoulders and bring the ribs together from both sides or from the sides with his hands: and gently adjust him in alignment, according to all possible ways that it may be fitting, until he has restored the shape of the bone, as it should be.
Then he shall place over him plaster and a board, and put beneath him from the table a light one, made of willow or of holly, and of similar things in a state of lightness, after you have dried it up with cloth. Then gently fasten him with a bandage over the broken bone so that it does not move: and sometimes he shall walk with a limp, going with a tight grip when turning.
Then consider the bandage at every hour, and whenever it becomes soft, tighten it: and if need should prompt its loosening in order to cure an itch, or a rash which has occurred at that place, or pain, or pus: then go through with it, and loose it, and remove the plaster, and set right what has happened in the course of its treatment.
Then reduce the plaster, if you see toward it: and put on a tight grip, until it is healed.
Regarding the restoration of the ribs, when they are broken.
Know that the fracture of ribs does not occur unless in the places near the back and from the extremities thereof from the anterior part. And it does not happen to them any attrition, except therefore, because they are cartilage-like. And the knowledge of this is not hidden from the sense in inquiry when the fingers are probed.
And the restoration of it is made so that the equal fracture with the fingers in a possible second way, until it is equal in figure, according to which is necessary. Then apply an overlay, and tightly fix the broken bone with the splint, if it needs it.
And if the fracture of the ribs is hidden to the interior: then it happens to the sick a sharp pain, and a puncturing, like that which happens to him who has pleurisy: for the bone pricks the wound, and also it happens to him that a difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and blood-letting: and this is difficult to cure.
And already the ancients have devised in it with many contrivances: and among them are those who say, Let you place food that generate an inflammation and a ventosity, so that it inflames the belly, and extends, and pushes the fracture towards the exterior.
But we really despise, so that there is no cause of haste in making an emetic that is hot, if it does not happen. But if it has already happened, then add this to it.
And said some of them: Let it be placed on a ventous place, and then suck with strength, and it is similar to reasoning. However, it is feared that the ventosity attracts suppurations to the place, because of the weakness of disposition.
And said some of them: It is necessary so that the place is covered with wool which has already been immersed in hot oil: and let there be placed down feathers between the ribs, until it is filled up: so that the ligature is equal when it is probed, according to its roundness.
The sick person shall be nursed with food and medicine until he has recovered from the pleurisy.
If the sick person is being pressed by pain, and if his nose itches or pricks, and we are afraid for the sick man: then we should split him on the spot and detect any broken rib. Then let us place over it an instrument that keeps it open, of which the memory precedes: and we will easily cut the bone, and we will cut it itself.
Then let us gather two skin flaps of the wound, if it is large with a stitch: and let us heal him with plasters until he heals.
If it happens during the time of a feverish swelling, then let it approach, and pour flour into rose oil and place it on the spot: and let the sick person be nursed with it as is appropriate for the swelling.
In the meantime he shall also lie down on his side where he sleeps until he heals.
For the restoration of a broken spine of the back and neck.
Of the bones of the neck when a fracture occurs, and it rarely happens that they are worn out: and likewise to the spines of the back. But when this happens to someone and you want to know whether it will heal or not: then trust in the Lord. For if you see his hands already softened, and stuporified, and dead: and he cannot be moved or extended or tightened, and when you tighten them with your fingers and prick them with a pin, he does not feel it, and does not feel pain in them: then know that he is not healing, and there are many dispositions that are fatal.
But if he feels it when you tighten them and prick them: then know that the neck bones are healed, and that the sick person will heal with treatment.
If something similar happens to his back spine, and you want to know whether it will heal or not: then look at his feet: if you see that they are softened, and the same thing happens to them as happened to his hands: then when he lies on his back, he moves and has a desire to go to the toilet, and when he leans on his stomach, he wants to urinate, but cannot: then know that it is fatal. Therefore, do not interrupt his work.
If, however, nothing of this happens to him, the matter is lighter.
And the cure of him that happens from this is, as you seek to calm inflammation of the hot sweat: so that you put on oil of rose alone: or when you wash with water alone.
Place over it now and then in the day, until he is calmed down with a hot sweat: then place on one spot from healing plasters, drying up, and tightly binding to him with the bandage: and order the sick person to use rest and tranquility. And let him not sleep over the part that hurts when he feels pain, until he is healed.
That if it happens at the separation of a bone's splint, or something that has already been separated from it: then you must, as it separates on the skin, and remove it. Then gather together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch. Then take care of the person with some meat that has grown on him, from ointment, until he is healed.
But if, at the end, the hip bone is broken and has come off, and the tail is cut off: then you must, with your left hand, put your thumb into the hole in the hip, and, with your right hand, push it back together as well as possible, and second, by equating it.
Then place over him, and take him away: and take care of the wound with the cure that preceded it, until he is healed.
The Restoration of Ankles.
Chapter XI.
Bones of the ankles are rarely broken. If they are broken, then their fracture is not, unless it is split at the ends of the bones: and they break lengthwise, and bend inward towards the inside: and happens to the person pain in the place, and a bruise: and the leg breaks that is broken.
And the restoration of it is, as you stretch your hand over it, until you stand over the fracture like this figure:
If the fracture is in the extremities of it only, then make that fracture equal, according to how you are prepared from equality, until its figure becomes similar to its natural one.
If, however, the fracture is in its length or already declines towards its insides: then make the sick person lie on his/her stomach, until his/her fracture is prepared for restoration. When, therefore, you have made that equal, put over it a plaster: then put over it an wooden or skin splint: and tightly tighten the straitening over which you do not fear the displacement of the fracture, nor the removal of the splint.
And when those equalities have come together with it so that it fills it, until it receives that stricture according to the equality: and order the sick person to sleep on his/her back or on his/her healthy side.
If, however, there occurs to him a hot swelling: then cease from extending it, and from its restoration, until the hot swelling subsides: and put over him what sits, according to what has preceded, then return to its restoration: and tightly bind him as is necessary.
If, however, it has happened that the bone is stuck or broken, extract it.
The assistant for the restoration of a fracture
The aid is that which is between the bed and the head of the spoon.
If it is then broken, its restoration is according to two ways.
The one is that you take a flat piece of wood of medium thickness, according to this form, which follows.
And bind together with two straps the two extremities.
Then hang it from a raised place: and let the sick person sit on a seat. Then let him throw his broken arm over the wood, until it reaches to its touch-point, in which middle sits an annexed piece of wood.
Then hang from above the person some heavy thing, so that he extends his arm towards the lower one. Then let the physician break the bones in his hands at once, until the fracture has healed, as it is necessary.
And another mode is that he should lie on his back upon his breast, and hang his hand from his neck with a bandage. Then order two servants, that one of them should hold this which is above the fracture with his hands: and that the other should hold below him, and should stretch both of them on either side.
And if you will that the extension be stronger, then bind beneath the fracture with a bandage, and above it with another bandage: and should stretch both of them on either side.
If then the fracture is near the end of the arm, then it is necessary that there be placed one bandage under the joint, and another under the fracture toward the hip.
And likewise if the fracture is near the hip: then it is necessary that there be placed a bandage on that place, and on the hip itself.
Then break the fracture with ease without labor, until it is made equal when it has healed: and then apply the bandage well: then bind it if there does not occur a swelling warm.
If then a swelling warm occurs: then let go of the binding until the seventh day. And place on him wool which is soaked in vinegar and oil of roses, until it has stopped the swelling: then bind it: and the mode of binding it is that you should place a plaster upon the fracture.
Then place an innovation from new cloth upon the plaster. Then let the assistant take the arm and put it on the shoulder: and he shall put his hand open upon the shoulder.
And place a cloth, and bind above the assistant's arm so that the arm stand in the place of the stars: if he does not forbid you to do anything, and does not change about you anything out of a broken bone.
That if you should find that there changes about you anything out of a broken bone: then use stars: and it is that you should place upon the fracture a star which is wider and stronger than the other stars. Place the splint between all the fingers with a width that corresponds to the length of the fingers, and make it so that there are three fingers' lengths from one side to the other end of the fracture plus three more finger-lengths.
Then tie tightly with a string over the splints as I described at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is so that your tension on the splints should be stricter than the place of fracture. And to the extent that the fracture lengthens, the tension should be lessened.
If then you see that the splints are long and the tension is strong, as we have said, in the hour when you restore the limb to life, then do so: but if you wait for the swelling to go down, then remove the splints and the bandages until the seventh day, as we have said.
Then examine the ligaments in all three days so that there will not be a prickly feeling, or swelling, or prevention of food from reaching the limb, due to the tension on the swelling. So make it right again as we have said above.
But if you are in doubt, so that there is no risk of anything from it: then do not remove the ligaments until after three days or longer.
And lie on his back with his hands on his belly and put under his pillow a stuffed cushion made of wool.
Consider this at all times, whether night or day, so that the broken limb does not move around and the ligaments do not become loose. So make it right again with your own power.
And set before him food according to the order that we have described, so that there is light food at first, until the jaw begins to close: then it should become heavier.
For the habit of helping and of the limbs is that it should be strict for forty days; then it should be loosened, and given a bath, and treated with ointment that makes it right.
If the fracture has been broken, ground down: then do not remove the ligaments and splints until after fifty days and up to two months.
On the restoration of fractures of the brachial bone.
The arm is made up of two bones called the humerus and ulna.
One of these is small, and it is that which follows the thumb. The other is large, and it is that which is placed below the little finger on the lower part.
Perhaps then, only one of the bones breaks, or both break at the same time.
When therefore one of the bones breaks above, then is its restoration easy and its healing easier.
And when one of the bones breaks below, it is a bad fracture, and its healing is difficult.
And it is worse when both bones break at the same time.
If therefore the broken bone is the little humerus above, then it is fitting for the doctor to restore it with ease, that he extend the small one properly, until it is even with it.
But if the broken bone is the big one: then let it be, that he restore it with a stronger bandage, tightly bound.
And let him set the hand in its place, and its extension above the little finger. And let the thumb of the hand be set at a higher level than all the fingers; and let the articular inferior be set for all the fingers, or for some of them; and let it rest sitting on its haunches, and let the little finger face it, or directly in front of it, in height, so that it does not suffer from any trouble.
Then let him extend the arm from its lower part, or with his hand, or with a bandage. And another one of them should extend it from above.
Then let the doctor adjust the bone until he has set it in a better position than he can achieve.
If there are any fractures that are out of place, then strive to restore all the bones to their places with your skill.
But if it seems to you that there is a fracture of the bone and it stings the skin, and there is no hope of restoring it: then remove it according to the manner which we have spoken of in those which precede.
If, however, there is a fracture with the radius, I have already done so to that singular chapter, therefore take care of it from that side.
If, however, in the beginning of your restoration there is a warm swelling, then take a thin cloth made of linen, blue in color, and place it between the thickness and thinness: and tightly bind the cloth to the stricture with care, until the swelling sits down: then stir up the liniments, and put on an emulsion prepared from fine flour ground with albumin. Then put on the splints, and let the splint that is placed on the fracture be a little wider and stronger.
And know that the number of splints for the arm is six in various dispositions: whether the fracture is in one shaft or in two shafts at once.
Then place your splint on the location of the fracture, stronger and more robust, and somewhat more with the splint towards the upper fracture, or towards the lower part: or place a softer splint on the splint, according to what preceded the memory of it at the beginning of the chapter.
And let there be cloths wrapping around the fracture, soft cloths, moist: and let them not be hard, rough. And let there be a thread that is tied with linen itself, between thinness and thickness, as we have said.
And consider the member and the ligaments after some days. If anything that requires correction happens, such as a rash that occurs in the member: then one should soak the member with hot water, until that itch subsides, and remove the member not constricted, until it subsides, and then repeat the splint.
If the stricture has already been softened, and the bone has already receded, and similar things: then repair it completely with your skill, and consider again.
For if nourishment is prevented from reaching the member, because of too much stricture: then one should make it a little softer, and remove it for a few days, until it heals up, and then bind it tightly.
But if some of those things we said do not happen to the sick person in question, then it is not necessary that he be cured unless after twenty days or so.
Then his hand that was injured should be suspended from his neck. And his neck should be made level and guarded with strength against movements. And let him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in twenty days, or in thirty-two; and perhaps it will be restored in thirty days. All of this depends on the condition of the skin and the strength of the body.
Of the restoration of broken hands.
You should know that it is rare for a fracture to occur in the knuckles and joints of the fingers. And it does not happen to him unless there is repeated rubbing.
When, therefore, the fracture has occurred or the bruising, then the sick person should sit on a level seat; and before him should be placed a second seat at equal distance. Then place his hand on that, extended.
Then the surgeon should make the bones that are broken join together with good union.
Then he should put on a poultice and a bandage, if there does not occur a hot swelling. Then place the splint from above, according to the quantity of space on the skin; and you have already bound it with linen thread.
If the fracture is below the knee, then make a sort of ball out of linen cloth; and direct the sick person to put it on with his injured leg: then tie it tightly with long linen thread.
And let him sit on a splint made of linseed, so that it is soft, in order to apply the linseed to the body with the injury: and tie it tightly, according as it is needed.
If the fracture is on the outside, then you should place a splint from above and another one from below the injury; and let the hand be held open and straight. Then put on the splint, as the hand turns, and extend between the fingers with the ligament.
If a bone of any finger is fractured, then if it is the thumb, it should be made equal according to what is necessary. Then tie it with the sole of the foot: and if you wish, put a straight stick under it so that it may not move, in order that the fracture may heal without moving.
If the fracture is in any of the remaining fingers, such as the middle, index, or ring finger, then it should be made equal and tied to the healthy finger that follows it: or all of them should be tied together according to their length, and this is better. Or put a stick on top of it, as we have said for the thumb.
And consider this in your restoration, and after that arrangement of the splints, warm them with hot water: and oppose to it whatever is necessary, when anything happens from it, according to what he tells us.
On the Restoration of a Fracture of the Hip
The hip bone often breaks and is felt: because it turns toward the inner and back parts.
And its restoration is such that one ligature is tied above the fracture, and another ligature is tied below the fracture. And the sick person extends his hand on his face.
Then he should extend all the ligaments for their sides according to equality: and this is done when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
If the fracture is near the root of the hip bone, then one ligature should be on the side of the pelvis so that it hangs down to the top: and another ligature should be below the fracture.
And in the same way, if the fracture is near the knee joint, then one ligature should be near the knee joint so that it hangs down to the bottom: and another ligature should be below the fracture.
Then the doctor should make the two hands equal to each other until he has reduced them according to their natural form: and the bones should be joined by a good joint.
Then it is necessary that you put on plaster and tighten it, if a member does not happen to have an aposteme. That if it should happen to have an aposteme: then let him dismiss himself for a few days, until the heat has seized it, and then return to your cure.
But tighten it so that it is like this. It is necessary that you wrap him up tightly on the fracture, that is to say, tie him: and leave twice as much of it, or three times: and let remain from it what is superfluous. Then wrap the leg, until the foot has grown back at the root.
And introduce a long thread between the pelvis and the leg near the knee towards the bottom, and make the ends of the thread come from the upper part of the two members. Then tighten the leg and the pelvis so that what is superfluous comes out of the loop.
Then put on top of the pelvis in the place of the fracture the stars, and put from them one star on the bone of the leg.
Then fill with dry leaves between the leg and the pelvis with soft leaves so that the tension is even.
Then begin with the strong tension from the middle on three twists, or four. And the more you lengthen it with a rope from the place of the fracture, your tension will be smaller and softer, and gentler.
Then turn to both ends of the thread that you introduced between the pelvis and the leg. Tie it with the three stars that are above. Then turn the two ends of the thread towards the bottom, until you reach the toe of the foot. And tie both ends of the thread as well as the ends of the stars from the other side: so that the ligament does not move from its place.
Then dismiss the tension on it while it remains like that so that there does not happen to a member corrosion, or an apostema, or an inflation, and similar things to it. That if anything should happen from it. Therefore, with respect to his solution, and adjust that which happened from there completely, as we have said many times.
But if a fragment of bone pricks the bone: then it is necessary, like that, if you can, to smooth out. And if not, find on top of it, and move it: and take care with that which preceded it, until it heals.
And when this fracture is contracted in the hips, besides adding stars to it, as we have said in the leg and arm.
However, in restoring it so that the broken one does not cause a limp. And if restored alone, besides being applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that he who has it limps always.
And you should know that the hip is contracted in fifty days, or added a little, or shortened a little: all this is according to the diversity of complexions, and the remains of dispositions.
Regarding the restoration of the fracture of the knuckle of the knee joint.
You should know that the knuckle of the knee is rarely fractured, but it often occurs through wear and tear.
But if it has occurred to him a fracture, then there is no doubt that it is either a crack or a hole in its parts. And it is like the wound and without the wound. And he stands above all that with respect to sense.
And the restoration of it is so that it equalizes what has been broken from its parts with the fingers, until it coheres, and joins together according to what is possible from adjustment and convenience, and manufacture.
Then put a plaster of rice flour, or flour that has been crushed and mixed with albumen: and put over it a round star, if you can bear it: and tightly tighten the upper part to it with respect to that.
Then consider all the dispositions that we have described in the remaining fractures: such as blisters, heat, and their like: so that you oppose any accident to it when it coheres with it, until it heals.
Of restoring broken bones of the leg.
Know that there are two bones of the leg, one is thick and called the leg bone; and the other is fine and called the fibula.
And it happens to both species of fracture that occurs in the two bones of the arm: and for this one is made the restoration thereof as is the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation is one.
That if both bones break at the same time, the leg becomes bent in all parts.
And if only the fine bone breaks, then the leg bends forward.
And if only the thick bone is broken, it twists downward: and that is of those which do not hide from you.
Then administer the extension, and the equalization, and the binding of the joints by means of bandages equally.
However, if the fracture of the leg is a bad fracture, it has many complications: so that there be less extension, and milder alleviation to thee.
And in the leg itself is some operation on the arm; and it is, as when you make the joints equal, and do all your work, then take two strips of pine wood, which are employed in the making of splints which are laid under tables: and they are made from the palm leaves: and choose out of them those that have a little thickness, and there be none of the small ones: and make the length thereof according to the length of the leg from the knee down below.
Then wrap up on a single cloth of two folds, making an overlap on each side according to its length. And place one end of the leg from one side, and the other end from the other side: and let them be from the knee down to the foot.
Then bind the two strips on three sides from the two ends and the middle. Since when tightness is forbidden, the leg leans to the right and to the left, and remains in good position.
And also let a wooden splint be made according to the length of the leg, and let it be placed therein so that it may preserve itself from motion.
Indeed, it is very important that you make that when the fracture is a proper fracture.
Then consider the leg every day, and with great care try to prevent it from becoming infected, or inflated, or otherwise. If then any of these things happen, then oppose it with him as much as is necessary, until he recovers his health, if God wills.
Regarding the fracture of the bones of the foot and toes:
The heel bone does not have a deep fracture.
However, when the fracture of the bones of the foot does occur, and when the toes also have a small fracture, it only occurs in many cases of abrasion.
If a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot and you see those bones slip over one another from side to side, then place the injured foot on the ground as if walking.
Then stand still, and place your foot on that which will elevate the bones: then press or trample it, and make it equal by applying pressure until they are all back in their places.
Then place a plaster on top of it, and put a board underneath: and place under the foot a thin panel with two flat ends.
Then tighten it with a tight bandage when you have wrapped it and left it alone.
When then after three or four days, then loosen the bandages. For you will find that the bones are even, or if any of them are fractured or displaced. The operation then is as follows: as you see it.
If any of the toes are fractured, then restore them, and make them equal according to what you have told me about the restoration of toe bones. Then place your finger with a wooden splint according to the length of your finger, and make it about as wide: then place under the foot the same panel that you have told me about, and tighten it tightly when you walk.
If it is broken from the bones, then two, or three, or more, then put a star on top of all the fingers of its size, rolled up in a cloth: and tighten the table in the lower foot; and stand over one head of the table outside the vent of the foot, so that he holds by good retention.
And it is fitting that you do not forget, but you consider all that I have said to you in the remaining fractures from the accidents which we have spoken of: and oppose all accident with him that it is necessary.
On the fracture of the woman's femur, and of the spine, and of the man's pelvis.
When the femur is broken in a woman, then make her sit square. Then lean her back slightly, and hold her by the rear.
Then fill the woman' with the hand of the obstorger, until she is filled: and let her be in the female part like a sphere.
Then shake the woman, and raise her back slowly. For that hand moves, until it is before the door of the woman like a sphere, and the broken jaw returns.
Then put a little ball on her back. When, therefore, she wants to urinate, the hand moves with ease, and then urinates: and reduces it according to the way that you put it in at first: and then turns back to her little ball.
Let it do this for seven days, or about, for the jaw is restored: for it is not recovered by that time, let it be mended with a needle.
And if you want to, take an awl, and tighten it on the hole of a twig, and insert the whole awl into the woman' Then blow into the twig with force, until it bends the awl inside the woman: for the fracture returns.
Then fill it with the hand of the obstorger, and let it stand for a few days, according to what we have said, until it is healed.
And when the os Pectini [i.e., the pelvis] of a man or woman is broken, then administer to it restoration and that which we have said concerning the os Anchae [i.e., the hip bone].
And let not the rectum be hidden in those who are broken close to it, for these are few, especially if there is some study or use.
And understand my book well, for the fracture itself signifies to you many things concerning the straightening of its own restoration and the narrowing of its own [bone's] self: therefore understand.
But when the os Pectinis [i.e., the pelvis] of a man is broken, take the throat of an goose; and insert the penis into it. Then put a bandage over it, and wrap it up, and leave it for three days or so, and let it heal, if God wills.
As for the restoration of broken bones, when they are with a wound.
It belongs to him who has suffered a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the os coxae or supporting bones, or similar to it, as you see fit, and stop bleeding immediately: if you have evidence of bleeding, as we have said above.
If the wound spurts blood, then you should cut it off, as you would grind up powder on top of it: if there is not present to you anything else.
Then begin to restore the fracture on that very day: and do not put off doing so, unless there is a swelling.
But if a swelling becomes hot, then dismiss the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the swelling subsides. And do not approach it on the third or fourth day at all, for you would bring upon it bad accidents.
But if the broken bone is prominent above the skin detected: then you should seek to reduce it and make it level with your own hands with ease and a small extension.
If, however, the extension is not prepared and his own skin is equal to your hands: then reduce him with this instrument. And this instrument is made of iron, whose length is the quantity of seven fingers, or eight; and its width is according to the amount of the wound. And for this it is necessary for the doctor to take three, or four according to the amount that he needs for healing any kind of fracture.
And it should be round: and it should have a small thickness so that it does not double up on itself when pressed against the body during surgery: and its sharp ends should have a margin on their edges. And let it be above his thickness from one half of it to the bottom.
And this is its form.
It is necessary in this operation, that the sharp end of it be placed on the edge of the prominent bone: and push it with a single force until the bone is reduced and reaches a certain equilibrium.
So consider to equalize the ends of the fracture in opposite directions.
If its ends are thin and do not accept the instrument well, then you should strike against one of its ends until the instrument has strength.
But if you cannot reduce them with the above mentioned instrument at all, then strike against it with a chisel that we have mentioned: or saw it with one of any kind of saw that is possible for you to get hold of.
Then smooth out what remains in the bone from roughness and small bark.
When therefore the bone is reduced and finds a painful, annoying pain after its reduction, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its own place.
So do this. For you will have a great impediment of infirmity, when your restoration is complete that bone which you have healed.
Then dip the cloth in black vinegar. If it is summer. And do not place the wound on a bone, nor put anything to sit with the oil: so that it does not cause rot and decay in itself.
Then apply the poultice at the time of your meal from the healing of the bone. And remove the wound bandage: so that you will not fall with the forceps into the second hole of the wound according to the quantity of the wound.
And take all caution, do not tie the wound when it is broken. For many times have done this ignorant doctors: and they caused to happen on their sick or death, or corruption, or decay, that is, harm. And your bandage be soft, gentle, varied of the bandages of broken bones.
That if the wound is bad, or is a large wound, and you are waiting for some bad accident that we have described, and hanging pain in the place: then it is not appropriate that you put the poultice on. And make them incisions of dry cloth in the place of the poultice, and tie it up with them.
When, however, it is after one day, or two days, and you see the wound begin to come into pus, that it generates in it: then take off from above the wound the cloth that you put on with wine. Then apply vinegar, and oils with which we usually treat wounds: such as the four-part oil, and similar to it.
And it will be good for you, so that you loosen the ligature. And consider the wound every day morning and evening, until it has hardened, and healed.
And it is necessary that the limb be prepared so, that pus that comes out of it goes down with ease.
That if the days that are passing over wounds, and it does not harden, nor does the pus come out of it: then you know that there are small bones in it. Why it is necessary to inquire about the fracture with the trial. How many of those false joints are separated, remove them, and pull out themselves. And which of those false joints are not separated, and prick the limb, and cause pain to it, seek to injure it, and remove it in any way possible for you that thing.
That if it happens to a wound to burst, or to open, that is, to suppurate, or some other species of corruption and putrefaction: then it is necessary that you oppose each of them with what is appropriate to him from the cure, whose preceded description in his own chapter.
And from that in which it is necessary that my speech should stand, and to which you make present mind when a bone is broken, and protrudes over the limb, such as the hip bone, and auxiliary, and similar to those of the large limbs, it is, that you do not suspect attraction of it, for many times from that happens death, indeed, leave it until it putrefies.
Perhaps, however, it falls by itself after twenty days, or thirty.
Then, therefore, cure the fracture, if it is with you: and otherwise, leave it.
On the Cure of Fractures in the Neck.
This Nerve Treatment has often happened in the neck for the cure of a fracture. Especially, that which is near to joints: and it is nourished from that figure of the limb. And perhaps it prevents the limb from its natural function.
Consider, therefore, if that nerve is young: administer to it medicines which have a constricting action, such as aloe, and olive oil, and myrrh, and oak bark, and acacia, and similar ones.
So, taking some of these certain things, or all of them: and bind them with a bitter wine, or with an egg white, or with vinegar: and place them on the nerve in a poultice, and tightly bind them with a good constriction.
And free him from prison, and do not separate him from his wife on many days. Then free her, and take another, until the nausea is gone.
Or put a lead weight on her chest uneasily. Lead is a property that removes whatever is feared from the body.
But if the nausea is already well-established and firm, and urgently needs to be removed: then find on its upper part, and strike with a sharp instrument: or cut it off with something like a razor, until it stops: and take care of her, until she recovers.
The cure, when it is restored, and there remains a member after that in a subtle way, not in accordance with its nature.
When the bone fracture is restored, and there remains a member after that in a subtle and weak way: then it is not done except for many reasons. Of which one is that many solutions of the ligament and its ligation are not done according to what should be: or because of the excess of the tightness of the ligaments, until it is prevented from running into the member: or because of the multitude of emollients in the non-time of their hour: or because of the scarcity of blood in the body, and its weakness.
And the cure for it is to feed the sick and make the body relaxed, until the blood increases in it. And apply the bath. And introduce joy and happiness to him.
Then put a piece on the member: to draw the piece towards it so that it receives a lot of food. And apply his emollients to him with warm water, until he runs the food, and returns to his natural shape.
The cure for broken bones when they are restored when they are twisted.
When the cure for a fracture that has been restored after its healing, and the prominence of the broken bone or nausea: and feed it in the form of the member, however, the member is not prevented from its natural function: then you should not listen to what he imagines, that the member should be broken again.
There were also many stupid doctors and healers who did this on our land.
And indeed this operation is very terrible, leading to death or a great fear, as if it were mortal.
But if the lameness and numbness are recent: then it should be dressed with warm water in which have been boiled softening herbs, such as the leaves of althaea, and its root, and mallow, and similar things. And let there be made to him a plaster with a softening plaster, like that of dandelion roots ground up in water.
Or let the root of althaea be cooked in mucus and stirred with chicken fat or oil of sesame: and let it be applied with it.
Or let fig leaves be taken, and dried with colubrain clay, and similar things that are called by the name of medicines which diminish congestion.
And when the numbness has resolved with persistent friction, old, and soft, which is made with wet hands. And let movement of the member be administered to all parts at all times.
But if the crookedness has already come before, and it is strong, and has gone into a stone, and there is a need to treat it with an iron: then let it be cut off above the bone, and the continuity of the bone be made to heal, and what is superfluous from the numbness or the bone with fine incisions: and let ease be given to it with care and diligence.
On the subject of dislocation
Dislocation is the departure of someone who is joined from their place. Why it is prevented from its own movement, and is supported in its figure. And does cause to happen on the painful pains, and severe injuries.
But when it happens that a dislocation has happened to someone, then let him hurry to have it restored: and do not delay it at all.
If it should delay, the place should be opened and the dislocation reduced with force.
Therefore, so that it may not make a noise, nor should it be extended at the time of opening it. Since it often causes a spasm, and hurts with its pain.
True, when that happens, then you should, in case of the wound, care to drain off the blood. Then let it be discharged, until it has rested the opening.
Then the member should be massaged with warm water and oil. Then reduce it with ease.
And care for all members, so that the member may recover to its own place.
I have already arranged the chapters of dislocation, also according to that which preceded in fracture, from the upper part of the body to the lower part of it.
§ Of the care of dislocation of the Mandible inferior.
The two Mandibles are slightly dislocated unless it is rare.
And the dislocation of the jaw is made according to one of two ways. Or else they move away from their places with a small removal, and become slightly softer. Or they are dislocated with a whole, complete dislocation, until they become softer towards the breast, so that a salve drains out, and it cannot hold fast, nor can it shut its mouth, and its tongue is drawn out with a word.
When, however, the dislocation of it is small, then it returns to itself in many positions with a little removal.
If, however, the dislocation is complete and whole: then it should be reduced quickly, and there should not be any delay: and it is, so that it holds fast by means of the cap, at the end of the jaw of dislocation, from the inside, if the dislocation is on one side. Or insert two fingers together, if the dislocation is from both sides. And the remaining fingers of his hand are outside, with which he is even.
And say to the sick person that he should clean his jaws and make them healthy so that he can chew on all sides. And the doctor should even out the jaw, and push it back into place until it returns to its own place.
If it is difficult to reduce it, especially if both jaws are affected: then administer a vapor with warm water and oil until the reduction becomes easy: and do not delay the reduction of the jaws at all, as we have said.
When they are reduced and evened out, and the mouth is closed, and do not relax: then place over them a few cloth pads, with a piece of wax that has been made from wax: and oil it with rose oil.
Then bind it easily with soft ligaments.
And let the patient lie on his back: and let his head stand between two cloth pads so that he does not move to one side or the other: and do not force him to chew anything: but let him eat what he wants, and administer it to him easily. Let him drink a little warm water, and let him swallow it easily: then let him go to the toilet, and wash his mouth with water.
He should not be troubled during the operation of his mouth while he eats and drinks, and when he swallows, until his jaw has set and healed.
If it is difficult to reduce the two jaws when they come out of place in an hour, and do not return to their own place: then many times fever and constant bloating will occur: and perhaps the stomach will be loose, and perhaps pure cholera will occur.
When you see this then you should know that it is a sign of death, and many times that person will die within ten days.
The reduction of dislocation of the fork (furca) and the extreme of the humerus.
The furcula does not dislocate from the side due to the intrinsic continuity with the chest. And it dislocates sometimes towards the outside: and that is what is sensed.
And its restoration is, so that it lies on its back on the ground, and extends its arms. Then the cover takes the place with your palm through strong cover, for she will return.
Then put on her a plaster, and wool, and squeeze it.
The extremities of the one who follows the bed, and continue with it, do not dislocate, except rarely. That if it dislocates on a certain day: then it should be reduced and made even as we have said, and that you should be prepared.
Then put on her a plaster, and wool, and tighten it up. And instruct the sick person to remain in a peaceful and calm state until she heals.
And with this same cure the extremity of the humerus is reduced when it separates from its place as well.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the humerus.
You should know that the humerus does not dislocate, unless through three modes.
One is that it dislocates towards the side tickling towards the lower part. Second is that it dislocates towards the side of the chest. And perhaps it dislocates towards the upper part of the humerus: and that happens rarely.
And does not dislocate towards the back due to the spatula. And it does not dislocate towards the front due to the nerves.
It certainly often dislocates and exits towards the lower part tickling: especially in those who have little flesh there. Since it exits quickly in them, and enters quickly as well.
But in those who have much flesh, the opposite is true: that is to say, since it exits with difficulty, and enters with difficulty as well.
And perhaps it happened to some men that they were struck, or fell down; and the humerus was dislocated warm, and it is thought because of this, since he has already been dislocated.
It is necessary therefore that you experience that, until you are certain about it, and then proceed to its treatment.
And the dislocation is known when it is directed towards the lower side in relation to the shoulder blade: and distinguish between a dislocated shoulder and a healthy shoulder. For you will find a great difference between them, and an injury in the head of the humerus, and under the little finger at the touch of the head of the humerus as if it were itself: and it cannot be reduced by the sick hand to its socket, nor can it move in all its movements.
And likewise, if it is dislocated towards the chest, or upwards: then there is a clear touch, and it does not hide.
And of this kind of dislocation the reduction is easy when he is young, or a sick boy.
And its reduction is, as he raises his own hand towards the top. Then put your fingers under its little finger, and raise the joint with force towards the top to its place: and the minister will raise his hand, and extend it upwards. Then let him put it down, for himself he will soon recover.
If he does not recover with the above-mentioned thing, and there are many days from when the dislocation happened: then it is necessary that the sick man bath in warm water, and an emollient application is administered which softens and eases, such as if cooked leaves of the plant known as sweet marjoram, and foenugraecum, and melilotum in water, and is applied.
Then the sick man will lie on his back: and let a sphere and wool be placed under its little finger, which is equal between softening and tightening.
Then the doctor will place his heel on the sphere, and raise the head of the humerus with force, and draw the sick man's hand towards him by the lower side.
And if you want to bring him back, do it this way: and he will come to himself as he is longer ill, and stand at the side, and let his shoulder under a towel of the nurse; and lift up the towel on him to the top, until he is sick lying in air. And another nurse should take the hand of the patient at the bottom of his leg. But if the sick person is light: then he should be suspended with something else, so that he does not move: for he will return immediately with dislocation.
And he is also reduced by another way: and it is that he is fixed on the ground a long wood, whose head is round figure: like a glove of the mortar: which is neither thick nor thin. Then let him be placed under the patient after he is laid on the head of the wood with soft cloth: and let the sick person stand by the length of the wood.
Then let his hand be extended at the bottom on one side, and let his body be extended from the other side with strength: for the junction returns to its place with speed.
That if his reduction is difficult by all that we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a piece of wood whose length is the quantity of two arms, and its width is the quantity of four fingers, and its thickness is the quantity of two fingers; and let the head be round, so that it eases his entrance into the deep title, in this form.
Then let them bind on the round head with soft cloth so as not to hurt the wood for the sick person.
Then let it be placed under the title of the nurse, so that his hand or arm extends on the wood to the bottom: and let the wood be tied over a support and the arm and the end of the hand.
Then let the arm be placed on a step by the width, and let his hand be extended at the bottom, and let the rest of the body be suspended from one side. The wound should be closed immediately.
For once the entrance is complete in whatever way possible, then you should place under it a sphere of the same quantity made of wool. Then place the prepared plaster made of powdery resin with olibanum and albumen all over the shoulder as it turns upside down.
Then tie the tourniquet under it as it is lowered: and let the ligaments be attached over the plaster upside down: and let his hands be joined to his neck, and let them remain so for seven days without moving them.
And it should be placed an impoverished diet for the member to heal: because it heals faster.
Then after seven or five days let him exercise with movement. If then it remains firm and does not become soft, then it is healed indeed.
If then the wound comes out a lot due to moisture that occurs with it or due to some other cause: then you should administer cauterization to it with three holes, as has been mentioned in the chapter on cauterization.
If all this is done, and the ligament is not firm after seven days, and the plaster and tourniquet are not secure on it, and it does not stand up by itself, and cannot raise its arm above its head: then you should know that the nerves serving the shoulder are either cut, or stretched, or softened: and you should know that the wound never heals in its place.
But the dislocation that occurs toward the chest and the nipple, or toward the back, occurs with a push and an extension with the arms: until it stops, and cauterization is administered to it with remaining ligaments and care, until it heals.
If something like this happens after healing, and a lag in movement occurs in the member, then let the invalid take frequent baths until that weight is softened, and return to its natural state first.
On the treatment of dislocations of the cubitus.
You should know that the dislocated cubitus joint moves with difficulty and returns to its position with difficulty as well; it dislocates particularly in the forward and backward directions.
And its dislocation is not hidden from you; for it falls by sight, and by touch, and dislocates in whatever form. And when you join a dislocated cubitus with a healthy one, that will be apparent to you. For the joint is stiffened, and it cannot bend the arm, nor can it touch its shoulder.
And you should know that you should immediately reduce a dislocation before it becomes cold.
For if the dislocation has become cold, its reduction is difficult; and it may not recover at all, especially when it is towards the back. It is worse in every form of dislocation, and more painful; and often dies with it.
And its restoration is such that it extends its hand with two hands; and the arm is spread out, and the thumb of each hand pushes against the cubitus joint from below, or from the base of the palm, until it returns to its place.
Or the dislocation is towards the front; then it returns in such a way that it doubles its hand with its own hand, until it hits against the base of its palm the dislocated cubitus joint.
If the dislocation does not submit to reduction, then you should administer a severe and vigorous extension; and it is as if two ministers extend an arm: and they hold him back from moving during extension.
Then the arm turns in all directions after it has been wrapped with a long double cloth, or a broad ligament.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he should rub it with oil so that it moves with ease in the lubrication of the joint. Then, with a sharp push, pull the wound open until it is re-opened.
And after reducing [the wound], let it be placed on top of it a plaster, in which is sitting the stitch, and drying with alba [white substance]; and let it be tied with stricture going down. And let the arm be suspended from the neck by the nurse: and let it be left for a few days.
Then, let it be unbound. If then the wound is firmly held in place, then dissolve the ligaments from her, and let her go.
And if you see that the wound is not well tied up, then repeat the plaster, and the ligament, and let her go for a few days, until it is tied up. Then, unbind her.
If then there happens to her any weight after reducing the wound, and she is in motion: then administer humidification in a bath, and a subtle friction, and a compression, until it is healed up, or put on top of the wound an ointment, that is, natem arietis pinguem. Then let it be tied up, and let her go on top of it for a day and night. Then take away from her, and introduce into the bath. When then she sweats, then bind up the wound with a moderate friction. Then repeat on top of her one time, and twice, and third time with the entrance into the bath, until she becomes relaxed.
And if there is a wound, put on top of her manure that is wet, heated with butter, and tie over the wound.
Perform this several times. She is then healed, and returns to her own disposition.
The cure for the dislocation of Al-Mahasım.
The dislocation of Mahasım causes great pain, that is, the wound between the arm and the hand.
And reducing the dislocation of him is easy. Opposite to the joints are ligatured. However, it is necessary that the speed be in the reduction of dislocation at the time when it dislocates, before the apotome is measured: or happen in him an apothem hot.
And the reduction of dislocation is that you put the Mahassem hand of the weak on a table and extends it minister his hand: and puts the doctor his palm on the eminence of the joint, and pushes it, until it returns.
However, it is necessary that you consider if the palm has already gone to the belly of the hand: then put the injured back of his hand on a table during extension and reduction: and if dislocation is going to the back of the hand, then the position of the hand should be intrusively on the table, that is, the inner part of the hand should be placed on the table, so that the doctor's palm rests on it on the eminence of the joint.
If he returns immediately, then it is good: and if not, then bind it with an plaster while the apothem stands: and let go of him, and do not return to it.
For if he does not bear it, and you cannot reduce it after the days have passed, then the joint remains according to its tortuosity: and does not hurt the weak one anything, unless the hand is softened, and cannot grip anything: then you should know that nerves are cut off, or rubbed.
There is no skill in it, except to bind it with a plaster close to the risk of it. And perhaps does not bring anything.
So if Mahassem does not return, then put on him the plaster which we described. Then it is bound, and let go after five days: then it is unbound and let go, and exercises the hand.
But if his movement is prevented, and happens to him something of gravity: then make it soft with warm water, and sometimes with friction, until it softens.
On the treatment of dislocations of the fingers.
When one of the fingers is dislocated all the way, or one of them to the back of the palm, or it is inside: then extend that finger and push the dislocation with your thumb until it comes back.
Then support the end of the finger, and suspend it toward the side where it is dislocated, and let it be for two days.
Then suspend it, and extend it, until it gets straight again on its own day.
When it is night, bind it according to that story: and do not cease to make it well on the day: and exercise it with movement: and bind it at night.
Make it for a few days, until it gets well.
And do the same with it if it is dislocated toward the bottom of the hand: and bind it to the side, and do your work with it, until it heals.
And do the same with it when it is dislocated to the other parts.
On the treatment of dislocations of the spine of the dorsal side.
When this happens to anyone of the spine, or many of the vertebrae are removed from their places: then there is no cure for it, because death approaches quickly.
And a sign of that is, that he leaves the toilet with a will, and cannot hold himself: and often they become weak from him, or two limbs, or two arms, or one of them: or one of his spine is removed from its place.
For many times it is dislocated, since the removal of them to the four sides happens often times.
That which is dislocated to the back is called a hunchback.
But the cure for it is this, that you should consider then, if a hunchback happens to be from childhood: then there is no cure for it, and there is no healing from it at all.
In those cases that occur by accident, or by percussion, or similar things, the ancient authorities have already set forth in a lengthy discourse the ways of treating them. This does not return with profit.
I have indeed already abbreviated it from that, which little excuses its length by reason of its nearness to my purpose: and in my exposition of it as I did exhibit it, and fashioned the instrument after their manner, showing it, and exhibiting it itself.
I say, therefore, that in the case of a deformity occurring in the anterior part, there is neither art nor cure from it.
And likewise in that which is made on both sides.
And do not cure them unless that which happens in the back proper, with what I tell you: and is, so that it extends itself on the face of a sick person on an equal platform close to the wall: and spreads itself under it a damp cloth, that it may not harm his chest.
Then place a straight piece of wood firmly fixed in the earth at the end of the foot, about the head thereof: and another piece of wood about the feet on the other side of the foot: and let the servant hold the piece of wood, and set it not firm in the earth. Then let another servant hold the other.
Then let the nurse bend over his head, and with a soft bandage hold fast to the part below his chin, making it firm: and let her extend the end of the bandage towards the piece of wood which is by his head: and bind it there.
Then let another bandage be stretched above his shoulders, and above his knees, and at the small of his back. Then gather all the bandages together, and bind them to the other piece of wood which is by his feet.
Then let all the servants extend to the piece of wood the bandages, and let them not move two pieces of wood from their places in which they are fixed: however, let them not be firm, as we have said.
And the physician should set his hand upon the spine with strength, until he has taken it off; or upon a board. Then he should attach his feet to the board with strength, until he has taken them off.
But if he does not recover by this treatment, then take a board whose length is about three arms. And make a cut in the wall which we have mentioned, that is near to the sick man, a place in which to insert the end of the board. Then place the middle of the board upon the spine. And let the physician set his feet on the other end of the board. And fasten it securely, until the spine is straining, and return to its place.
Then if you wish, operate with a saw which is turned with your hand: and it is like this, that you should fix two pieces of wood on the ground at the head of the back which are the length of an arm: and at the head of the two pieces of wood.
And make the length which is between all the wood a palm: and there has already been made in every place an opening, in which the saw runs: and it is made fast all the wood to the ground very firmly, so that it does not move at all.
And introduce the round wood: and there is a saw which turns about in two openings of the two pieces of wood.
And at its end there is an opening, in which the wood is fixed, the length of which is a palm with that by which it turns: and there is also similar opening in the other two pieces of wood.
Then tighten the ligaments which you have tightened in the spine of the saw which is at its head: and the ligaments which you have tightened in his legs in the saw which is at his feet.
Then stand by every saw which makes it turn with his hand by means of a lever, with which it turns: and the physician should adjust the spine, according to what we have said.
This is the form of a tourniquet, which follows.
Then, after the spondylius has returned and the place has been made even, then you should put on an dried plaster with albumen. Then the stump. Then place above the plaster a plate of wood, whose width is three fingers wide, or about that. And its length so much as it takes up space for the gibbosity, and on the healthy side of the spondylius.
Then tie with a bandage which we have said. And use the sick one with delicate nutrition until it heals.
That if anything remains of a prominence in the place at the end of the healing: then it is necessary that the medicines which soften and loosen be given, with the giving of the plate which we described at a long time. And now is given in that plate of lead.
And when it happens that a prominence occurs at the rear of the spondylius of the back: and it is believed by means of that dislocation, and it is the opening which has already been made. Why it should not be assumed that it will do so with this medicine: perhaps however that will happen death.
On the treatment of dislocated anchae.
You should know that the dislocation of an anchae, and of a shoulder, does not occur unless there is only a little dislocation: and does not occur to them what occurs to the other joints from slight distance and pressure.
And the joint of an anchae dislocates according to four parts. Because it dislocates towards the front, and towards the back.
And most often it dislocates towards the inside: and a little towards the front, and towards the back.
And the treatment of its dislocation to the inside is: because when you join the thigh of a healthy nurse with an unhealthy one, it is longer: and is the knee of the sick more prominent than that of a healthy one, so that the sick man cannot double his foot behind him: and there is a place which follows the buttocks, so that the head of the hip has already reached that place.
And his sign where dislocation has occurred is external, which are his opposite conditions to these conditions.
And the sign of him where dislocation has occurred to the front, because it widens the healthy leg according to the complement: however, it does not duplicate the same without pain that is in the knee: and if he tries to walk, he cannot overcome it to the front: and he holds back his urine, and he wipes himself with his heel, and during walking he steps on his heel.
And the sign of him where dislocation has occurred to the back, that he does not widen his leg, and cannot duplicate the same until he doubles his knee: and it is shorter the other leg; and the knee is softened, and the head of the femur is at the place of it.
The reduction of this dislocation of the eyes is that you consider then, if the dislocation has been fresh, which has now healed with the one who has it. Then if you administer the reduction of it, and remains according to its disposition: then is not in it at all cure. Therefore it should not be assumed that he is perfect.
But in that one whose dislocation is recent, and is out of the four species of dislocation: then approach to this, so that you move the joint, and extend it inwardly and outwardly, and move it with the right and left hand: for perhaps it will recover, and does not need any other cure.
But if this way does not recover, then you should prepare a strong instrument, and extend the leg of him from the lower part: or with his hands, or with a ligature that is tied over the leg above the knee: and another instrument extends his hand from above: so that he inserts his hands under the skin. Then bind with a soft ligament over the root of the pelvis, and hold the end of the other ligament.
And let his extension be from the front part of the groin to the thigh, or from the back to the spine.
And let their whole extension be one way, until he who is ill with his body is lifted up from the earth and remains suspended.
For this is the type of extension, which is a common species of the four species.
If therefore the dislocation returns with him which I have spoken of, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary that every species of what I say about the cure of itself.
In reduction however, when his own dislocation is towards the inside, it is necessary that the sick man should lie down on his healthy side. Then let him put a bandage over the root of the hip, in that which is between the head of the hip and the place which is under the groin. Then extend the ligature from the side of the groin to the higher part of the body, to the side of the fork.
Then another strong servant should take his arm, and he should reduce the large place of the ill hip, and extend it towards the outside with a swift extension. For it has already returned to its place.
And this species is easier than the other species of cure, so that this limb is reduced.
If however he excuses himself from you, and does not obey you at all with this species of cure: then it is necessary that two nurses should bind the feet together with a strong ligature, soft, over the two heels, and over the two knees: and let the length of each from its comparison be four fingers' quantity: and let the length of the sick man's leg be increased by two quantities of two fingers.
Then let the sick man be suspended over the head of the ligature, so that he is in the house: and let his length from the earth be a quantity of two arms' length.
Then command a strong man to strike the head of the hip: and let another be suspended with the sick man: and let another push the hip with strength, for the extension returns to its place with velocity.
In reduction therefore of his own, when there is a dislocation to the outside, it should be so that the sick person lies on his back, according as we said in having gibbosity. And let the ligaments be tied over the cross of his own body, the sick one, and over his chest.
Then two beams are to be placed, one at the feet of him, and another at the head of him. Then a beam is to be placed in the middle of the foot, well fixed: over which wet cloths are to be spread so as not to hurt the sick one; and let the beam be placed between his thighs, so that it does not draw towards the lower parts by the extension.
Then all the ministers are to extend on their side, and the doctor is to make the reduction with his own hand.
If therefore he obeys to the reduction, it will be good.
And if not, let him be placed on that board, and pressed as we said in the case of gibbosity, equally. However, it is necessary that the sick one should lie on his sound side.
And when the dislocation is to the front, then it should be so that the thigh of the sick one is quickly extended; and this is according to our above description on lying on the back; and the doctor places his right hand palm on the knee of the sick one. Then he is to be pulled by the hand with the other, and with that pulling place him extended towards the lower parts on the side of the leg.
And if the dislocation is to the rear: then it should not be so that the sick one is extended towards the lower parts, and is raised up on the ground; but rather let him be placed on a hard thing, as we said also in case of his lying on two broad things; and let him be on his face, and the ligaments extended: according to what we have just said.
And let there be applied pressure with the board also on the place to which the joint is dislocated, when the reduction is completed according as it should be.
And the sign of his recovery shall not be hidden from you: and it is so, that you spread out two legs of the sick: and when you see them equal, and the sick one straightens his leg, and stretches himself without excuse: then you know that now the limb has returned, according to what is due: then you join the two hips together, and put on a splint, and fasten it with ties, that is, with a belt: so that he does not move widely in any part: and let the sick one rest for three days, or four.
Then you shall loosen the ligaments, and the splint, and bring the leg together with the other: then if you see them equal in position, then know that the dislocation is now fixed: so let go of the sick one to walk.
And if you see any softening: then go back, and put on the splint, and tighten it according to your first direction: and let go of him also for three days.
Then you shall loosen it and let him walk a little on each side for a few days, until he is comforted well.
The Dislocation of the Knee.
THE KNEE IS DISLOCATED IN THREE WAYS. IS DISLOCATES TO THE OUTSIDE, TO THE INSIDE, AND TO THE BOTTOM, THAT IS TO SAY TO THE BACK.
AND IT DOES NOT DISLOCATE TO THE FRONT.
And the sign of his dislocation is, that you command the sick one to apply his leg to his hip. But if he does not attach himself to the hip: then know that the knee is dislocated.
AND THE RESTORATION OF ALL KINDS OF DISLOCATION IS THIS, THAT YOU LET THE SICK ONE SIT UPRIGHT, SO THAT HE EXTENDS HIS LEG IF HE CAN OVER IT, AND ADHERE TO YOUR BACK FACING FORWARD: and put his foot between your feet.
Then you shall attach the knee of him with your palms, and make them straight between your fingers over his knee. Then apply with your palm two sides of his genitals with strength. And another minister extends his foot, until he returns to his place.
And the sign of the return is that which adheres the thigh to the hip in gentleness, not laboriously.
Then apply plaster upon him, and let the thigh adhere to the hip. Then bind them together with bandages for three days, or four. Then dissolve them.
And the sick person should not walk, but he will be healed in a few days.
But if his return is not satisfactory to you, then apply an extension with strong ligatures, of which the account of the cure of ankylosis was given, until he returns.
The Cure of Dislocation of the Calcaneus.
The Calcaneus is sometimes moved with a small movement, and sometimes dislocated according to the complement. And the dislocation of it is made either towards the inside or towards the outside.
And the sign of the dislocation of it is that you see the Calcaneus swollen, proceeding to the part to which it is dislocated.
But the cure of the dislocation is easy; and it is that, when extended with ease with the hands, and made to return, until it returns.
In the cure of it when it is dislocated according to the complement, you should make the sick person sit upright; and hold him firmly from behind by a strong minister at the middle part of his back,
Then hold with your right hand with your palm his foot from the upper part of it, and with your left hand from the lower part of the foot near the heel.
Then draw the foot towards you with your right hand. Then with the two fingers of your left hand.
Then extend with the left, and push the chest of the foot towards the hip with the right without labor.
Make it twice as strong, as we have described.
Then push the chest of the foot to the ankle in a third degree, and you should tear the tendon.
But if he returns in a first degree or in a second according to this mode and you see the foot even, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation on himself because he will return again.
But if you are forbidden to reduce him with it that we have spoken of then: then let him lie on his back on the ground and fix a board firmly on the ground so that he falls between his thighs: but you have already wrapped up the wound with a cloth in order not to hurt the patient.
Then let the servant take the leg of the patient: then let the other serve extend the foot or with his hands or with a cord that binds above the ankle of the foot. Then let all the servants stand opposed to the extension of their patient and let one nurse stand between the two thighs holding it back so that the body does not attract towards the lower parts at the extension.
Then let the doctor adjust the dislocation with his hands and let the other servant hold the sound leg from below. For the dislocation returns with velocity.
But when the dislocation returns and you declare to him that the return of it is healthy then put a plaster and a support, and tighten it with strings firmly, and tie the foot with a cord to the leg.
And it is necessary so that you should not be afraid or worry about the nerves that are above the heel in the back because they do not have a binding cord over them and hurt them.
Then let him go for two days or three. But if the ligament becomes softer then tighten it on him: but let him go free after three days or four and forbid the patient from walking for forty days. But if he tries to walk before that space, there is no security except that the dislocation should be dissolved on him and the corruption should take place and not receive after that cure.
If it should happen that he has a hot apoplexy: then you should give him sedatives, as we have narrated in another place from the cure, and an emetic, until it is removed.
Regarding dislocation of the toes of the foot and treatment.
It is necessary that it should be adjusted which is out of place with a little extension without work: and this is not difficult, indeed, it is easy.
If however the dislocation is in some of the knuckles of the back of the foot: then you should make the invalid put his foot on an equal place of the ground, or on a board: and it stands as if it were walking.
Then you stand, and put your foot on that which protrudes from the joints. Then trample on it with your foot with force, until it returns, and does not appear to be in a raised position in place.
Then put under the instep of his foot a board which takes the entire foot, which has two heads. Then tighten him with a strap for three days. Then solve him, and let him rest from walking for many days, until it is tightened and secured by reduction.
Regarding the types of dislocation with a sprain or fracture.
When this happens to him, and he is inclined to cure himself and restore himself, often death succeeds: and therefore it is not necessary that you should be hasty in the cure of him, which is of this kind, unless he is prudent in the art of the long use, merciful, compassionate, slow, not daring, and not presumptuous: and that he uses medicine which sedates the hot apostemata only: and leaves the invalid to divine judgment. Unless you have hope or expect salvation from destruction with kindness of disease, and in which there seems to be some hope. Let us then immediately reduce him at the start of the thing, before the apoplexy of heat occurs.
But if the limb returns, as we have said, then administer the remedy that quiets the apoplexy: and take care of the bruise with it as it suits him from the dried ointment.
If the dislocation is with a fracture and they occur in separated bones of the jaw, then let us immediately remove them, and make a hole in that place as we have said for simple illnesses because it preceded in those places.
And let your care be according to your virtue, and keep yourself from the entrance into a state of fear: because my prophecy has preceded you.
For that is better for you with your Creator, and more lasting to your glory, and healthier to your body with them at that time.
