After I have completed to you, my son, this book, which is the last of the science of medicine with its supplement, and having finished in it from its explanations and declarations, it has seemed to me useful to complete it to you with this Treatise, which is a part of surgery, that is, of the art of operation with the hand.
Since operation with the hand is laid down in our region, and in our time it is entirely private: until perhaps the science of it has perished, and its trail has been lost: and there remain of it only a few small descriptions in ancient books, which hands have altered: and it happened to them that error and confusion occurred, until their intentions were closed and its meaning was extended. It seemed to me useful to set forth it with the arrangement of this Treatise in accordance with its explanation and declaration, and its abbreviation: and I wanted to add it with forms of tools, Cauteriums, and the other instruments of operation: for it is necessary to include its addition, and its proper definition.
Since there is no good craftsman of the hand in our time, it is: because the art of medicine is long, and its author must be exercised before it in the science of anatomy, which Galen related, until he knows the joints of the limbs, and their forms, and their connection, and separation, and has knowledge of bones, and nerves, and membranes, and their number, and their growth, and pulsations, and quiet, and places of their exit.
And for this reason Hippocrates said, The name that has a name is much, and the work that has a work is little, especially in the art of the hand.
But we have already spoken about it at the beginning of this book.
Since he who is not learning, that we have said about anatomy, does not clarify, but falls into error, by which men are formed, who form themselves from this science, and shout about it without knowledge, and without experiment.
That is, because I saw a doctor chop off an aposteme scrofulous sore on the neck of a woman, and he cut some of the arteries in the neck: why did the blood flow from the woman until she died between her hands.
And I saw another doctor who dared to extract a stone from a man's bladder, which had been causing him pain for a long time, and the stone was big. So he approached him and extracted it with a twist of his hand. Why did the man die on the third day?
And I had already been called to extract it; and I saw from the size of the stone and the care of the nurse that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who took a fee from our King for medicine: and there happened to be a black eunuch near him, who had broken his thigh bone near the heel; and the doctor continued in his ignorance and bound the fracture with thin splints and strong ligatures and did not stay with the wound's exudation.
Then he released him according to his desires. Then he let him go after a few days and commanded that the ligatures not be loosened; but he stood thus until the sore in his leg and foot began to putrefy, and came to ruin.
So I was called to him; and I made myself convenient to loosing the ligatures; and subsequently there was peace, and he was free from his pains.
However, the corruption had already taken hold in the member; and I could not restrain it.
So the corruption ceased to walk in the member until it died.
And I saw another doctor who pierced an ulcerous cancer; and it putrefied after a few days until the evil of it spread with his lord.
That is, because when it is a pure cancer from the melancholy humor then it should not be cut out with an iron at all unless it is in a member that tolerates it so that it may be completely excised.
And for this reason, my sons, you must know that surgery is divided into two sections: namely, the operations which are associated with health; and the operations, where there is danger in many dispositions.
And I have already excited everywhere in this book, wherever surgery has come into being, where there is fear and alarm.
Why is it necessary for you to be afraid of that, and to turn away from it? In order not to have dull wits to speak and to dishonor.
Therefore receive with solicitude and protection, and bring our sick to yourself with ease and strength, so that a better way, by the grace of God, may lead them to salvation and the glorious succession: and remove from them terrible ailments with difficult cure; and remove their souls from that which makes them fear, so that hesitation may come upon you in your faith and ease in your mind.
For it remains more to remain for our glory, and to be exalted in the world, and at last to the numbers of you.
For Galenus has already said in some of his advice. Do not cure ill health, and do not call yourself a doctor of illness.
I have already divided this treatise into three chapters.
Chapter one: Of the nature of health.
Of the cautery with fire and cautery with acute medicine, a kaput, and ordered from the head to the feet, and of forms of instruments and tools, and of all that is necessary in the operation.
Chapter two: Of the forms of wounds, and of the ways they are made
of cutting and piercing, phlebotomy and venesection, and of wounds: and extraction of arrows, and similar things: and all the kaput, ordered in forms of instruments.
Chapter three: Of the order of operations. 1   De ordine operationis
of restoration, and dislocation, and curing of twist, and similar things: kaput, ordered from the head to the feet, and forms of instruments.
[But Before I Speak Of The Quality Of Operation With Him, It Is Necessary To Speak Of The Quality Of His Wounds And Of The Complexion In Which They Are To Be Displayed.]
[I Will Then Speak Of The Quality Of Operation Of The Surgeon, And Of The Quality Of His Wounds, For This Speech Is Long, Subtle, Knowledgeable, And Secret.]
[A Great Number Of Wise Men Had Spoken On It, And They Had Disagreed With Each Other; But For Me A Little Of Their Speech Is Sufficient, I Fear Prolongation.]
[I Will Then Speak Of The Surgeon Who Is Suitable For All Kinds Of Complexions, Whether With Or Without Substance: Excepting Two Complexions, Which Are Hot And Dry Without Substance, And Dry Without Substance.]
[But In The Hot And Dry Complexion With Substance They Disagreed.]Dico ergo, quod in iujiuamentis eius sermo diversus est [Some Said That The Surgeon Should BeOperated In It, For The Surgeon IsOperated.]Sed alii dicuerunt: Non sit operatio in eadem, sed in aliis complexionibus, quae sunt cum materia [But Others Said: 'Operation Should Not Be Done In It, But In Other Complexions That Are With Substance,' And They Said The Contrary To Him, Namely That The Surgeon Is Not Suitable In An Illness Of Heat And Dryness: For Fire's Nature Is Heat, And It Is Suitable, So As To Heal From An Illness Of Heat And Dryness, With Heat And Dryness.
[And He Who Said The Contrary To Him: 'By The Surgeon It Is Performed Surgery On Every Illness Of Heat And Dryness That Occurs In The Bodies Of Men: For When You Compare The Body Of A Man, And His Humidities, To The Complexion Of Fire, The Body Of A Man Becomes Cold.
And I too say by experience: for this very reason, that experience has already shown me that.
Truly, it is not necessary to add anything to this, except that one who has already tested and experienced, and exercised in the exercise of the latest chapter of cautery, and knows the diversity of complexions of men, and the disposition of sicknesses within themselves, and the causes thereof, and the accidents thereof, and the space of time of them.
But from the other complexes there is no fear for you; above all, in the diseases of cold and moist. For indeed all doctors have agreed about them; and they did not differ from cautery in regard to them.
And know you sons, that the action of cure by cautery with fire, and its goodness on cauterium with medicine burning together is simple: because fire is simple, whose action does not reach unless to the member that is cauterized; and it does not hurt another member joined to it with a little injury.
But the action of medicine burning reaches to that which is prolonged from the members; and perhaps it makes difficult the cure of a disease in the member, and perhaps it kills it.
But fire because of its subtlety and goodness of its substance does not do this, unless it is in excess.
For indeed this has already become known to us by experience, because of the length of practice and study with art, and the standing on the veracity of things; and for this reason I excuse the length of speech.
And if it were not, because it is not right for this book of mine to bring you the secret and hidden thing in fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies by its expulsion, which expels diseases by a philosophical demonstration, which is acquired from the minds of your own, I would not.
And know you sons, that they differ in the time when cauterization is to be done, and put a better time for the doctor.
It is necessary that I say that the caustics are to be used at all times: for if the accident happens through time, it is hidden in the ligature, which is attracted with the caustic. And above all if the caustic is because of the pains from the necessary pains, strong, feasts, who do not tolerate tardiness: for they are afraid of them, that the evil which is greater than a slight injury will happen to them through time.
And do not fall into the minds of the uneducated sons of that son, who do not understand, unless the common and dull doctors say: for him is not always a return to health from the illness by the caustic; they put it down as a consequence, and it is not like what they think: because the caustic is not, unless in place of medicine, which changes the complexion, and dries up the moistures that are the cause, so that the pains happen.
But the caustic is excessive over medicine because of its power and the strength of its action and its quickness: and it is possible that it should return the illness at some time according to the complexion and place of the illness, and the power of it; and that it is prepared in his body from an excess of it therein: and that it comes to itself through this acquisition from food, and similar things from causes, unless there is illness, in which the caustic is administered.
Illus enim dolor, qui non potest ueni pro tempore, et non potest agere causticum, quare non potest ueni, sicut illius dolor: et hae superfluitati et humiditati, sicut causticum dentis, possunt ueni pro tempore: et si hoc accidat in uero, non est necessarium cauterium. But this pain, which cannot come because of time, and cannot act with the caustic, so
But the word of the common people, that the caustic is the last medicine, is a true word: it does not refer to what they intend in this; for they believe that there is no cure that gives with medicine, nor anything after the occasion of the caustic.
But the art is opposite to him, and the intention, that cauterization is the last of medicine, is not, unless when we administer the methods of cure in some diseases, and they do not confer on these medicines: then we administer at the end of the thing cauterization, and confer; then from there falls, that cauterization is the last of medicine, not according to the intention which the common and many-sided doctors understand.
But the ancients said that when cauterization is with gold it is better than cauterization with iron: and they did not say that, except for the equality of gold and the limitation of its substance: and they said that it does not make pus place cautery. But this is not absolutely true: for I have already tested it and found that itself does not do so in certain bodies without others.
And cauterization with itself is good, and better than iron, as they said. But when you cauterization fire in fire from gold, it does not declare to you, when lit according to the quantity that you use, for the reddening of gold: and when it comes to itself to cool, and if you add to it ignition, it melts in fire, and turns into leaves.
Why does the craftsman fall from that in employment: and for that it is made cauterization with iron among us faster and closer, from rectitude to operation.
And I myself have already arranged this chapter on cauterization, according to chapters: and I arranged them from the head down to the feet: that they may all find what they want from it.
Chapter II.
Here confirm cauterization to the domain of humidity and coldness on the brain: which two are causes of salt, and multitude of flow of humors from the head to the parts of eyes and ears, and multitude of sleep, and pain of teeth, and pain of throat: and universally all sickness that comes from coldness, such as paralysis, and salt, and epilepsy, and apoplexy, and such like from these ailments.
The mode of cauterization is such that you should instruct the sick one: to let him be washed with a wet-soaking medicine three or four times a night, according to what the strength of the disease and its age and custom require.
Then instruct him to shave his head with a razor. Then make him sit between your hands in a squatting position so that he has placed his hands on his chest.
Then place the root of your hand over the root of his nose between his eyes. Therefore when your middle finger has gone as far as it can go, mark that spot with fire.
Then let the cautery be made of olive oil, which has this form.
Then place the person himself on the marked spot with fire, and grasp his hand slowly, and release it as you rub him. Then let your hand move quickly, and examine the spot.
If you see a quantity of hair coming out from the bone, or a quantity of grass, then let your hand fall. And if not, repeat the cautery with iron, or with another one when it is cold: until you see the bones, which I told you about.
Then take some salt, and dissolve it in water, and dip it in the ointment, and place it on the spot: and let him be for three days.
Then place over the person the ointment dipped in butter, and let him be on the spot until the fire is extinguished. Then care for that with the four-fold ointment until he is healed.
They have already said that when the wound remains open for a longer time, it will emit pus: why is this better and more beneficial?
And some of them said, "Let the skin be cauterized all the way down to the bone": and let the cautery be held back until a certain hardness of bone is achieved.
Then cut off after that which is burned up from the bone, then dress.
And others say that it is necessary to make the incision when the wound has been made round with a caustic until it impresses on the bone like the form of a nail: or an instrument which women put in with ink writing straight: and they estimate, that from this place exhalation of head vapors and a long time leaves off the joint open.
Then dress until it has hardened.
But these two kinds of cautery are not known to me at all unless in some men from fear the second time.
And let go that person, it is better with me when he is healthy.
For the head is weakened by the continuous solution of itself: as we are testified in the other members: and especially when the head is weak from nature: and the species of cautery first is more healthy and better with me, and I use it: so let us operate when he is healthy.
CHAPTER III.
When in the whole head there happens to be a chronic pain: and it is prolonged in an invalid, and uses honey, and broths, and head purgatives, and oils, and employments. And especially if already cauterized with one kind of cautery which we have described, and does not give it anything from those: then examine. For if the head is sick from nature's strength, and is not weak, and there is a cold feeling under it: then cauterize with another kind of cautery below it a little. Then cauterize himself on all the corners of his head with his own cautery, and let not the skin be seen, and a quantity be discovered from the bone, which we have described. And let him cauterize himself with one kind of cautery at the back of his head, in a place which is called a vessel: and it is a place where there is wind: and wash your hair well in this, and do not discover the bone. He is therefore weakened by that painful disorder, and different from the other pain of all the head.
And I will say this Cautery in its place: and it is necessary that there be a cautery, where the horns of the head are cauterized, and the occiput of it with a finer cautery, where the middle of the head is cauterized.
Chapter IV.
When it happens in a part of the head pain and soda, or extends to pain to the eye, and is washed out with cleaning medicines, and the rest treatment is administered, which I have mentioned in divisions of diseases, and does not bring all of that: then cauterization is in it according to two ways: or cauterizing with sharp medicine burning: or with iron.
But the cautery with sharp medicine burning, is, that you take a tooth of another, and cut it into pieces, and cut off the ends of it from two sides. Then cut the place of pain at the time with a phlebotomy knife on both sides, until it is made in it a place under the skin, where the head is caught.
Then put it into it under the skin, until it is hidden: then tie it over it with a thread of constricting tension and let it go quantity of fifteen hours afterwards solve it out, and remove another one: then put on it a cloth dipped in butter, until the place makes pus: then cure the pus with ointment until it heals.
And if you want to make that with some medicines burning, which I wrote in the 12th book, about Ointments that burn.
But cauterizing really with iron, is according to this way: Fire Cautery, whose form is this:
And it is called a Clavis: because the form of the head is like the form of a key, and there is something of a turning in the middle of it, and there is a small eminence in the middle.
Then place the knife on the spot, and hold your hand back: and turn the iron gradually with speed: and let the quantity that is burned out by the thickness of the skin be like half of it. And close your hand so that the artery below does not get burned, and do not let the blood flow out.
Then dip the knife in salt water and place it on the spot and leave it for three days: then dip the knife with butter: afterwards care for it with ointment until it heals.
And if a wound, cauterize this headache with an edge of a razor in the second cauterization. And do not cut off the artery in this half, for it is new and own.
The way to cauterize in an old half-headache.
When you are curing a half-headache, with this which we said before in the preceding cure, and which we said in the divisions of diseases, and there is no cure: and you will see from illness that it does not suffice to it which we said in the first cauterization with medicine, or with cauterization with fire, then it must be that the fires of Cauterium are turned, until it turns white after the signs on the spot of pain with a line, whose length is half a finger, or almost like that: and place your hand with a blow, and tighten it until you hit the artery, and reach all the way to the mouth.
However, you need to cauterize the continuation of the jaw, which moves when chewing, so that it does not get burned on one side, or the nerve that moves it, from which comes a spasm.
And be on the lookout, and take care of the flow of blood of the artery that has been cut off. For there is a fear in it, and especially to him who does not know that thing which he does, and is not learned, nor expert: and dismisses the operation with it at first.
And I shall come to speak about the treatment of the flow of blood from a vessel according to its mode, and in the place of this book.
That if you see from sickness that it is not sufficient for him this cautery, and you see the body tolerating the cautery in the middle of the head, as we have told, take care of the wound until it heals.
And if you see, administer the cautery, which we have said in the chapter on the extraction of the artery with the cautery having two scissors. For the cauterization is better than this and confers more benefit.
The mode of cauterizing in earache.
When it happens in the ear pain from cold, and is cured with liquid, and remaining cure as we have said in the division, and the pain does not subside, then fire cautery: and that is what is called a dot, whose form is this.
Then the dots with this after its ignition in the circumference of the whole ear, as it is resolved: or in the circumference of each, if at the same time the pain is in both. And lengthen it with the cautery from the root of the ear slightly, after you have marked the places with the caustic: and let the quantity of the cautery be ten dots all over the ear, and almost that same.
Then care for the place, until they are healed.
The mode of cauterizing in torture.
Chapter VII.
Torture which is cured with cautery, is not unless from the species that happen from the phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of sicknesses.
And the distance of cautery from the species that happens from drying up, and spasm of a nerve.
When you cure this species of torture with salt, and hyssop, and gargles, and your cure does not confer benefit, then you shall cauterize the sickly person three cauteries: one near the root of the ear, and a second little below its place, and a third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery from the opposite side of the weakened part. For softening does not occur unless in a part that appears healthy.
And the shape of the cautery is such that it cauterizes itself in the very tip of the upper ear under the corner of the head a little: and at another time: whose length is according to the length of the thumb. And place your hand with the cautery, until the quantity of half the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and its species from a scalpel, whose form is given above: indeed it is not so sharp as you see: and it should be that the scalpel has a little excess thickness.
Then take care of the place, with what precedes it: until it heals.
§ On the method of cauterizing in ancient apoplexia.
When an ancient apoplexia is antiquated, and care for it has been given with what we have said, and your medication does not help, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauterizations on all the corners of his head, and with one in the middle of his head as we have said, and with one at the back of his head, according to what has preceded: and let the mode of the cautery be according to what has preceded.
Also cauterize with a cautery on the jawbone: and it is more last.
Then take care of it with what has preceded.
Head.
It should be that he who is ill can drink in the first great hour of the day, and a pill that softens the brain.
Then wash his head all over, and place on the back of his head an ointment described in the treatise on ointments: and place it now and then.
This is the form of the cautery: and make it according to the order we have said there.
If so healed by that, it is good. If not: then make him three wounds on the posterior part of his head, which are descending from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the eye: and place between each wound the thickness of a finger.
Then cure the Wound, with what preceded it.
If however you wish to add something, and the sick one endures it: then make him a wound in the middle. That if you wish to add something: then cauterize himself above two horns.
Then cure him, until he is healed: and let the Wound be oiled according to the form, which has gone before.
As for the mode of cauterizing in Paralysis, and softening.
Head.
It is necessary that you proceed in the cleansing of the head with hyoscyamus, and with what I have said.
Then rad the head with milk: then cauterize him with a middle cautery of the head, and with a cautery over each horn of the head, and with a cautery over its posterior part, and with three cauteries over the spine of the neck.
If however you are able in health to soften the body many times, and the sick one endures it, and the sickness is strong: then cauterize him with four cauteries over the spines of the back, and the last with a cautery, until it burns out from its skin much of it, and wash your hand. Then cure him, until he is healed: and thus let the Cautery be oiled.
As for the mode of cauterizing in Epilepsy.
The epileptic head is not to be cauterized unless it is from one who has epilepsy from phlegm.
It is necessary that you make the cleaning of his brain first with hyoscyamus, and with the other cure which I have said in division: when the sick one is great, or bears medicines well.
If however a boy who does not tolerate medicines, then he is given gargling, and chewing cleansing the brain, before those many days with good food.
Then he rubs his head, afterwards he cauterizes himself with a cautery in the middle of his head, according to what has preceded in the manner: and cautery on his occiput, and over all the horns of his head. If he is sick and strong and tolerates it, then cauterize him with the cauteries which I have said in having paralysis, and softening of the body over the vertebrae of his neck, and the vertebrae of his back: and let the cautery be oiled according to the manner which has preceded.
But if the boy is sick, then put a subtle cautery, according to this manner.
The way of cauterizing in melancholy:
When the cause of melancholy is moist corrupt and thick phlegm, then cauterize him with the cauteries which we have said in having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of a drop to the brain causing melancholy, and his body is wet with moisture, then give him in a drink that will cleanse his brain, according to what has preceded in division: then he rubs his head, and afterwards makes a tortuous thread made of linen, like a circle.
Then put it in the middle of his head: and the sick man sitting holds himself back from all parts.
Then present the liniment. And it is worthy of being made with old butter. And heat him up on a moderately hot fire, the measure which he can bear when he enters into him. Then evacuate him with a jet of water in the middle of his head in a circle, and let him go until it is frigid.
Do this sick one every week once, with the rest of his treatment being good, until he is healed.
If you want to see, then burn him by making small punctures all over his body, except that you keep your hand with the cauterizer: moreover, let it be smelly.
This type of cauterization humidifies the brain with its quality.
Then put on top of him a cloth dipped in butter, or chicken fat.
In this way, cauterizing in descending water up to the eye.
Chapter XIII
When you notice the beginning of the water in the eye by the signs that I mentioned in the division, then start and drink with it so that it cleanses his head.
And keep him away from all humidity, and let him sit in a bath, on several days of fasting.
Then tell him to scratch his head, and burn him in the middle of his head. Then burn him on the two temples with two cauterizers, if the beginning of the water is in the eyes at the same time: or from one side, if the beginning of the water is in an eye: and cut off with the cauterizer all the veins and arteries that are under the skin: and let the cauterizes be long in width: and watch for the flow of blood.
If you see anything of it, then cut it off immediately with whatever medicine is possible: and I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and their cutting, and taking care not to let blood flow.
And when he is burned with resin, between two bones, with two cauterizers at the end of production.
In this way, cauterizing in old tears:
When the tears of the eyes are old, persistent: and they are on veins, and arteries that are on the outside of the head, it is proven that it is from the excesses of cold, phlegmatic: then burn with the same cauterizer in the beginning of the water descending, a cauterizer in the middle of the head, and two cauterizers on the two temples, and two cauterizers on resin under two bones. And if it does not improve with the addition, then cauterize it in all sides cautiously with the eye, on the upper edge of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
¶ On the way of cauterizing in the nasopharynx.
When you treat this, with what we said in the division, and the medication does not benefit: then approach and give him three nights of infusions of cold waters: then shave his head, and cauterize it with a medium caustic, with an olive caustic. Then cauterize it with two cauters on the upper edges under the hair a little bit.
And guard from the artery, so that you do not fall into it.
And this is the form of the caustic.
On the way of cauterizing in the softening of the eyelids.
When the eyelid of the eye softens from disease or moisture: then cauterize the eyelid with one caustic, with this lunar caustic.
And if the eye (is affected), then cauterize it above the two eyelids with two caustics on all parts: and they should be elongated from both sides: and the length of each caustic should be according to the length of the eyelid: and do not remove your hand from the caustic, except for the third eyelid.
On the way of cauterizing the eyelid with hair that pierces the eye.
The caustic is in two ways: with fire, or the caustic with burning medicine.
In the caustic, however, with fire, order the sick person before it, so that he stops his hair, if he is of those who wash themselves, until they grow long and smooth. If it hurts him near its edge: then squeeze the eyes shut with putty, so that they do not move, until they are well-healed.
As soon as they [the wounds] are born and become equable, then place the head of the nurse in your lap: afterwards, mark the eyelids of his eyes with a wax impression, the mark being according to the shape of the myrtle leaf: and let the beginning of the mark be near the hair.
Then put on a cloth soaked in albumen or in silken mucilage over the eye.
Then apply fire as a cautery, whose form is this.
Then cauterize on the shape that you have marked gradually in many places, until the skin surface is completely burned, which is like the shape of the myrtle leaf, all apparent by itself.
And the mark of your work's health is: if you  [are able to] close the eyelids of his eyes now, and remove the hair near the eye's puncture.
So then raise up your hand: and let him go for three days.
Then put on the [wound] site a cloth with butter on it until the scar is eradicated. Then care for the wound with ointment until it heals.
If any of the hair falls out after an hour, and softens the eyelid: then repeat the cautery on that place as you did in the beginning.
If, however, the hair falls out from below: then cauterize that very place until it moves to its own natural place: and make it so that the hair of the eye does not sting.
It is as you command to an ill person, that he should let go of hair, until it grows long and equable. Make in the form of a cloth from cloth the shape of the myrtle leaf.
Then take from a well-known soap, and from a non-imbibed clay of one pound or nearly that: then immediately dry it up with good stirring, and make it with haste so as not to become cold. Then from it [the skin] over a sheet that you made like the shape of a lily leaf, and place it itself on the eyelid of one or two eyes. And place under the eye bathed in albumen or: and the head of the patient to lie in your lap.
And place your finger index on the medicine, and press it a little. And you to move him whenever he feels the tingling of the medicine: for his taste is like fire.
While it was persisting in this way that he found the taste, then dismiss the medicine, and move it with your finger. When the taste is quiet, then remove the medicine, and wash the eye with water.
And then consider, if you see the eyelid open, like it opens during combustion with fire or incision, is good: and if not, then repeat on top of him from the medicine on the spot where it does not impress the medicine, and does not deteriorate, until your operation is enough, and closes the eye.
Then place over the patient with butter, until the skin of the burn is removed. Then care for the patient with diaphanous ointment, or other, until he heals.
And it is necessary to you by the operation, so that you keep the last watch, so that nothing of the medicine falls into the eye.
That if the eyelid is softened after days, and struggles with some hair in the eye, then repeat the medicine on that place, which is softened by the lid of itself, like you did in the first. Then care for the patient, until he heals.
And this is the form of the lily leaf.
And you know that the eyes of men differ in size, and beauty. So therefore according to this sit your consideration: and do not hide the straightness of his sight, which is the study of this art.
The way of cauterizing in the lacrimal fistula.
When you treat a fistula, as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatment does not help: then you should cauterize it according to this mode.
Order the sick person to put his head in your lap, and let him hold his head between his hands so that he does not move or stir with his head.
Then put cotton wadded in alum, or in a slip of mulberry leaves on his eye: then apply the cautery, which has this form.
Let him sit with his back bent as the shape of a knife edge from one end, where the cautery is made: and if the blade sits penetrating all the way to the other end, and if the blade sits standing up.
However, this bent blade is better for your work.
Then express the fistula if it is open, and wash it out, and dry it up: and if it is not open, then open it, and wash out its pus.
Then put on him the cautery, which is made to burn fiercely.
And hold with it your hand somewhat near the cautery from the eye, towards the side of the nose, so that your hand does not move or stir the sick person: and put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrode it.
If then you can see through the end of your cautery to the mouth, it is good. Then if not: then go over the cautery once or twice if you can bear it: and dismiss it after three days.
Then put cotton wadded with butter, and treat the person with an ointment to dry up, until he is healed.
That if after forty days he is not healed: then put on him a sharp medicine to corrode, until the mouth is discovered: and cut it according to what comes up in his own book.
And there is another way of treating a fistula, which some first said. Seek out the place of the fistula, and find it; then put into the said fistula a very fine tube, that is to say, a very fine cannula, whose form is this. And pour into it a quantity of liquid lead, and hold your hand with the cannula securely held back, so that it does not move at all, lest it run or get to the eye of him who has the fistula.
And you should put on top of the eye an eyedropper full of infusion in albumen or in water.
For lead burns up the place of the fistula, and heals it with a marvellous healing.
That if the fistula is healed, with what I said above from the Cauldron, and the cure, is good. And if not, then it is necessary to administer the nasal opening, and reduce the fistula to its own natural course of the nose, according to which it will go into its own place.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in the fistulas of the lips.
Often there occur on the lip fistulas, which are called pilus, and especially on the lips of boys.
And so when you treat these fistulas, with what I said concerning the division of illnesses, and this treatment is not successful, then a small paring knife, sharp, made of iron, of good temper,
and set it on him according to the subtility of the knife.
Then put the burning quickly into the place of the fistula, until the cauterization reaches the bottom of the fistulas.
Then care for him with caustic, until he is healed.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in the fistula of the mouth.
When it occurs that a pustule is on the root of the gingival tissue, or in the palate, or on the roots of the teeth: then it pushes out, and bursts: after this it curbs, and runs out pus, and becomes a fistula: then care for it, and this treatment is not successful, then you should put fire into the fistula, according to the quantity that takes hold in the fistula. Then insert the litmus paper into the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand until the litmus paper is burned all the way down to its tip; do this once or twice.
Then care for the patient after that as we have said above regarding the treatment until he is cured.
If then the pus is severed and heals, it will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to examine the spot and remove the corrupted flesh according to what comes into its head.
De mode cauterizing in gingivae and dentibus mollificatis:
When the gum is softened by moisture and the teeth move and do not yield to remedies, then place the head of the patient in your lap.
Then the fire-caulium, whose form you will put after these, so that you may put the cannula on the tooth: and quickly insert the litmus paper into it: and hold your hand slightly, until the sick one feels the heat of the fire has reached the root of the tooth.
And wash your hand; then repeat the application of the litmus paper several times, as you wish.
Then the sick one shall fill his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour; and spits it out.
For the teeth become steadier and the gum is hardened and the corrupting moisture is dried up.
The mode of cauterizing in pain of teeth:
When the pain of the teeth is due to cold or there is coldness or dryness in it, and does not yield to remedies with medicines: then the litmus paper is to be applied to it according to two modes: either with butter or with fire.
But the litmus paper of his is, that you may take the butter and heat it, and boil it in a brass tube or in a vessel. Then take a bandage and wrap it around the end of the tongue. Then dip the end of the tongue in melted butter and place it on the aching tooth, and hold it there until it begins to hurt again: then repeat this several times, until the pain subsides.
And if you want, dip the cloth or bandage in cold butter and place it on the painful tooth: and place the iron red-hot on the tooth that hurts, until the fire has penetrated to the root of the tooth.
But the cauterization with fire is so that you can see towards the airway or the iron tube. And sit in his body some gruel-like substance so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth that is healing.
Then take the fire-cauterizer, whose shape you have prepared: and place it on that tooth: and hold your hand so that the cauterizer cools down.
Do this several times, for the pain will be relieved, or do it on the same day, or on another day.
And it is necessary that the cauterizer be placed on the impression so that the sick mouth be filled with good balm and hold it for an hour: then let him spit it out.
And this is the shape of the cauterizer.
Cauterize with whatever extremity you will, second only to the possibility: and this is the shape of the tube.
The mode of cauterizing in strophic conditions.
When the staphylas are full of phlegm, and from cold wetness, and do not submit to the digestion by medicines, and want a quick digestion: then take a small fire-cauterizer, whose shape is this.
It has two open extremities so that smoke can escape from the cauterizer's other extremity: and place the iron red-hot on the flesh once, and again if you endure it, until it penetrates to the depth of the scar.
If the wound is small: then apply cautery according to the quantity of the wound.
Then let him rest for three days, and put over him a cloth soaked in oil until he has healed from the burn.
Then take care of him with ointment for the tooth, until it has healed in shape of a tube.
The mode of cauterizing a sore throat and constriction of breathing.
When the moisture is flowing over the lungs, and especially when it is accompanied by a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the sick person should be evacuated at first with liquid medicines dissolved.
Then cauterize him on the soft part of the neck at the root of the throat in a depressed place: and be careful, so that you do not go forward with the cautery to the throat or skin, unless there is something of it.
Then cauterize him with another cautery at the joint of the neck in the last part of the spine of the latter: and let the cautery be a claw second according to the manner which preceded.
Then take care of him with that which has preceded, until he has healed.
The mode of cauterizing in diseases of the Lung and Cough.
When the cough and disease of the lung are caused by cold moisture, and the sick person does not have a fever nor tuberculosis, and the disease is old: then cauterize him with two cauteries above the jaw at depressed places, gently, and slowly. And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts: and let the cautery be a tube second according to the shape which preceded.
And if the wound is small and you are to use cauterization by piercing with the cautery, which is called a Puncture, whose shape has preceded in piercing the pain of the ears: and let there be punctures from twenty to nearly thirty.
Then take care of him with that which has preceded, until he has healed.
And he has also three branches for the caustic: in this form. Why do you heal with it when you make a trio of three cauteries.
Chapter 27
When the head of the humerus is dislocated by a cause of moistening, and does not return to its place at first from its dislocation until it has become accustomed to its return, then it should be reduced by a slight movement; which we have already shown to happen, then it is necessary that you reduce the dislocation at first. Then he should lie down on his back or on his healthy side. Then, with the palm of your left hand, oil the titillus which is on the inside at the top with your fingers: and if the joint dislocates into the inside.
Then take the caustic fire, which has two branches. Whose form is this:
Then cauterize the oil, until it penetrates to another side, and the figure of the cauterization with four cauteries.
And when it is made to cauterize with the caustic fire which has three branches, why is there a figure of six smaller cauteries when it is made to cauterize with the caustic fire, and are the branches according to the sensitivity of the tentacle?
And this is the form of the fire which has three branches.
And when one is added to this method, why are there eight cauteries?
Then put on the caustic fire crushed pokes with salt. Then make the member quiet so that it does not move at all until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is towards the top and does not often happen, then cauterize himself on the shoulder with a sharp caustic, or make multiple punctures with cautery.
For the joint becomes firm, and the moisture is removed; and the sick person is healed.
To cauterize the stomach.
If cold and moisture accumulate in the stomach, until they have been removed from its surface, and many cataracts have formed on it, and persevering treatment methods are not effective, then the sick person should lie down on his back, extend his legs, and spread his hands. Then cauterize with six cauterizations, one cauterization under the breastbone in the size of a finger with a cauterization on the clavicle, and two cauterizations below the sides in the size of a finger, until a triangular figure is achieved. And lengthen between each one so that they do not join together, when they are pus-like.
And let the depth of the cauterization be twice the thickness of the skin.
And let the figure of the cauterizations be like this without addition: and if you want to make a larger cauterization in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and let the cauterization, which is made like this, be one according to the figure of a circle according to this form.
And the stomach is to be cauterized by piercing it with a needle when it shudders at this cauterization: and it should be, so that the signs are placed on the stomach's piercing according to the quantity that you have with the caustic: then cauterize it with the needle-piercing: then care for the stomach with the treatment that preceded it until it is healed.
The method of cauterizing the lower abdomen, which is cold and damp, until they have been removed from its surface, and many catar
If pain occurs in the liver from cold and moisture, or from coarse winds, until it has emerged from its surface with natural overflow of excess fluid, and healing treatment is not effective with it: then let the sick person lie down on his back on his scalp, and make three cauterizations according to this form, and this quantity, all over the lower abdomen from the hypocondrium, where the bed of man lies: and let there be a space that is as long as a finger between each cauterization according to its thickness: and let the cauterization be made according to the length of the body's rectum: and do not squeeze your hand tightly with the caustic.
And let there be a quantity of what is heated by the thickness of the skin, half as much added: and let the sick stand on his feet.
But if he is not standing, then let him lie down, for he has already extended his legs and raised his arms.
This is the form of the surgery.
And you too can perform this surgery with a knife if you have skill and caution in the art.
And guard yourself, so that you do not proceed further in the surgery, and the thickness of the skin is burned throughout, since the skin there is thin, so know that one.
De mode cauterizing apothemata (the liver).
When an exit is found and you need to know, if that apostema (exits) is in the liver or in its covering membrane: then if it is in the liver, you will see a painful fever, and there is no sharpness of pain; and if it is in the covering membrane of the liver, there is a sharp pain: and you will see that the treatment of doctors tires them out.
Therefore let the sick person lie on his back. Then figure out the location of the exit with a torch: then light the fire of the cauldron, so that it is absorbed by radiation. And this is its form. And cauterize it with one fire until the skin is burned all over, and reaches the sipum (a small vessel), until it exhales its breath entirely: then take care of the cure of the exits, until it heals.
And it should not be performed with this surgery, unless the person's knowledge in the medical field is prolonged: and because through the hands of some diseases occasionally pass: then let him dare to perform such an operation.
But, I think it is better to release it.
To cauterize in pleurisy.
The ancient doctors said that they used to apply the root of aristeolochia as a cauterizer for cold pleurisy in this way. And you should take a long dry root of aristeolochia, and it should be as thick as the finger. Then dip it in oil: and light it on fire. Then apply the cautery once on that which is between the blade of the fork and the neck, and two small cauteries slightly descending on the side, which is under the beard.
And two cauteries also on that which is between the fifth and sixth ribs slightly descending towards the rear: and another cautery in the middle of the breast, and another above the stomach. And three cauteries from behind: one in that which is between two spatulas; and two cauteries from the sides of the breast, lower cautery being in that which is between two spatulas.
And you should not compress your hand with the cautery, but rather keep it in plain sight smelling.
And some ancient men said that they use a cautery of iron like a radium: and they light it, and put it inside that which is between the ribs until it reaches the pus, and the discharge comes out: as we have said before in the description of liver pustules.
But in this piercing with a cautery there is danger that either the sick person immediately dies, or a leak happens to the place, which has no cure.
Chapter on the way to cauterize the Spleen.
When you treat the spleen illness, as we have said before in the division of illnesses, and your treatment does not bring about a cure, then cauterize it according to three ways, all of which are straight.
Of which one is, that you make three cauteries, or four in a line following the length of the spleen according to the shape of the cauteries of liver, which preceded this figure.
And place between all the cautery quantity of the thickness of the finger, or more little or less.
And place the measure of the cautery, which we have said in the hepatic cautery equally.
And do not compress your hand with the cautery: and let the sick rest on his back.
And another mode of cauterization is that which has two hands, which we have said in the chapter on shoulder dislocation: and raise up the skin, which is in direct splenis, where it approaches the bed of the sick on the left: and let your lift up your hand so that you lift up the skin according to the width of the body, so that the cauterization fall according to the length of the body.
Then introduce two hot hands so that you pierce the skin from one side: then remove the cautery: so there are four cauteries.
And if you want to cauterize with a cautery having three hands.
Then take care of the cautery after you have sent it out to emit pus for many days: for it is more effective because what has preceded from the cure remains.
The mode of cauterizing in Hydropsis.
The cautery does not fall in Hydropsis, unless it is carefully made to fall.
When you treat Hydropsis with the modes of cure which we have said in division, and there is no effect from the cure, then you must cauterize four times around the navel, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back between the vertebrae, and one in the direct line of the breast, and another in the direct line of the stomach: and let the depth of the cautery be near the thickness of the skin.
Then remove the open cautery so that it emits pus after a long time.
And do not wet the sick with the cure after the cautery is applied to it: because two intentions should be gathered for him, and he will quickly recover with the help of God.
Indeed the shape of the incision for the abdomenal cavity, when incised, should be closed; according to which the preceeding shape of it is: and when incised from behind, the shape of the incision should be ovoidal according to which its preceeding shape was.
The mode of cauterizing the feet and thighs.
When they are put out in the hydropic diathesis, and become filled with yellow water: it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot, at the knuckle joint, which is between the auricular and the annular finger; and having washed your hand with the cautery, do not turn it around: then wash your hand, and do not return to the cauterization at all.
For the yellow water returns, and the cautery is according to this form.
Then do on the two thighs two cauteries in every thigh, and make the cautery with the edge of the scalpel-like cautery: and make the cautery according to the length of the thigh, one under the knee, and another lower down by that, about in the middle of the thigh: and do on the whole hip two cauteries; and do not close the cautery for a long time: so that it returns from it some water: then take care of it with the rest which we have said.
The mode of cauterizing in the solution of the abdomen.
Chapter XXV. The stomach.
When the solution of the abdomen weakens the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines; and it is cured by the usual modes of cure, and does not recover: and you see one that bears with him a great exuberance of virtue, then cauterize him by means of a large scalpel on his stomach, according to which he was cauterized on the stomach with a circular scalpel, and four small cauteries around the navel, with a small scalpel; and a scalpel over the aloes in great numbers, or two scalpel-like cauteries.
And if you see exuberant moistures, and this which is weak tolerates it, then cautery him with cautery over the rib cage, and cautery over all the ileum: and perhaps you added two small cauterizations next to the great stomach.
For healing is successful, whose sign is not in error.
§ On the method of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
CHAPTER XXXVI.
When there are old many hemorrhoids, or one, and they are of gross humors, cold, or corrupt moistures, and cure with that which we have said in the division, and does not provide a cure: then cauterize three cauterizations over the lower vertebral bone of the back under an almond-shaped little triangle, and cauterization under the navel almost two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is cold, and his food does not digest, and you see his face paled, then cauterize him over the stomach with a large cautery, according to what preceded: and cauterize over his epiploae, and another over his splenii, with a claui-cauterium: and let go of the cauterium open at some time: and then heal him himself until he is healed.
CHAPTER XXXVII.
When you cut off Altzelul, then set fire to a cauterizing tool that radiates heat. Then introduce into it the lit cauterizing tool: and last hand your own, until the cautery reaches the opening of the anus from which blood flows: make it once, or twice.
If then Altzelul are many, then cauterize each one with a separate cautery according to what we have said. Then heal them, with that which confers on them from the ointment, until they are healed.
And if you cauterize him with a large cautery over his anus, it is more final in healing.
To cauterize a fistula in the anus.
Chapter 38. On cauterizing a fistula in the
When the patient does not submit to the cut and operation which we have described in their place, and shudders at it, perhaps he will be cured with the help of cauterization.
When therefore a fistula happens to anyone, and it becomes old, pus runs out of it, and there is corruption and moisture. It is fitting that one should test it with a gentle probe. Then recognize the depth of its extent with a probe.
Then take a kindling of fire as it were, similar in size. Then insert yourself with the burning brand into the fistula and measure the amount by which it enters.
And repeatedly pass the brand over it, until all the corrupt matter is burned up, once, or twice, or three times, according to the necessity of your case.
And guard yourself from the burning of a dry branch if there is one there, or of a large piece of wood: but if the fistula opens into the body of the bladder, or of the intestine, then guard yourself from all such places.
And do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place; and consider that it does not penetrate.
Then tend the place until it is healed.
But if the place is sealed, and there are no more discharges from it for a long time, then you shall know that it has now been completely healed.
And if there are no more discharges from it, then you shall know that it is a penetrating fistula, or that the opening into its depth is corrupted, or something like that: whose memory will remain in the place itself.
The method of cauterizing hernias.
When it happens in the hernial pain from cold, or from gross wind, and is nursed because of it, then one should cauterize the same above the pubic bone over the hernias, with a cautery over each hernia, whose memory precedes.
And perhaps we cauterized him himself with his own almeyda. Why are there three striped lines. Therefore the last will be more in the binding.
§ On the mode of cauterizing the vesica.
When there is weakness in the vesica and softening from cold and moisture until it does not retain the urine, then cauterize him in the lower part of the suppis over the vesica, where the hairs begin to grow, and cauterize with one cautery from the right suppis, and another from his left: and let the length of his cautery be according to the length of his knuckle of the hand: and cauterize him with two cauteries, if you can bear it: and let sit according to what has preceded the cautery with a claw.
§ On the mode of cauterizing the matrix.
When there is cold and moisture in the matrix, and it is prevented by that from impregnation, and her menstrual periods are delayed, and occurs to her a pain at her coming into the bedchamber, then it should be that he be cauterized with three cauteries around the umbilicus, as we have said in the cauterizing of the vesica, and cautery on the alkazium behind, or two cauteries: and let sit according to what has preceded the cautery with a claw.
§ On the mode of cauterizing the anus in dislocation.
When the mucous membrane of the anus flows into the faeces, and there is a cause for its exit from its place: and its sign is that it prolongs the crust over another, when they are facing one another; and the site of dislocation is found in that.
Therefore it should be that he cauterize the weak one over the anus of him with a similar circle: after you have found the signs with the caustice around the anus, as it turns away: and that it falls down itself in the middle of the circle.
That if you do not have this caustic present, then causticate it with three caustics, with a large olive oil caustic: and let there be made a depth of caustic according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin of all.
Then take care of yourself, until you are healed.
The way to causticate in the sciatic nerve.
When it happens that there is pain in the sciatic bone, and there is a cause of his coldness and moisture: and the sick person is treated with it, as we have said in the division, and there is no cure for him, and he grows old: then it is necessary that you should separate the sick person from gross humors with foetid pills, or with artificial pills, and similar things. Then causticate it.
And the mode of the caustic is according to two ways: either with caustic with burning medicines, or with fire.
The caustic with fire is according to many ways.
Of which one is that, that it causticate on the sciatic bone with three triangular caustics, according to this form: And let them make a depth that is good, or bad. And let there be space that is between every caustic according to the quantity of the thickness of a finger: and let there be olive oil caustic.
When, however, it is made on the middle of the head with his own. Why are there four caustics?
And if you causticate with a circle, whose form precedes in the caustication of the dislocation of the whole ankle, one: that there be a circle containing the whole ankle.
And let it burn the thickness of the skin of all.
This is the way to causticate in the sciatic nerve, when there is pain adhering to the ankle itself, and does not extend until the hip and leg.
If, however, it extends to the hip and leg, then cauterize him with two cautery wands over the hip, over the place where he is wounded, in which there is pain, and your own cautery over the shin bone for four fingers on the opposite side: and set the cautery blade.
And set the depth of the cauterization according to the depth of the skin's thickness.
That if the sick person says that the pain extends up to his toes, then cauterize him there where he feels pain with a single, triple, or quadruple (or more) cautery wand, as he desires.
And if he says that there is pain under the knee towards the leg, then cauterize him there with a single cautery wand.
And let your cauterization in everything be so that you do not burn with the cautery the nerves, or a large artery, and do not attract harm to the sick person through it, or contraction.
And I have already seen one and another who cauterized on the shin bone and finished the cauterization and the leg was swollen until it reached the foot, and all of it was corroded and corrupted: then the solution of the water came, and death after that.
That if there is pain on both sides at the same time, cauterize each one according to this method.
And some wise men have said in cauterization of the anchos, whose cautery is this mode. Make a replica of the iron rod whose diameter is half a palm: and let it be at the opening according to the thickness of the finger nail, or a little less: and let there be in it a third replica.
And let there be a space between each replica according to the quantity of the nail of the thumb: and let there be replicas on both sides: and let their height be almost like a knot, or two knots: and let them make handles of iron out of line with the replicas.
Then it is to be burned in fire until it turns red and sparks are produced; then it is to be placed on a plaster of anointment, with the sick person lying down on the sound side. So he is to be cauterized with three round cauterizations in one stream.
Then let him be left for three days. Then cover it with butter, and let the hole be left open for many days. Then care for him with ointment until he is healed.
Says Albucasis, with this species of cauterization on the son, we are somewhat afraid, because of the look of it: and therefore, because there are few who wait for him over the wound.
However, it is a good thing for the patient, and he remains with his place.
But the cauterium is with doctors who burn it, so that you make two loops of twine, into which falls the pin of his door from brass or iron, the length of the walls: of which there are two knots, or almost the same.
And let there be space that is between each amount of the thickness of a finger, and let them be open below and above: and let it contain itself facing forward, according to this form.
Then place it on a plaster of anointment, with the sick person lying down on the sound side. And compress your hand heavily over the plaster of anointment. Then pour between two circles of hot water, which is slightly heated with fire, and hold it for a time: and let the sick person feel the tingling, and his own burning, because he feels the tingling as if it were fire, until he is calm.
Then wash your hand with an instrument, and rinse it thoroughly with hot water and sweet water: then let it be left for three days.
And place butter on it, until the blackening of the burning is removed; and let it be left for a few days, and let pus flow out of it. It is indeed the last resort in treatment.
Then that care with the ointment, until it heals.
If the pain extends to the hip or leg, then make him lie in that position where he can contain water, as you did in the ankle equalize it.
And this is the method of warm water: and I have already written it in the book on rectifying medicines. Take alkaline and burned lime on both sides one part: wash them both, and put them in a new bowl, whose lower part is pierced with a small hole, according to the quantity that it ingests itself; and put under the bottom of the bowl another washed out: and pour over the alkaline and lime with water, which submerges both through the finger: then you compress them with your hand by good compression: and remove the bowl, until the sharp water descends on the lower part of the bowl uitreatae.
Then gather together all the water, and pour it over another lime: and wipe off, until it renews itself.
It will then be very strong sharp, which is administered in many operations of medicine, and in the cauterizing of the remaining members. Since it does the work of fire itself.
And from medicines there are, with which they cauterize the ankle, also like theriaca, and honey of the acorn, and lime with soap, so that both are mixed.
And Galen himself also reported, of a man from ancient curing, which he was cured of pain in the ankle and sciatic leg: and he made it very clear. And he said, "I do not like another cure, and I was cured of the one limb, until he reported, that perhaps he entered a hot bath, and came out from it already healthy.
And it is, so that it is accepted from the seer of men: and if it is not found a man, let it be taken thus, fresh: and it is fatted somewhat, and let it be placed on the ankle, where the pain is, or leg, or hip: and bind it, and leave it by quantity of three hours, or per quantity that he feels the sick person's sedativeness. Then introduce him into the bath.
When his body therefore becomes hot, introduce him into the sweat-bath. For the pain has ceased, and he is healed.
And you should know that it is not appropriate to use any ointment with these medicines unless after evacuation of the body.
And Dioscurides, who said that when he was cauterized with sheep dung, his sciatica got better: and it is a cauterization according to this way. Let the wool be boiled and soaked in old oil, and let it be placed on a deep place which is between the thumb of the foot, and between the fire, and it is closer to the fire.
Then take sheep dung as it is, and set it on fire in the fire until it becomes a coals.
Then place him on the wool, and leave him, until it is extinguished. Then repeat that. Therefore do not cease to do that, until the sense has recovered by way of moderation up to the ankle, and the pain has ceased.
And this mode of cauterization is called Vaccine cauterization.
§ On the cauterization of dorsal pain.
When pain occurs in the back from various causes, or from injury, or from excessive evaporation, and similar things, from the infusion of cold material, and oil: and cauterization does not fall, except in this single form alone, which is made from the infusion of cold material.
Therefore after the evaporation of the nurse with foetid pills, and similar things, let them be placed on the back where there is pain, three lines according to the length of the spine itself, after he has shown signs of a caustic in each line, five cauterizations, or more according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the nurse's virtue: and let it be made a cauterization with the cautery-pinch.
And if you wish, cauterize three cauterizations, or four, with the middle one closed off, according to this form.
To cauterize in a caesarian section.
This disease often occurs in small infants.
And the sign of this disease in small children is that it comes on suddenly during an enema and a movement: and there is inflammation at the very last vertebrae of the spine and its ligaments, which has already begun to spread over the rest of the vertebrae.
When you see this, and when you want to do this, then cauterize it with a cautery that is in the form of a circle.
And he should take the cautery over all parts of the spine equally: and if you want to cauterize around the spine with a pointy cautery, two lines, or three: and the points should be close together.
Then take care of the place, until it is healed with this that I have said.
And do not administer a cautery on the gibbosity, which is made in a spasm of a nerve.
The way to cauterize in podagra, and for the pain of joint injuries.
When the pains of joint injuries are from cold fluids that are spilled on any member of the body, then when pains occur in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this disease by its own name - Podagra.
When Podagra of cold cause is cured with methods of cure, and do not remove the pains, then remove them with a cautery.
And it is, so that it is cauterized after an enema around the joint of the feet, with many cauteries: and let the cautery be Olus.
And if you are able to endure so that you prick the face of the foot, then do it with a pointy cautery. That if the pains ascend up to the knees, or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize it over all the knees with three cauteries, or four from all parts, with this same cautery of Clavius.
If, however, you need many such poultices, then cauterize him himself. And do not submerge your hand with the cautery, but keep it wet only around the skin's surface.
If, however, the pains rise up to the knees and back: then administer what we have said above from the cautery in its chapter.
That if the pains are only in the hands, then pierce around the joints, as two lines resolve.
If, however, any remaining pain remains in the fingers, then pierce them, over every knuckle a point, and over the palm of the hand.
If, however, the pains rise up after days to the elbows, or to the shoulders, then cauterize both of them from all sides.
And do not make the sick person lose strength with good regime, with taking in medicines. For if good regime makes one well, and the phlegm is expelled, he will be healed by God's help with this cautery.
On the mode of cauterizing in ruptures.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, and the intestine goes down, or touches the testicle, and it begins to spread near: then you should order the sick person to give up food on his own day. And so that he urinates with indulgence, so that the filth goes out from his own bowels.
Then make him sit between your hands on his back: and order him to hold his breath until he walks out, or shows the testicle, or the intestine.
Then reduce the person with your fingers, and mark him with the cautery below a rupture on the edge of the pelvis, with a sign whose end is similar to half a circle towards the top of the body.
Then light the cautery fire, which has this shape, until it becomes white, and drops sparks. Then reduce the intestine, or the testicle to its concavity. Then let the attendant place his hand over the site so that it does not leave the gut: and you have already opened between the ribs of the patient, and placed beneath him a towel, and one servant standing over his ribs, and another over his chest which holds the hands.
Then place the cautery on the spot, with your hand holding the cautery steady. And hold him, until you are satisfied that he has come together with him to the mouth: or else repeat with him another blow, if you do not succeed with him in the first place up to the mouth.
And carefully observe that the exit of the gut does not take place at the time of your cauterization, so that you do not burn him and he goes through it to a bad end or great disease.
And know that when you do not succeed with the cautery in closing the mouth, your operation is of no avail.
And it is necessary that the cautery be fine for infants, according to their measure.
Then take care with the rest of the ointment, until it heals over.
And let the sick man lie on his back for forty days, until the wound is closed up.
And let him take food of a length of time corresponding to the duration of his cure, which softens his stomach: so that he does not lose the gut by straining and vomit.
And when he is ready to rise after forty days, then administer a loose ligature, and let him hold it for another forty days.
Let him rest from labor, and from filling himself with food and drink, and from loud speeches.
For when he uses this regimen, he heals with an intact cure.
And I will speak of the cure of ruptures with an incision in its chapter.
But when ruptures occur in the remaining belly, and are beginning to form, and do not want to join together, then cauterize his rupture with round cautery according to its quantity: and let it be as if it had been burned from that time on like the third one. Then the care for himself, as we have said: and let him not be drawn away.
And some had first said: that it might be cauterized with the triangle-shaped cauldron, according to this form.
Afterwards sign it with pitch, and put a line which is along the width in the posterior upper part of the wound, and another line downwardly. And place your hand in the middle with the cauldron of the claw.
But the first cautery is easier and better.
In the method of cauterizing in pains due to a fall, or to a blow.
Chaps 58.
When it has happened in some member by a fall, or a blow: and that pain persiste for a long time, and does not respond to treatment with medicines: then it should be cauterized with the cauldron of the point.
And let there be a cauldron for each member according to its size, and its strength, and its weakness, and its virtue, and its position of twist, and its pain from it.
But if he is healed by the first cautery, it is good. If not: then repeat over himself the cautery.
For from the custom of these pains is that they change from one member to that which approaches it. Why it should be necessary that they should be removed by the cauldron, until the sick is healed.
In the method of cauterizing in lepers.
But lepers, and when they live by the cauldron with a strong motion. And especially the species of lepra, which is due to putrefaction of phlegmas and melancholy: so that when you are cauterizing it, consider well the wound.
But if lepra is incipient and you have treated it with the cauldron that we have said in division, and it has not descended, nor has remained still: and you have waited for the sick person, so that corruption encompasses all his body: then cauterize him over his head with five cauldrons: one in the middle of the hairline, and a second below it facing forward at the end of the hair, and two above two horns, and one behind the ear.
And last with your hand a little while, until the impression impresses the lung with a sore one, and the membranes are dislocated from it; so that the breathing of the vaporous gas is eased out of it, and cauterization also to the splen with regard to what preceded.
But if the leprosy is already spread over the sick one and appears clearly: then it is necessary that you cauterize with these cauterizations which we have said in the beginning of the book, and a cauterization on the tip of the nose, and two cauterizations on the two cheeks, and two cauterizations on the two sides of the neck, and six on the back bones, and one large one on the muscles near the tail-end and one above it, in which he is bound up: and two on the shoulders: namely, one on every shoulder, and two on the elbows, and two on the two humerus, and two on the two breasts, and one cauterization on the whole chest, from the joints of the fingers of his hands and feet: and a cauterization on each heel of his feet, and on the knuckles of his hands.
And let there be a nerve to you that are over the last heel, so that you do not burn them.
And when one is cauterized with a caesarian section on the jawbone, and with another on the stomach, and with another on the liver.
And know that the more you add cauterization, it is a greater remedy, and gives more relief.
And know that the sick one does not find any pain in the cauterization, as he finds it when he is healthy: for his body has already been stunned.
And let the cauterizations be of a size, and of a shape according to the limbs and joints: according to what preceded from the appearance of tools.
Then take care for the cauterizations with wheat flour of herbs with honey, and with the other cure, until it is healed.
To cauterize when stupor occurs.
When a limb is stuporized and does not heal with medicines, oils, plasters, or bandages, then cauterize the limb with cautery, according to whether the magnitude of the limb is increased or decreased.
And place your cautery instrument slightly into the thickness of the skin. Then care for the limb with ointment until it heals.
And sometimes cauterization occurs at some stupor that happens to the hand or foot in the spine of the back near the exit of nerves that move that limb: and the stupor is removed.
But it does not presume on that, unless one is wise in anatomy of members, and the exit of nerves that move the body.
Head L.
When Albucasis is burned and does not show any of the tricks of medicine in it: then cauterize over it with a deep cautery instrument slightly, according to the thickness of the skin, until the hue changes and the color of it alters.
Then care for the limb with herb flour, and rose oil with lentil seeds, and leaves of mullein, and pigeon's blood, and hen's blood: make one part of each: all these things are mixed together, and spread on a cloth, and adhere to the place until it heals.
The method for cauterizing in cancer.
When Cancer is beginning, and the blood should be stopped in it: then cauterize the limb with a circular cautery instrument, as it turns around itself.
But the wise have said, "Let the last cautery instrument be used in the middle.
But I do not know that: because I fear it will ulcerate: and I have seen it sometimes.
And it is better that the cautery should be used around it with a circle, as we have said: or with many cauteries.
To cauterize in abdomens.
When anyone has an abdomina and it is delayed in maturation or because it is causing unnecessary suffering or because of old age and there is little blood there, or for time and the quickness of the abdomina's maturation, then cauterize around it with small cautery points while puncturing. Then let go of it. For she will quickly mature.
But if you want to pierce her with a needle and apply cautery, then this is its form:
And lay the needle down in the middle of the abdomina until it penetrates the skin: and place the cautery from it so that it follows a slow course, so that it eases the flow of blood.
Then take care of the wound until it heals.
The method for cauterizing a corrupted malady.
Chapter LIII.
A corrupted member does not burn except in a walking part, and it corrupts itself: just as fire eats dry wood.
But if you see a corrupted place that accepts the cautery with fire, then large cautery points, small claws and great ones, according to what suits it in the place where the corruption is.
Then cauterize the member from all parts until you have eradicated the whole corruption, and leave nothing of it within.
Then let go of the member for three days, and place sulfur, crushed with oil, over the cauterized places so that all the scabs are removed, and all corruption is eradicated.
Then take care of the wound with an ointment-generating flesh.
But if you see that after three days a healthy birth takes place in which there is no corruption, it is good.
And if not: then repeatedly cauterize the one that remained from the corrupted places.
And the corrupted member is sometimes treated with acute medicine. It rises up by itself in the place of cauterization.
Indeed, when the wound is burned with fire, and I have already said that the application of acute medicine to the division is a form of cauterization, so take it there when it is no longer hot.
The way to cauterize a wound in a claw and a wart.
Chapter 50.
This disease often occurs in the lower parts of the feet, and is a stubborn, filthy trouble that afflicts the foot.
And there are two methods of applying the cautery: with fire, and with warm water.
How much, then, is it like the fire of the plucking-knife, which is a kind of cautery: let it be made of iron, according to the quantity that contains the claw from all sides: and let the edge be sharp.
Then place the burned thing on the claw. Then turn the hand with the cautery around the claw, until the cautery reaches the depth of the claw: and leave it for three days, until pus begins to drain. Then bind the thing with coarse strips of silk, crushed up with salt: and leave the plaster on the wound at night. For it will be eradicated from its roots.
Then care for the place with a soft ointment of meat, until it heals over.
If they are not turned inside out, and often occur on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet: then apply to them warm water; and there is, as you may get a tube made of brass, iron, or a feather: and place it on the claw, or a nail. Then throw into the tube a little warm water: hold your hand on it, and turn it around with your hand a little, so that the edge of the tube is pressed into the root of the claw, and there is some warm water coming to the surface: and let it rest for a while on the prickling of the warm water.
Then let go of him, for the nail is removed with its roots.
So do one at a time after another until you have done all that are in the body.
Then take care of them after they have been cut off, with that which generates flesh from the ointment.
The method for cauterizing while trembling.
When it happens to anyone that there is a tremor due to cold in a nerve, or from a quartan fever, or from any other cause: then it is necessary to cauterize the person with four cauterizations, or five on the spine at the back, and between every spinal bone one cauterization, and one within the belly, and one above the stomach.
For the tremor is calmed by the oil-cauterization, and the health of the disease of cold is accelerated.
The method for cauterizing with albescent (white) unguent.
Chapter LVII.
When white (corrosive) pus is expelled from the body, that is to say, pustules which are formed from corrupted moist (materials).
Then it is necessary to cauterize first when they appear, with a fine cauldron of myrrh set on fire, whose tip is heated with fire. Or with the root of aristochaos, which is long. Or with a lenticular cauldron.
And when they are cauterized with the cauldron, in the beginning of their expulsion according to this mode: and do not increase: and are broken up by an excess of the matter, and are cured from it.
However, it is necessary for that to be done after the evacuation with blood-letting.
The method for cauterizing in a pulse of blood from an artery in the ulna.
This is the way: so that the head will allow blood to flow when an artery is cut at the ulna, which has happened from the outside, or when there is a pustule at the site of incision, or when cauterizing a limb, and similar things: and it becomes difficult to stop the bleeding.
When then it happens to someone else, then hold the edge of the artery with your hand and place the index finger over it: and tighten it very much, until the blood is stopped under your finger, and does not come out of it anything.
Then put small olive oil torches on fire, and many in number: and blow over them until they burn well.
Then take from them one, or small, or big, according to the thickness of the forearm and the place where the artery is broken, and place the torch on it: then remove your finger quickly: and hold the torch, until the blood is cut off.
That if it is expelled when you take your finger away from the opening of the artery, and put out the torch, then take another torch quickly from the ones that are prepared on fire.
So do not stop doing this with one after another, until the blood is cut off.
And beware, so that you do not burn the fire that is there, and happen to bring upon yourself other evil with it.
And you should know that when blood flows from an artery, then it is not possible to stop it: especially if the artery is large, unless with four fingers. Or when with a torch, as we have said. Or when extracting, when it has not been extracted. For when it is extracted, its ends turn towards the outside, and the blood is cut off. Or it is bound with a strong knot of thread. Or are placed on top of the wound by means of its nature, so that the blood is stopped and held with a decreasing constriction.
But who gives it the cutting and the constricting with thread, and the placing of burning things over it, or similar things, does not give him a complete cut, unless rarely.
But if it happens to someone else and there is no present doctor or medicine: then let the index finger begin to be placed over the opening of the wound as we have narrated, and the constricting of it very much, until the blood from the upper part of the wound is stopped, and placed on the artery. And the finger should not be moved away, above it with cold water constantly flowing, until the blood is congealed, and thickens, and is cut off.
And in the meantime, he should consider what needs to be done with the dressing or the medicine.
On incisions, punctures, and bleeding in wounds and similar cases.
We have already spoken in the first chapter about all sicknesses that are suitable for burning with fire and medicine, their causes, their instruments, their forms of cauterization.
And I placed those chapters from the beginning to the end.
And I will proceed in this chapter in the same way: so that it may alleviate the questioner's query.
And before I begin that, you should learn from your son, that the fear is in the first chapter about cauterization.
And for that, you should be cautious about it, because in the operation which is in this chapter, often there is a spillage of blood, with which life is lost at the opening of the vein, or an incision on a bruise, or an opening of an exit, or the curing of a wound, or the extraction of an arrow, or an incision on a stone, and those similar: from all of which fear is associated, and terror, and death falls.
And I warn you, do not fall into that, for when it falls on you, there is a hesitation, for sometimes people who are fallen in this art with the modes of sickness fall. For from them is one who grows angry with his illness, and he is lenient when death comes to him: because of the severity which he finds from his disease and the length of his suffering. And when sickness is born out of fear, which signifies death.
And from these he gives you his own hand, and tells you to use it, hoping for health, but his sickness is harmful.
So then it is not necessary that you agree to him who comes to you from these, whose way is such. And be your caution much greater than your greed and your avarice. And do not presume about anything from him unless after certain knowledge that confirms with you what he achieves in succession that is worthy of praise.
And so that you may cure all your sick patients, by prediction and indication of that to which healing is appropriate.
For in him there is for you an aid in acquiring fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you, O sons, with his wisdom, and may he not take away from you guidance and inspiration: for it is in his power.
And I too have arranged this chapter by distinguishing it into chapters, according to what preceded in the Chapter of Cautery from the crown down to the toes: that you may find what you want from him, and what you need.
Of the Cure of Water which is added to the heads of boys.
Chapter I.
You should know that this illness often happens to boys at puberty: or when the midwife presses the boy's head without lightness.
And whenever it also happens for an obscure reason which is not known.
And I too did not see this illness in anyone but boys, and I would have liked to see all of them die because of it, so that I would leave the work of healing it.
And I too saw a boy of those whose head was filled with water, and the head became magnificent every day until he could not sit on himself because of its size, and the moisture increased until he died.
And this moisture, or集 between the skin and bone: or集 under the bone above the socket.
And the operation in that, if there is moisture between the skin and bone, and the pus is small, then you should find a crack in the middle of the head in width: and the length of the crack is almost two knots, until the moisture runs.
And this is the form of the needle.
If then the moisture is increased and the pus is larger, then place them two cracks, according to this form.
And if the moisture is under the bone, and the sign of it is that you see the scalp open from all sides: and when you compress it with your hand towards the inside, and it does not hide from you: then you should find in the middle of the head three cracks, according to this way.
And after the incision, remove all the moisture. Then tighten the cracks with rags and dust. Then put the wound under a pot with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then loosen the ligaments, and care for the wound with bandages and ointments.
And do not stop tightening the head with equality. And feed the sick with dry food and little moisture until they recover their strength and heal.
Another way of cutting is so that you take into account where the pus appears in size, and the collection of water.
Because when it is more in the back, or in the front, or on the right, or on the left.
So go up with the incision where it appears to you pus and filling: and cut it according to what is possible for you.
And observe, so that you do not hit an artery, and there is a flow of blood, and the sick person dies from that flow with the evaporation of moisture.
Of the Incision of Arteries that are behind the ears.
Head II.
When an ulcer occurs on the eye or chest and it is old and does not respond to medical treatment: then the last resort is to cut open these two arteries.
It is necessary therefore when you incise them, so that the sick man may shake off his head. Then fear the place with a rough cloth, so that the arteries appear. Then the sick man should tie his neck with any of his cloths. Then consider where the pulse beats. And the places of each are those which are behind the depressed ears: and rarely is it concealed, unless in certain men.
Then marks with caustic on each: and cut each with a needle sharply, the incision extending to the nose: and let it go round the head by its width.
And if the eye, introduce the needle under the artery, and cut it towards the top with an incision.
And let the length of the incision be as two fingers joined together.
For when the vein is incised, blood flows out with a pulsating movement, which ascends to the inside at regular intervals.
But if the artery does not appear by touch, then it is necessary that you measure from the ear the quantity of space of two fingers' breadth. Then marks with caustic, and bring to a stop at the nose.
And what needs to be released from blood is 6 minims, and perhaps you release more or less of it. All this depends on the quantity which appears to you from the vein as it fills, and on the fullness of the artery.
Then consider towards the ear. Then if there remains at the nose any soft stuff, then cut it so that it does not happen a boil which is hot: then tie the ear with a linen thong.
Then care for yourself with ointment, until you are healed.
Regarding the extraction of arteries, which are in the temples.
Chapter III.
When a man has an old headache, or acute catarrh because of acrid humidities and heat in the lacertae of the temple, or old soda, bitter, and like things: and is treated with the methods of medicine, and does not admit this: then we are skilled in these diseases in extracting the arteries from the temples, or cauterizing them, as we have related.
And the method of operation in extracting them is this: that the sick person's hair which is in the temples be shaved, and be directed towards the appearing artery in the temple. And it itself shows you from its pulse, and seldom hides itself unless in a few men, or bitter cold.
That if it is hidden from you, then the sick person should tie his head with any of his clothes: and then he should cover the place with a rough cloth. Or with hot water, until it appears to you by a clear sign. Then take a needle, which is slightly made in the shape of a point. Then scrape with it the skin easily, until you reach the artery. Then put into it a hook, and extract it upwards, until you have taken it out of the skin, and make it ooze from the tunics which are under it on all sides.
If, however, the artery is fine: then turn it with the end of the hook. Then cut off a portion from it on the second side according to how long its ends are extended and turn them towards each other, so that blood does not flow out. For if it is not cut, and if it is not separated, the blood will not rise inwardly.
Then let the blood flow from it by six ounces up to three.
That if the artery is large: then it should be tied to it in two places with double thread, strong and smooth: or with the tendon of a horse, so that it does not come under putrefaction before the healing of the wound, and blood flows out.
Then cut off the superfluous flesh, which is between two ligaments. Do that at that hour, or after another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with the cauldron up to the nose, with a sharp knife: until the extremities are cut off and it remains in its place of work.
And that is better work, unless he has a fever or a hot skin. For the cauldron is from those who remain to end the moisture. Therefore it is better to bandage.
And after extracting the arteries, so that the place may be filled with old cooking: and put on top of it a little bit of wool made up.
And after the solution is cured with dry medicines, which make the flesh grow, and with liniments, until it heals.
That if while you are operating blood flows out from an artery, then hurry to cut it off with a cauldron, or as if you fill the place with bandages: and tighten your hand, until the blood is cut off. That if there is nothing present for you, then put your finger on the place, until the blood freezes. And dip the place with water of cold heat, until the sting stops and is tightened according to what needs to be done.
And from that which is lighter and easier to extract the artery, it is, as if the cauldron holds two knives: and the sharpness of the two knives is like an almond. However, they are much less sharp than the two knives. For if they are sharp, as the two knives, it is appropriate that both have coldness: and do not cut into the flesh with speed. But when there is a little bit of roughness in them, it holds the heat of fire and cuts the flesh quickly: so that this work is better for all work, lighter, and easier.
And this is the form of the cautery.
And make space between the two knives according to the thickness of a finger after you have marked the two places with wax: and place the both fires far away until they come to the mouth, and fall a little on both places so that it will be extended what is between its ends. For with this wax not do they consolidate in depth.
Chapter IV.
Of the cure, course of tears, acuteness, from the eyes.
When there are persistent tears and there is a course of tears from the ears that are on the outside of the head: and there is no benefit to them with the medicines of doctors, and his eyes begin to turn red, and he feels a trembling in his forehead, as if it were the trembling of ants: and his eyelids are warmed by the acuteness of the tears: then the ancient people found benefits in this operation for their cure, and they called it the cure with Ense.
And is, that you shave off the hair that is on his forehead. Then cut in the forehead three incisions that are equidistant according to the length of the forehead: and make the length of the incision almost like two fingers, and let the incision that is in the middle of the forehead be equidistant according to the length of the nose, and the second according to the length of a lizard's movement, and the third from the other one by half its length: and be careful not to cut the arteries that are on both sides. And extend your hand from the continuation of the two jawbones, and make space between each incision according to the thickness of three joined fingers: and have you a prepared sponge or many dry cloths with which you squeeze out the blood.
Then introduce the spit end of two acute ends, whose following form is: From the incision that is on the side of the time, to the incision that is the second one: and scrub all the skin between the two incisions with the chisel, which is above the bone. Then also cut this from the middle to the second incision. Then also remove this scythe-shaped piece, and introduce into the first incision again a different tool called a sharp chisel from one side, not acute from the other side. And this is its shape.
And place its acute side against the flesh attached with skin, and its blunt side against the bone: and push it, until it reaches the middle crevice: and cut off with it all the waste that descends from the head to the eyes: except that which continues the incision until it appears from the skin.
Then also make this in the middle crease until another crease.
And when an equal quantity of blood has run out, express the places from the clotted blood.
Then also put into every crease a piece of leather from old cloth, and put on them wicks soaked with wine, or oil, or vinegar. And tie so that it does not happen a blister hot.
And on the third day loosen the ligaments, and administer a strong infusion with warm water. Then also care for this with basilicon ointment, and with the others which are used for wounds: until it is healed.
Head.
§ On the treatment of acute lágrimas and cataracts to the eyes from inside the head.
When there occur to someone a sharp, bitter, and persistent Cataract, and the eyes seem weak, pale, and already declining in aspect: and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hairs fall out of them, and there is a sharp pain in the depth of the head, and consequent sneezing: then remove these accidents, that those materials, and the Cataract do not come, unless they are removed with many tools.
And the best treatment for them is this. And it is, as you order to the sick person to shave his forehead. Then also make in it one crease in the middle of the forehead, or somewhat less in width, and begin with the crease from the left time to the right time: and continue the incision until you reach the bone: and extend your hand from the jawbones that move during mastication: until it is stopped when it reaches the bone: and you will dry out all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate between the two lips of the wound with a hot cloth, or with silk from linen. Then tighten from above with thread: and immerse the thread in wine and oil so that a hot swelling does not occur.
And when you loosen it, and you will see that a hot swelling has already begun to emerge: then it is necessary for the surgeon to open the mouth, until the flesh begins to grow there.
Then take care of the patient with dry healing that makes flesh grow: as if you took two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony: and prepare a plaster, and administer it to the birth of flesh in these wounds.
Chapter VI.
Regarding the care that falls on gold.
All that falls on gold is of four kinds: either mineral stone, or similar stones, such as iron and silver; or it is from a plant, such as beans and peas; or it is a fluid substance, such as water and vinegar, and similar things; or some creature.
When, then, it falls on gold, or any kind of stone that does not add to the gold and does not grow in it, expose the gold to the sun alone: but if you see a stone, then distill in gold some of the oil that has been cooked, or sesamum. Then administer the extraction and make it snort with condiments, and polverize the nose at the approach of sneezing, after you have placed around the ears twigs of linen or wool, and raise the auricle towards the top.
Because this treatment is often repeated.
If, however, it does not go out, then administer the extraction with gestures, that is, with subtle pizgaroli: whose form is this.
If, then, it goes out with a gesture, it is good.
And if not, then administer the extraction with a black hook that is subtle and made of little pieces.
If then he does not come out by that way, then make a tube of brass, and insert the extremity of the tube into the opening of the ear much, and the dust that is in the circumference of the tube with the soft metal with oil, so that there is no route except for the tube: then remove it with your吸引力 forte.
For many times he went out with him whom we have described. But if he does not go out in this way, then take from the calaminum, or from the water, that is to say, the prepared gluten, with which they bind the birds, with which put the metal when it is hot, and set him at the end of the radius after you have dried the ear of the humidity: then insert him into the opening of the ear with ease, after you have dried the ear from the humidity.
If then he does not go out with all that we have described, then approach to cut off, before the hot apoplexy happens, or the spasm.
And the mode of the incision is so, that the phlebotome cuts off the sick one first of all in the head: and then remove from it the blood according to the measure of its power. Then make the sick one sit between your hands, and turn his ear upwards, and find a small hole at the base of his ear in his fat in a depressed place: and let the hole be lunar-shaped, until you have reached the rock: then remove it with that one, which is possible for you from the instruments.
Then suer the hole from your time with speed, and tend to it, until it is healed.
That if what falls into the ear is from one grain, which grows, and swells up: then administer the extraction of it.
But if it does not obey you to come out, then take a thin, delicate stick, according to this form.
And administer with that one the cutting off of its kind from a grain, which falls into the ear, and do not make it, when you think, that it is already moistened by the humidity of the ear, until you have put many whips on it: then remove them with a hook, or with a subtle gesture, or with suction, as we have said, for the extraction of it is eased.
But the water that is put into the ear should be used by the sick man with a stirrup first of all; and he has already filled his ear with some cooked salt; and he lies on the ear where the water is. So if he goes out through that, it is good.
But if not: then take many small stones, according to the length of a finger, soft, dull, and heat them slightly with fire; and let the sick man put one into the hole of his ear: and he should salt his foot on that side, and hit it with another stone on the stone that is in the ear. So let them not cease to do this with stones and stones until he has gone out all water.
And he has already gone out water so that you take from the fire or from one branch and put its end into his ear; and you light that end with fire until it is well burned. Then take another branch and do this many times until he has gone out all water; and pull it out with a tube according to what was said before in the stone.
But when extracting what has entered into it, if it is a small body, like a flea, and like it, take care of it as I said in the division.
But if it seems to be a large body, then administer its extraction with gestures and hooks; and the work of it is easier for all those who hold it in the ear.
But when extracting the black dog that is in the ear, if your care seems to be the same as what we said in the division and in the book of distillation, and does not seem to be helpful; then you should examine the ear in the sun. But if there appears anything of that sort out there, then extract it with gestures or with subtle hooks.
But if nothing appears out there, then take the tube which has this form: narrow below, wide above; and put its thin end into the ear according to the tolerance of the sick man: and then suck it up with a strong suction. So that many times, until all the worms come out.
But if they don't obey you to go out, then dip the cane around them with chalk, as I said on the stone.
That if they don't go out with it that we said: then administer the distillation which the ancient have already experienced in the infection of worms: and you will find that in the treatise on distillation.
And may your flow be as it is when you pour oil and medicine into the ear with this instrument, whose form is depicted here. As you see, do make the hole of silver or brass, narrow below, and wide above.
So that it is driven as it is in the squeeze of the cane, let it be made of brass, made askew. And if you want to take the liquid, and pour it into the ear with the cane, let it be made of brass, made askew. And if you want to heat it slightly, let it be heated with fire, and let there not be anything that is distilled into it, for medicines do not tolerate that.
Head VII.
On the treatment of the disease of gold.
When some children come out of their mothers' wombs unpierced.
And it also happens to some people that there is an opilation in the ear of gold from a wound, or flesh grown in it.
And this opilation sometimes happens in a deep hole of gold, which is not caused by heat: and when it happens to the external holes a little, it is caused by heat.
That which happens in a deep hole of gold, and which is not comprehended by appearance, is difficult to heal in many dispositions.
And in that which is caused by heat, you should put gold into the sun, and look in it: then if you see an opilation appearing, open it with a sharp tweezers, whose form is as follows, let the end of it be in a small curvature, some of its part being acute: and let the other tweezers side be soft: so that it does not hurt the ear.
If then an inflammation has arisen from the flesh in the meatus auris: then hold it with a fine hook and cut it easily with a sharp instrument until the whole is cut away.
That if an inflammation is in the deep part of the ear: then take a thin ray, soft and heat it slightly: then put it into the meatus auris.
If then you feel an inflammation with it, that which occurs when there is loss of hearing due to weight: be careful in removing it easily; and being careful, do not injure the nerves of the ear.
Then put into the ear a liquid of the quantity of width of the pore that you have opened with Egyptian ointment: let it be for several days until you are cured of the injury.
Or take liquid and pour it into rose water, and pulverize it on it, and use it.
That if you see the ear already infected: then it is necessary that you take out the liquid, and let it be with other liquid, which you have put in greenwort that is made with rose water, until it cools down the infection; then care for the ear until it is cured.
If then there is a flow of blood: then dip a sponge, or cloth in cold water and put it on the ear; and use what remains of the cure, which stops the predicted flow of blood in the treatment of distillation.
Of the cure of the palpebrae of Albithis.
Chapter VIII.
These are the things that occur in the eyelids of the eye when they are moist and dry.
Then you should hold them with tongs: or with a hook, and cut them off at the roots. Then put on the places greenwort.
If then there flows blood from them, then you should burn them with a small lens.
And burning them is better after cutting. Often they return when a little remains of the roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned up, and do not return.
On the treatment of the eyelids of the eye.
Chapter IX.
Often it happens in the eyelids that something is absorbed by Crandinus in his strength and dureness, and on account of this he is called Grandinus; and it is an aggregation of a thick moisture in the upper lid, and in the lower lid.
Operation therefore on them is, that you consider then, if it is Grandinus proceeding from the eye, which appears on the lid, and moves to all parts, and the thing is easy.
Find therefore over it a slit from side to side. Then scrape her thoroughly from all parts with ease, until it bleeds. Then suspend her by a hook, and cut her off.
But if you are not prepared to cut it off, unless you penetrate the eyelid with an incision just a little, then it will hurt the injured part in some way.
That if the slit is wide: then aggregate her together with sutures: and take care of her, until she heals.
And if it is small, do not cause harm to her from it. The unguents restore the same, and inflame her.
And if Grandinus is a fall into the inner parts opposite to the surface inwardly, then turn round the eyelid, and suspend Grandinus by a hook: except that you should make an incision, and press her from all sides.
That if the eyelid is elongated by an incision, then it does not hurt the injured part in any way.
Then wash out the eye after Grandini's incision with salt water; and take care of the place where it is inflamed, until the injured part heals.
On the treatment of the eyelids of the eye.
Chapter X.
Axirnath is a dew that forms in the eyelids of the upper eye: and indeed this often happens to boys: and it grates their eyes, and they get cataracts in the morning, and cannot see the light of the sun, because tears flow towards them, and for this reason they always lie on their faces, and sleep on top of them, and their eyelids are wet under their brows, which have already been inflated by swelling: and the prominence of Axirnath is indeed apparent to the eye, and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel Axirnath between them.
And the mode of its operation is that he should put his sick head in your lap.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare it with folds, and make it into a circle according to the quantity that contains Axirnath from all sides. Then place it on top of it, and press it with your fingers from all sides so that Axirnath gathers in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle of its humidity with a sharp instrument that has a sliver of skin attached to it, and there is no larger wound than that which is made in phlebotomy in the deep.
Or you should find all the skin, until you reach Axirnath, because Axirnath often proceeds from a wound in many places: for indeed Axirnath arises from white skin.
Then remove it with the cloth that you have soaked between your fingers towards the outside: and you should open your hand to the right and left until it disperses: and carefully, do not add it to the wound, so that you do not hit the eye with the knife, and let it go.
But if Axirnath does not appear to you at first from the wound, you should add a little to the wound with ease until Axirnath begins to come out. Then remove it, as we have said.
Then immerse the cloth in vinegar and water, and place it on the spot, and tighten it with dust.
And there are people who wrap themselves with salt, and they put it on the wound of a裂口，to make what is left of that humidity melt.
Then take care of herself, until she heals.
But if it happens on the spot of an abcess a hot place, then take care of himself with cooled plasters, until she heals.
The way of the Ataxmir eyes, that is, when the eyelid becomes soft to the eye, so that it grows like it should not be.
Chapter XI.
When they grow in the eyelids of hair added beyond the course under the natural hairs, and increase: then they hurt the eye, and cause diseases, such as constant tears, and softening of the eyelids, and alba
And the Ataxmir eyes are cared for according to four ways. Or by cauterization with fire. Or with sharp medicine, according to which is stated in the chapter of cauterization. Or the Ataxmir are cared for by incision and suturing. Or with needles, according to which I say:
It should be placed on the head of the nurse in your lap. Then turn towards the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
But if it is turned, that is good. And if not: push it into where there is a hair from the lower part of the eyelid, and let it pierce with the thread up, and let it be close to the natural hairs, that is, close to the edge of the eyelid, where the hairs grow: and pull the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn it around.
Then find on the inner side of the eyelid under the added hairs with a sharp instrument incident from the larger tear to the smaller tear.
Then pull out the thread, and put under the eyelid a small piece of bread or cloth: then seal with enxert on the eyelid, which is like the figure of a leaf of myrrh.
It is indeed necessary that the figure be made according to the quantity and elevation of the eyelid: for this has already been diverse among men.
From these it is indeed necessary that the figure be made according to the quantity and elevation of the eyelid: for this has already been diverse among men.
Then when you find the edge of the eyelid with a spatulum on two lines that you have marked, and begin from the larger tear to the smaller, and place one slit next to the natural hair, as is the thickness of the radius.
Then insert the hook into one of two angles of the skin. Then scrape it all out. Then gather together with sutures the two lips, with an awl and a fine thread: and wipe away the blood, and let what is superfluous adhere to the two eyebrows, with some things that are invisible, if you want to do this: and if not, then it does not matter.
Then let go of the suture and thread up to three or four days: then take care of that.
And if you want, let go of the hook without a suture, and take care of it with it, that it dries up and tightens. For the eyelid is lifted at the seal of the wound and its aggregation: but the future one is better.
In this way, Ataxmir taught to heal.
But in that is a concern about the sick, and it is from a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And another way of Ataxmir too: and it is, that the figure on the eyelid is like the shape of a bay leaf, as we have reported.
Then lift the eyelid with three separate or aggregated hooks, according to this shape that follows, then cut off what is superfluous with little scissors, according to this form, with an equal incision.
But if it is not possible for you to hold the hook, and it does not fit that way: then take the thread in which is the hook, and insert it into the middle of the figure: and insert another thread next to the larger tear, and a third next to the smaller tear: and gather the threads between your fingers with an equality.
Then anoint your hand with a equal amount of ointment: and anoint the skin over what is marked by the bandage, as we have said.
Then gather together two lips of the wound with a stitch: and care for it, until it heals.
If however an abscess happens to be at your incision, or a hole: but that abscess with caustic, and such like, should be seated from the ointment.
And when ever the eyelids also turn in, so as to turn his hairs.
Therefore you should use that which we have said for an incision: but the stitch is more artificial. For the care of Ataxmir with needles.
And is, when you turn the eyelid, and cut the hole which is within, according to what we have said. Then artfully make two needles, or two thin sticks: the length of which should be according to the length of the eyelid, and their width less than the width of a toothpick: and you have already stitched at the ends of both sides where you hold the thread.
Then gather each one with a thread over what is in excess from the eye-lid, and strongly tighten two needles from both sides, and let it go for some days. For the skin is stiff, it will die, and it will rot away, until it falls away by itself.
If however it should be delayed, then cut it with razors. Then care for it, until it heals.
When however it is hardened, the eyelid is to be anointed, and the hairs are not pricked.
And this is the form of two needles which you should make according to this figure, and the quantity in length and width.
Chapter XII.
For anointing the stinging hairs in the eye with an acorn.
The operation in that case is, that you should take a thin acorn, and insert it into a thread of silk, and string it up. Then join the extremities together with sutures, and tie each knot with a fine thread: and let the length of the threads be one palm.
Then make another thread from linen thread, shorter than that, and tie the ends together with a knot.
Then let the sick person lie close to your chest, near the sun, that the operation may be declared: for the operation is subtle or minute.
Then insert the awl from the linen thread into the root of the eyelid, and let it pierce through the eyelid swiftly, until it comes out on top of the natural pimple.
Then draw the awl all the way up to the linen thread: and insert the awl into the linen thread: if it is one, or two, or three, not more.
Then draw your hand away with it, until the pimple comes out with the linen thread along with the natural pimple in the eyelid.
If however the linen thread is pulled out, and does not come out with it: take the linen thread from below, with the thread that you have composed in it, until you can pull out the linen thread from the upper opening, and cut off the eye-lid with it: then pull out both, and close the eye, and let him stay closed for two or three days, until the pimple has come to head, and a pimple has grown up on its place, and covered it.
If the thread is short, then either attach a long thread from the natural pimple, and let it come out with it: or let him go, until he grows longer by space, and then let him out.
Chapter XIII: On the Treatment
When this happens to the eye, it is called Leporina.
And this Al-Akhrawi treatment is either natural or accidental.
So this Al-Akhrawi treatment is either from the union of a pimple with a skin fragment, or from a cut, or from cauterization, and similar to these.
And the mode of operation in her is, that you may find her consolidation, and that you separate her lips, and put in it what is between them licinio from linen, and bind her, until she be healed.
And it is not fitting that you should use in her things which dry and constrict, for if you do this, she will return worse than before; but rather use in her things which soften, such as fennel seed: and steep it with water in which althaea has been boiled, linen seed: and unguent with dyaquilon, which is liquid when mixed with some of the oils: and apply licinium to it, and cure with it.
And the treasure of your cure is, that you may seek all contrivance, that she not consolidate, according to the form which she had in the beginning.
And this operation which we have described is nothing else than a certain correction of Albacasis, that she not return to her form, according to which she was entirely.
Regarding the cure of Albacasii which is done in the lower eyelid, and is a rubbing or contraction upward toward the right and left.
Chapter XXII.
This of Albacasii which is done below is what is truly called Albacasis. And it is natural, and is accidental.
And the accidental one is done from a wound, or a crease, or a scar, and such like.
And the mode of operation in her is, that you take an acorn, in which there are two threads, and touch it to the flesh, and cause it to penetrate from the left tear to the right, until the two ends of the thread come to the flesh.
Then extend the flesh upward with a nail, and strike it with an awl on the side. If then the form of the eyelid returns according to what is necessary, it is good.
And if not, take a ray, and put it in the crease, and turn it with it: and find two creases on the inner side of the eyelid, and are the ends of the two creases from two angles of incision, until they meet and form one angle: until when they are gathered together, may that figure be made, and is a Greek letter.
Then remove that flesh by quantity, which is his acute lower side, from him who follows the eyelid. Then collect the separate parts and sew them together with a woolen thread.
Then take care of them with that which I have said, concerning soothing medicines and bandages, until they are healed.
And if an axillary wound occurs in a fissure, and needs to be sutured or cauterized: then you should find a flat fissure under the eyelids, also depending on what preceded it. Then separate the two lips with a lint, as we have said.
And the main words about the care of axillary wounds, whether they are upper or lower, so that the operation proceeds according to the preparation of Albucasis' form.
For it itself is very different in form: and the skilled craftsman prepares his art with whatever means are possible to him, until he restores the figure to the natural shape, or close to it, and himself also becomes ill, as is fitting for him from the operation and instruments in many dispositions.
Chapter XV
Regarding the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva, or the cornea.
And when this consolidation has happened to many people, so that the upper eyelid is consolidated with the white of the eye, and prevents itself from its own natural operations.
Then you should insert the tip of a ring under the eyelid and lift it up: or you should extend it with a hook: then cut the adhesion with a sharp knife, which is not acute in cutting the skin of a hook, but rather slightly obtuse: so that the sick person does not disturb at the operation, and removes the hook, and hurts his eye with its sharpness: and make your incision as if you were removing it, until when he returns the eyelid to its own natural form, and heals the adhesion entirely.
Then pour into his eye warm salt water, washing it with water: or distil into his eye from a distilled wine made from a dissolved zinc, with water.
Then separate the eyelids from the eye with a blade of iron: and place on the eye wool dipped in alum; and after three days use seif, and with solidatives, until it heals.
On cutting the nail and the eminence of the flesh of the lacrimal gland.
Chapter XVI. On the incision of the nail and the emin
Know that the nail is made in two ways. Or it is nervous: and it is similar to soft, tough sikfah, delicate. Or it is not nervous, similar to frozen moisture of snow: which when it touches iron, or is held by a hook, comes off, and does not stick to it.
And the two kinds do not begin to form until from the greater lacrimal gland, gradually, until they have acquired moisture, and prevent light, and eye movement.
And the method of working on its incision is: so that he may place his head in your lap. Then open his eyes, and separate his eyelids with your hand. Then take the nail with a small hook, and extend it upwards. Then take a pin and insert it into the nail from among the nails of a horse, or a hook: and make the thread strong, and double its end slightly, and fix it in the middle of the nail: and pierce it with an awl, and tie the nail thread onto it, and extend it upwards: and scrape off with a hair the side of the nail that follows the pupil, as if you were closing it up with hair until the very edge of its rear end.
Then make a small incision in the root of the lacrimal gland with a sharp scalpel, or with small forceps: and remove the natural tissue of the lacrimal gland, so that no constant flow of tears occurs from its incision.
And when the nail is extended with a hook alone: or with thread, as we have said. Then scrape with a soft sponge, this is its shape.
And let not the sponge touch the horny tunic, and let not an injury occur to it, and let not the pupil be punctured.
Then after the incision, pour into the eye some ground salt, or from a piece of zinc made from zinc, and leave it alone until another day. Then care for the eye with what is necessary, until it heals.
If the nail is not nerveous, and you cannot insert an acumen into it, nor does it hurt when you push on it, then often this nail-species with medicines is cured, and heals as if told in division.
If you want to cut it open, then open the eye with care, and take a soft sponge, mild of touch, this shape is in accordance with. And shave the nail from the top with care. If you see that it is getting thinner and wrinkling, and the shave impresses into it, then distil from your own hour in the eye from ground zinc, or from red zince, or from salt finely-ground: and rub the eye until another day.
Then repeat the operation on it again, until you remove all of it. Unless otherwise it is good for you in your eye a hot aposteme: then, however, let go of it, and care for the aposteme until it heals.
Then repeat the operation on the same again with the shave, until it heals.
Except if the flesh is not painful to the eye, it should be suspended with a hook, and cut off from that part of it: and do not make the last incision, so that the course of the tears does not run.
Then pour into the tear canal ground red zince, or made from zinc, until it heals.
From the incision of Albucasis, and the flesh that has grown up in the eye.
Chapter XVII.
The flesh becomes red in some men's eyes, mixed or laid on, until it covers the pupil, or approaches it, or tightens it over the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelids outward: and the rosace expands.
And the operation is also that he should put his injured head in your lap. Then open his eyes, and pull out all the flesh with suitable hooks: and hold it with one forceps or another.
Then cut the flesh first, until you have finished all of it with a knife. And be careful from the eye, so that you do not hurt him during the operation: and let your incision be such that it reaches all of him with a knife, or with a chisel, which we described in cutting the nail: or with small forceps, by which the flesh is held fast, seconding how his shape will come after this skull.
When your incision is complete, and all the aloes has been removed, then fill his eye with a crushed salt: or distil into it red powder, and similar substances from the medicines that burn: and put on top of the eye a cotton pad with alum: so that it is protected from burning heat.
That if some of the aloes remains, and warm blood remains with you, and be careful about a hot aposteme: then let go of the eye, and take care of him while he sits with an aposteme.
Then repeat the operation on him again, until he is healed.
And also do the same with the flesh added which has happened in the eye from this kind.
However, it is necessary that you keep away from all weak eyes the cure from natural or accidental ways, working with iron: and do not put your own hand into any of these operations, until you have finished, for that member is able to endure such an operation.
On the Collection of Sebum from the Eye.
Head XVIII.
There are red swellings that cover the eye and prevent it from being operated on; and they weaken the eye with the passage of time.
For this reason, first of all, you must consider whether the eye on which Sebel lies is strong and has no other disease except Sebel: then remove Sebel from it.
And is it not as you command the sick to put their head in your lap?
Then hang up these swells with one or two hooks according to your discretion: and may the hook be thin, according to this shape, or may there be two hooks placed at a distance in the body, according to this shape.
Then take these swells with thin forceps with care, and wipe away the blood hour by hour until you remove those swells from the eye, and they heal up: and be careful not to leave the eye with any sharp edges.
And let your operation take place in the middle of the day and be firm in your operation: so that you do not fall on those swells.
And when you have drained it, then sprinkle the eye with green or red pepper so that its original sharpness may eat away what remains of Sebel.
But if you cannot collect all of it in that hour, then plug the eye with something that soothes the pain of the eye: and leave it for a few days until the pain subsides: and keep it away from heat: then repeat over the same spot according to this method, until it heals.
And this is the shape of the forceps.
(For reducing arsis to the nose.)
Chapter XIX.
The doctors say that Arsis should be operated on with a sharp instrument or a strong medicine: according to what went before in his narrative.
And if it does not heal, then it is no skill in it: unless you find on the swelling that appears at birth and squeeze out all the moisture that is in it until the hole is discovered.
As soon as the bone is detected, and you see corrosion or blackening in it, then cut it off with this instrument, whose shape is like this.
And it is called the chisel of the head.
Let it be made of iron and be round like a chisel, that is to say, marked with the file, or with a sharp point from a sharp instrument, fine and subtle: and place the bone on the corrupt site.
Then turn the bone between your fingers and press your hand lightly, until you know that that corruption is now worn away: and do it several times.
Then restore the site with dry Styptic.
If then the site is healed and a bone grows up in it, and the wound heals over: and remains for forty days, and does not break out again, or happen to it any accident: then you shall know that it is now healed.
And if not, then there is no skill, unless the tube is reduced to the cavity of the nose, according to this form.
And is, that you should discover a second bone by means of iron, or with sharp medicine: and when the bone has been detected, then take a chisel, second, whose end is metal and triangular: and make its wood like a pyramid extended to the end, as you see it.
Then place it on the bone itself: and let it be near the tear: and extend your hand from the eye a little way. Then turn your hand with the chisel, until it penetrates the bone, and feels weak: by this you shall know that heat is issuing from it, when it holds your hand on its nose.
Thus then restore the site with dry Styptic as I taught you.
When then a bone grows up and the site hardens: then the matter that flowed out to the outside returns to the nose: so it is lighter over the weak one.
On the Emphasis of Eye Reduction
Chapter XX.
When the eye emerges whole, and does not cause harm to the sight or diminution thereof: then it is fitting that you should resolve the disease by bleeding: afterwards, you should apply poultices on the eyelid without scarring, but with suction.
Then place on the eye a liniment made of acacia, aloe, incense, and sheepswool. Then tighten the eye above with a cloth with a lot of powder.
And the mode of the powder is this: that you take soft cloths, many and twice as much of each cloth; make them into many: then place them one on top of the other, according to the quantity needed for the eye: then tighten them together with a tight cloth.
And repeat the poultices with suction without scarring.
Then remove the poultices and leave the eye tightened during the day and night.
But if the ligature again softens, then it is fitting that it should be tightened a lot: then remove the ligature after day and night, as we have said.
If therefore the eye is already red and you have used new ointments, it is good: and if not, then repeat the poultices, and the tightening, and the poultices, until the eye is healed.
On the Incision of the King's Ointment
Chapter XXI.
When the disruption has occurred in the King's ointment, then let it emerge and proceed outside the eyelids like a grain of wheat, and form the shape of a human being for it, so that the eye may strike it: then the operation is in it according to what the narrows: and is, so that you introduce water in the root of the King from below to above.
Then introduce another acum where there is a double filament on the lacrimal side, and let it penetrate: then remove the first according to its disposition.
Then cut a place for a son of two, and bind it with him on the side of the King in the orbit of the needle: and tighten it much.
Then extract the acumen, and place it over the eye with wool immersed in albae [a kind of poultice]: and let it go until it falls with the thread with the King's side.
Then care for the eye with him, which comforts itself, until the wound heals.
And whenever the King is tightened from all sides with a circle of cloth, until he adds to the eye a great eminence.
Then pierce with a fine needle that it reaches to the depth of the eye, and curries away albae [a kind of poultice], and falls down the eye, and goes in at once: then tighten it up until it heals.
¶ Of the cure of Al-Baqī' s case.
Head XXII.
This disorder called Al-Baqī' s, is not but a mucus gathered in the eye, similar to water that has dropped down, and it is not that itself.
And the mode of operation in this case is, so that you make the sick person sit on a prepared chair, or straight.
Then take his head in your hands from the two parts, and move it, until you feel the mucus coming to the lower part of your eyes. Then cover it up, and let it not fall down, and let the light be complete: and let the sick person see things as he used to: and if it did not fall down below, you shall know that it is water.
If, however, the descent of the mucus with him which we have said does not prepare, then make the sick person sit between your hands. Then take a fine needle and find it with him on top of the horny layer just at the junction with the corneal veil in the crown, until the mucus comes out.
When, however, it has come out, then distill into the eye a hot water in which you have already mixed haygrass and honey: or water in which you have already bulled haygrass and honey: and then care for the rest of the cure, until it heals.
Regarding the treatment of water that has entered the eye, or a waterfall.
Chapter XXII.
We have already discussed the different types of water and what is suitable for incisions, each according to its nature, explaining and demonstrating it. Then take the same one according to health.
Then let the sick person sit between your hands, facing towards the light, near the sun: and bind his healthy eye, and tighten it tightly: then with your right hand, if the water has entered the left eye, close the left eye with your palm: or with your left hand, if the water has entered the right eye.
Then take alum with your right hand, if the eye is on the left: or with your left hand, if the eye is on the right.
Then place the end of the alum, by its thickness, towards the crown of the eye, in the same direction as the tear film, and push it in with force: and you will feel that the alum has entered the eye's white part; and sense, that the alum has reached the lacrimal canal.
And it is necessary that the length of the alum's journey to the eye's depth be a measure of the space between the pupil and the end of the blackness; and this is the crown of the eye. You will see it in the same pupil of the eye' vision, because of the clarity of the cornea.
Then place the alum until it reaches the spot where the water is. Then push with your thumb from below, once on either side.
If the water has entered immediately, then the sick person will see it immediately, and the alum will be in his eye.
Then rest for a little while. If the water has entered, then place it again, except that it comes out of the alum.
When it is set and does not come up: then remove the alum with ease: and you will feel your hand moving slowly.
Then dissolve a little in water from the clear salt gem; and wash with it the eye inside out. Then put outside all of the eyeball, or a cloth soaked in rose oil and alba, and bind with it the healthy eye:
We and also those who are our time, put on him crushed cumin mixed with alba;
That if he does not obey you the almagda to the entrance in the eye because of his hardness, since he is a man, whose eye is very hard: then it shall be necessary that you take the spatumile, which is called Alberid, whose this is the form.
Open then with it the same connection only, and not the last hand of your; and is there is not a place but you make the place for the almagda soft.
Then introduce the almagda, according to which we have said.
And near the complement of your work, let be prepared sick bed poorly made, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark house; and forbid him from all movement, and from coughing: and put food for him that which nature heals: and do not move his head to the right, nor at all to the left.
And let him sit the ligature according to his will until the third day.
Then dissolve that in that dark house, and examine his vision: and let him see things. Then reduce the ligature until the seventh day.
And is not necessary that he does it in the hour of cure, or immediately after the incision: but let him keep away from it, because water rises quickly through the veiny aspect.
But if it happens that the apostema is hot: then let you open the eye before the seventh day: and straighten it with him that sits down the apostema, until he sits down: then let you check his vision, and let put over the face of his oral where regulates his vision under this its days, while he exists in that dark house.
Then he shall leave the house step by step, and turn to his own bed.
And you know that a student is not absolved from a few doshas of sleep: then he should dare to do the operation.
And indeed some of them have reached us from Al-Ayn who said that it was done in Al-Ayn to make a hole with a needle so that water is sucked up.
But in truth I have not seen anyone on earth do that, and I have not found it written in any of the old books, and it is possible that it should be new.
And these are the forms of the instruments so that they stand on them who do not know them.
Let them be made of pure brass; and let their ends be with this same subtle triangular shape, and the sharp end.
Chapter XXIV.
Regarding the cure for the birth of a nose.
When and because different kinds of meat are added to it, some of which is absorbed by the many-legged scorpion, and from that comes a scaly, light-colored flesh; and from that comes a soft, non-bright-colored meat.
In the meat from which there is a soft, not deceitful, and no cancerous part, you should make a seat for the sick between your hands opposite the sun, and open his nostrils, and throw in them a sharp needle from one side: then take them to the outside, and cut off what you have grasped with a sharp, acute scissor from one side, until you know that all the meat has been removed.
What if anything remained of which it is not possible to cut off: then shave it with one sharp instrument so easily until nothing remains of it. But if your blood is in charge of you, or an accident happens to become hot: then oppose it by what is necessary: or is it from the malicious apostemas, then approach it with cauterizing, until the blood is separated, and all flesh is removed.
Then let it be applied to the nose after a sharp incision, and water or wine. But if the nose is opened, and moistness proceeds therefrom as far as the palate, then you shall know that it is already well.
But if the moisture does not penetrate, as it should, then you shall know that there is bone born within the upper nasal bones, to which the knife does not reach with the incision.
Then it is necessary that you introduce a twig of a certain thickness, and there are many knots in it; and place a quantity of the finger, or less, between each knot; and let go the injured person, so that he sends one end of the thread into the nose with a nail, or with whatever is possible for him to do after he has done himself similar injury: and let him pull his sense of smell, until it reaches the throat, and go out over his throat.
And often this same boy does such a thing in school; and it is an easy thing for him who wants to do it.
Then place the two ends of the thread, the end that goes out over the nose, and the other that remains in the nose. Then let the knotted thread lie tight against the tissue with the knots in the thread. Let it be so that you know that the tissue is already with the knots of the thread.
Then pull out the thread: and place in the nose after the removal of blood a liquid that you have soaked in Egyptian ointment; do it for three days, or more, until the ointment has corroded all that is left of the flesh.
Then place in the end of the thing in the nose a plumb-pipe, for several days, until it is healed.
But if it needs healing that dries up, then use that.
For the making of a nasal douche, with which to pour out oil, and other medicine into the nose, let it be made of silver or brass: that it may be like a small lamp, opened as an oyster shell: and its outlet in a similar way.
And if you wish to make a closed tube, like a cane.
And if you wish to make a closed tube for lavage, it should be full and sealed: its handle at the end, which you hold, while you heat oil in it or that which you wish to extract and liquids.
Head XXXV.
The ulcer often grows at the tip of the nose and becomes larger with time until it makes a crater-like indentation in the skin.
And for this, when it first appears, you should cut off all of it. Then place over the spot, or poultice, or burning medicine that remains in the spot.
But if the cutting of it is delayed until it has become larger, then examine it, if it is hard, dull in color, and dull in smell: then do not touch it with fire: for an ulcer is a cancerous thing.
For many times the eye that has been wounded by an arrow and has had an ulcer, and from it have come great malicious things upon the one who had it.
And if the ulcer is a gentle touch, not dull in color, and you see that the cutting of it is possible throughout its whole length, then wash it with water, and cut off the one, without fear, and without dread: and take care of the place along with it, until it heals.
Head XXVI.
On the suture of the nose, and the lips, and the ears.
You should know That when there occurs a separation of the cartilage of one of these joints, then the operation is little done unless in some men.
Then you should know when it happens to someone, that you should consider, if it is a fresh wound with its own blood: and then add pain to the wound with sutures: and take care of the wound itself, until it heals.
And if the continuity of the wound has been separated and some healthy parts have been made: then it is necessary to cut off all the part from its own skin, until it bleeds. Then the two lips are joined together with sutures and are tightly tied, and dust is sprinkled on the wound with dragon's blood and ground olive oil: and put over the powders a fragment of plaster of Paris, and some other from the consolidated plasters: and leave it tied for two days, or three. Then çöz solve it, and change the medicine: and leave it until the threads separate themselves by themselves. Then care for the wound with ointment, until it heals.
The method of the sutures is, that you gather the solution of continuity, or with the threads, as we told you in the wound of the eye: or you gather the solution with a thread, as I have told you.
The Twenty-Seventh Chapter.
The extraction of knots from the lips.
Many people have hard lumps in the inner part of their lips, like little seeds of herbs, and some smaller ones and larger ones.
Therefore it is necessary that you turn over the lips, and find out every knot, and hang them up by a hook, and hit them with a hammer from all sides.
Then fill the place after the incision has been dried three times, until the blood is separated.
Then it is to be cleaned with vinegar, and the place with it is to be cured until the sores heal.
The Twenty-Eighth Chapter.
The Incision of flesh that has grown on the gums.
Many times a flesh grows on the gums, which the ancient ones call "abuluss".
Therefore it is necessary that you hang them up by a hook: or hold them with pincers, and hit them at the root, and let the blood run, or let it bleed.And if the incision is on the outside of the gum, you shall put cotton in the wound, and bind it up; and if it is on the inside, you shall put wool thereon, and bind it up: and if it is on the back part of the teeth, you shall put wool in the wound, and
Then put on the site three times, or other powder stipulative, drying.
That if that flesh returns after cure, for many times it returns, then cut again, and cauterize it: for that does not return after cautery.
Head XXIX.
¶ Of the reasons of teeth with iron.
When and are gathered in the surfaces of teeth from the interior and exterior part, and between the gums hard skin, sharp, and sometimes denigrantur, and become yellow, and virides, until it comes from that corruption to the gum, and the teeth are foedi per illud.
Therefore you should make the sick sit between your hands, and his head in your bosom, and saw off the molars and teeth on which appear to you the gums, and such like sand: until there remains nothing of it, and likewise do about the blackness, and viridity, and yellowing, and other things until they are cleansed.
But if it is taken away that which is in them from the beginning of the reason, it is good: and if not, then cut again on them a reason another day, second, and third, until the last comes to study in that what you want.
And you should know that the teeth resist the razors of different shapes and figures: second, that is prepared for your operation: moreover, that the razor with which he saws the teeth from the lower part, is another than the razor with which he saws between the teeth, according to other forms.
And these shapes of razors are among you prepared, which you see.
Head XXX.
¶ Of the extraction of pain from teeth.
It is necessary that you take care of the tooth with its pain with all your skill, and are tarder in the eradication of it. For it is not that the tooth should be suppliant when eradicated: for it is a sublimis substance: until, when there is no excuse for the eradication of it, then it is necessary that when it is sought to eradicate the diseased tooth, so that it hardens, and certifies with you teeth aching.
For often pain deceives the sick, and he thinks that the tooth is infected and removes it; then the pain does not leave him until the infected tooth is removed.
For we have already seen this from the operation of bleeding.
When therefore the tooth is pained by itself, then it is necessary that you make incisions around the tooth with the chisel, in which there is some virtue, until it is healed from all sides: then you remove it with your fingers, or with delicate tweezers at first slowly, until you cut it.
Then when you have made a good location with the chisel, and the place is between your knees: which you keep firmly, so that it does not ache; then pull out the tooth after its straight line, so as not to break it.
If then it does not come out, then take some of their instruments, and push it under it from all sides with ease, and try to move it, as you did at first.
If the tooth is broken or corroded then you must fill it with cloth: and you grasp it with a small rod so that it does not break at the time of your tightening on it with tweezers.
And it is necessary that you should carefully make incisions around the gums from all sides.
And keep your strength, so that you do not break it, and let some part of it remain, and return to the pain from which it was first that is greater in its malice.
And beware, do not do what phlebotomators do in their haste and the boldness of their soul in eradicating it, except that they administer to it what we have described.
For often they bring about great diseases in men, which are more difficult to break, and leave all the roots of it, or some of them: or take it out with some of the bones of the jaw: as we have often witnessed this.
Then, let it be rinsed with wine, or with vinegar and salt, after the removal.
That if it should happen a flow of blood from the places (for often it happens) then dry up some of the wound, and fill with it the place: and if not, cauterize it, if it does not suit you the wound.
Form of the forceps is thin which moves the teeth in the first place, have long extremities, short handle, thick, so do not double when pressed on top of the tooth: they are like you see thick handles, until when you press with them, do not bite themselves, and do not double: short extremities, and they are made of iron bar, or from a bent piece of iron, direct extremities: and in their extremities are teeth, some of which enter into some, and by constriction squeeze tightly, firmly.
And when the extremities become like the form of the ear's opening which is called ciconia, and are strong constriction.
Chapter XXXI.
On the removal of teeth and the breaking of the mandible bones.
When there remains after the removal of a tooth that is broken something, then it should be placed on the place with butter for one or two days, until it becomes soft the place: and then introduce to it the algast or forceps: the extremities of which are similar to the ear' opening which is called ciconia. The form of this is of the forceps.
Are extremities made like a lemon inside: or like a horsehair plait.
But if it does not obey you to the exit with these forceps, then it should be that you tie on the root, and remove all the flesh, and introduce the instrument which is called a small punch, whose form is this.
Is sit brevius extremitatis, grossae parimiter: et non sit imbibitum, ut ne frangatur.
If then the root comes out through that, it is good: and if not, you should be guided with these other instruments whose forms are these.
Form a triangular shape at the end, where there is some bulkiness.
Form a triangular shape at the end, where there is some thinness.
And with other instruments and tools which have preceded in the order of teeth.
Also sit with this instrument which is similar to a large hook, this shape, the twisted triangular end, where there is some bulkiness so that it does not break: and be not浸 浸 wet.
And know, that there are many instruments for teeth: and likewise the other instruments do not matter, and the skilled artisan finds out by himself the instrument, according to which is significant its operation and ailments itself.
For from ailments are to those for which the ancient instrument did not say, because of the diversity of their kinds.
If then breaks the jaw from a tooth, or from other bones of the mouth, or is rotten: then examine above it in its place with that which belongs to it from instruments and hooks which I have said in extracting roots, and move by motion, whose form is this.
Sit in it something of bulkiness gradually, so that it is tightened, or held with it the jaw, and does not flee and push, until it walks out the jaw: and restore the place with medicines fitting to it.
If then there is little putrefaction in the bone, then shave it from its putrefaction, and care for it, until it heals.
Chapter 32.
Of locking Dentum eminentium over others.
When teeth prominent not according to its natural course, it becomes rotten by that form: and especially when it happens that in women, and girls, namely teens.
It is necessary so that you consider. For if a tooth is born after another tooth, and does not fit, or its locking is possible, or its grinding: then shave it: and if it is joined with another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, whose this form is.
The face was like a little mask and it was made of iron and its extremities were acute.
And let your wound be healed, so that you may not suffer any more, and because of the toughness of the tooth, and so that it does not dislodge another tooth.
But if he is exposed to the sun: then rub him with a piece of iron, whose shape is this.
Let it be all of iron, and the handle of his minutely sharp awl like a needle, as if an aiguille: so that it may be sharpened little by little over many days with ease, so that it does not move the teeth, and falls out: then make smooth the end of it, with some chisels.
If it is a tooth that breaks off part of it and hurts the tongue: then let it be sharpened as well, until its sharpness is gone, and made smooth: and let it be flattened, so that it does not hurt the tongue, or spoil the speech.
Chapter 33.
On the Retentation of Teeth with Golden Filings.
When it is an injury and a shaking of the front teeth from a blow, or a fall: and the sick person cannot clamp them together on top of that, so as not to fall out: and he has tried different remedies with bitter medicines, and there was no benefit in it: then let them have filings of gold, so that they may be clamped with a wire of gold: for gold becomes yellow, but never changes.
And let there be a medium filo between the subtility and thickness according to the quantity that he takes between the teeth.
And the form of the retentation is so that you take a filo and insert it between two healthy teeth: then bind it with two extremities of filo between the teeth, or one, or more, until you reach the edge of the tooth on the other side. Then repeat the texture right up to the part from which you started: and grip your hand with care and prudence, until it does not move at all: and let your grasp be tight where you grip the filo, near the roots of the teeth, so that it does not slip.
Then cut off the extremities with scissors: and join them together, and bind them tight: and hide them between the sound tooth and the moving tooth, so that they do not hurt the tongue; then loosen it so that it is stiff when it remains.
If however it has come loose or has been cut, bind them together with another thread, and let it stand with it in this way for a whole time.
And this is the form of the teeth, and the appearance of the retention of two sound teeth and two moving teeth, as you see them.
And sometimes one tooth goes back, or two after the loss and falling into their places, and holds fast as we have described, and remains: and does this only if the craftsman is prudent and skilled.
And sometimes a bone is broken: and it is made into the form of a tooth, and is put into its place, from which the tooth holds fast and is tied on, as we have said: and remains, and is bound to it for a long time.
Chapter IIII.
Sometimes the ligament which happens under the tongue is either natural with which man is born, or accidental, from an arrow which has already healed over.
And the operation is so that it opens the mouth in its head in your throat, and lifts up the tongue: then cut that nerve-ligament through its width, until the tongue is free from its hold.
If there is anything of hardness and swelling in it, and if that comes from the healing over of an arrow-wound: then let it fall into a hook, and end it through its width, until you cut the ligament, and free the swelling.
And be careful, so that there is not a break in the deep flesh, and do not cut the artery there, and let the flow of blood happen.
Then let it be washed into the incision with rose-water, or with vinegar, or with cold water.
Then place under the tongue a wooden splint from linen, which the sick one should hold all night long: so that it does not set hard on the second day.
But if blood flow occurs, then place three layers of cloth over the wound site. But if you are wounded by blood, then cauterize the site with cauterizing resin that suits it: then take care of yourself with the rest of the cure, until it heals.
Chapter 25.
When a small blister under the tongue occurs that absorbs the wound, preventing the tongue from its natural function: and perhaps it magnifies so much, until the bone is filled.
And the operation on it is such that you open the mouth before the sun: and consider the blister.
But if you see that the wound is dark-colored, black, hard, and the sick person does not have a feeling: then do not touch the wound, for it is cancer.
And if it declines to whiteness, where there is moisture, then throw into it a hook and cut the wound with a sharp scythe and free it from all parts. If you are wounded by blood during your operation, then place three layers of cloth on the wound, until the blood stops flowing: and then return to your operation, until you remove the wound with its complement.
Then rinse it with vinegar and salt: and take care of the wound with the rest of the cure that suits it, until it heals.
The treatment for blisters between the two eyelids.
Chapter 26.
When the following occur between the two eyelids, that is, glands, which resemble azalea, and which are called the two eyelids: when you do not heal them with the cure we mentioned in the division, then consider them carefully.
But if the blister is hard, dark-colored, and has a little feeling: then do not touch it with iron.
If it is red in color and its root is thick: then do not touch it even with iron, fearing the flow of blood, then let it go, until it dries up. And then either you pierce it or it ruptures itself.
And if it is white in color and round, and its root is thin: then the wound should be cleansed.
And the operation on it is, so that you consider before performing the operation on it, if it has a warm, complete scab, or is about to be somewhat diminished: then therefore make it sit in your lap, and have its head in your bosom: and open its mouth, and take hold of it with your hands between them, and rub its tongue lower with the instrument, which has this shape.
Let it be made of silver, or of brass, that it is sharp like a knife.
When you rub it with the instrument and a scab shows itself to you, and it falls on its own: then take hold of it with a hook, and pull it out toward the outside as much as you can, except that you draw it out with it some skin.
Then cut it with the instrument, which has this shape following. It is sewed up with thread: however, its ends are curled so that the opening of each of them is on the other's acute point: so that it is from iron sewn, or a cloth soaked in.
If this instrument is not present, then cut it with a chisel, which has this shape. It should be sharp on one part, and not sharp on the other.
And when you have cut one of the eyelids according to this shape of incision, cut the other second by following this same shape of incision.
Then after the incision, gargle the sick person with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
But if it should happen that there is a flow of blood for it, gargle with water in which leaves of myrtle or similar things from the stypetical have been boiled: until the flow of blood stops: then take care of the wound, until it heals over.
And sometimes phlegmonous abscesses arise in the throat, besides two amygdaloid ones. So cut them as I said in cutting of the two amygdales equally.
And indeed I have already been cured of a woman with an abscess that had arisen between her throat, which she drew to a hoarse voice, little sense, which had almost closed her throat: and the woman breathed from my mouth, and had already prohibited her from eating, drinking water: and had already come close to death, if she had remained one day or two days.
And the abscess rose only so much that it had thrown out two branches, until they had come out of two nostrils.
So I hurried up and fixed one of them with a hook. Then I pulled it out, and there came out a big piece of it.
Then I cut off where I had caught it from the nostril's opening.
Then I made her go out through the other nostril's opening.
Then I opened her mouth, and pressed her tongue: then I fixed the hook in the abscess; then I cut off part of it, and there did not flow out any more but a little blood: so I closed up her throat completely, and she began immediately to drink water, then also took food.
So I did not often cut the abscess again over a long period of time: and an abscess succeeded to that which I had cut, until it was too late and then very painful.
I therefore took care, and cauterized the abscess between her throat.
Then it stood still: then I walked away from her part, and did not know what God would do with her after me.
On the Incision of a Phlegmonous Abscess.
The head of Chapter LVII.
When a catarrh comes down to the palate, and an abscess rises and is long, then it is called the vertical one: and if it is in the lower part thick, round, then it is called the uvular one.
When you are healing with it as we said in the division, and there is no cure: and you see that the apothermia has become cold from it, and it is subtle: then you should strike it.
And what comes out of it is rounded and there is no length in it, and it is bloody or black in color or not in its essence: then you should strike it too. For fear is in the wound.
So when you see it according to the way I said from its whiteness and length, let the sick sit in front of the sun; and press his tongue with an instrument that preceded the description: then fix a hook on his cheek, and pull him down: and strike it with one or two instruments which I said for cutting two nostrils.
And you should not strike from it unless it is added to the natural limit without adding.
For if you strike from it more, you will hurt speech and language.
Then after the incision use what we have said about the incision of two nostrils: and care for it until it heals.
But if the sick is disturbed from the incision: then you should use skill in cauterizing it without fear and anxiety.
And the mode of cauterization in it is not, except with sharp water: and it is, as you put the head of the nurse in your lap. Then press his tongue with the instrument which we said. Then take from water what I said to you in the chapter of cauterizing, and bind it with this dry calamus, and fill it with the juice of this instrument, whose this is shape:
Let its end be where the medicine is bound, like the bound cochlea of the radius.
And place the instrument with the medicine on its plate: and let the sick lie on his side so that saliva flows from his mouth out of the inner medicine, so that it does not go down to his throat anything, and hurts him.
Then take your hand with the medicine. And then apply a little of the medicine to the wound, an hour's worth, until it has been reduced and calmed by the medicated salve.
And if you wish to receive blood, and to stretch it out on the edge of the wound, and to dip the cloth into the medicine, and to insert the rod with the cloth into the canal above, until the cloth sticks to the wound.
Do this many times, until you get the result that you desire regarding cauterization. Then release it: for it will dry up and fall off after three or four days.
That if you wish to use the medicine again, repeat it: and after cauterization wash off the surrounding area with a wet cloth dipped in butter, and clean up what is on it from the medicine: and rinse it with cold water.
And treat externally with embrocations, and internally with gargles, until you are healed.
This therefore is the more beneficial species of cure, and less effective in preventing fear.
And when a wound is cured with this, which is softer than cautery and incision: for it is cured with smoking, in the following way. Summon herbs, and hyssop, and oregano, and rue, and sage, and chamomile, and abrotan, and similar things; and add them all together, or some of them in an oven, and boil them in vinegar, and let it bubble: and let the bottom be covered with a fine ash: and let there be a hole in the middle of the cauldron, above which put an instrument for piercing, in this way.
Let it be made of silver or brass: and introduce the end into the tube, in which there is a small hole, until the vapor rises up to the wound on the rod, until the wound is heavily obscured.
Then repeat this many times over the same area, until it has healed.
And for this reason, do not perform this cure at the beginning when the patient arrives with a suppurative wound. But because it adds to the suppuration: and you should not do this cure unless at the height of its suppuration.
If you do not have this instrument with you, then take a cane and put it at the end of the wound so that the skin does not burn the mouth; for the skin prevents the vapor from burning the mouth: and this is good cure with health.
On extracting spines, and bones from the throat.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Often a tooth, or a spine of a fish, or something else would adhere in the throat.
Therefore you should extract what is visible on top of the jaw when it falls after you press the tongue with an instrument on the sun; and tell me that it is in the throat.
And if what is hidden in the throat does not appear to you; you should make a weak sick person eat before it is digested in the belly. Perhaps then what is attached will come out through the vomit.
Or the sick person swallows a piece of nettle, or radish, or dry bread; or takes a piece of dry sponge from the sea, and ties it with a string, and then swallows it; So when he arrives at the place where there are spines, or teeth, and they are extracted, then he will come out.
If therefore he does not come out with it that I have said: then use the instrument of lead in this form.
Let it be thicker than a radish no more, and in the end let it be narrower, which he can put into his throat easily: and let him hold his head up.
And let him keep away from the tip of his epiglottis so that it does not make a cough; and push out with it, if he has a tooth or a spine, or stick it in with his own hand.
For a sick person to enter is better; for his knowledge of the site of the wound, and he pushes down or pulls up his hand with the instrument upwards, all this according to the quantity that has been prepared for him, until he comes out.
Regarding the extraction of blood: When one should withdraw the blood from a patient, first check the direction of the blood flow
Chapter 39: The Wound
When you treat with the leech together with what I said in the division of treatment with medicines and it doesn't work, then consider in the mouth facing the sun, or next to the sun after you press his tongue with the instrument that I told you.
If then your yawn falls on the leech, remove it with a small hook, or with delicate movements to one side.
That if it is not possible with them: then take a narrow tube, and insert it into the mouth all the way to near the throat; and then insert into the tube an ignited iron with fire. Do this many times: and let the patient abstain from drinking water all day.
Then let him take a full drink of cold water and open his mouth to it; and let him put his mouth on it and not swallow anything from it: and let him move his hand with water. For the leech immediately falls when he feels the water.
If it does not come out with what I told you, then smoke the patient with camphor, or with a wormwood bug, or with an instrument that I told you in smoke-making.
Do this many times, because it will fall on its own.
And the method of operation in smoke-making is that you take a pot, in which there are wormwood flies with fire; and cover the pot with a lid, and have a hole in it; and place the end of the instrument in that hole.
Then throw the smoke, and let the patient put his mouth at the end of the tube, and let him close his mouth so that the smoke does not come out until you know that the smoke has reached the leech. The wound should be cleaned immediately.
If it does not fall, then many times apply suffumigation.
And the sick person should lie down, eat broth, and other foods, and not drink water.
Therefore, he must go out with this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which, when it falls on top of it, blood is removed from the throat when it drops.
It is similar to forceps, as you see: but because of its curvature which enters into the throat. And the end is similar to an ear, which is called a cicona, in which there is a roughness of the edge of the blade; and when it grasps something, it does not let go at all.
Regarding the opening of Abscesses, their section, and care in general.
Chapter 40.
There are many kinds of abscesses, many types, according to which comes the memory of them, that is, one and the same in this book: and they differ in their perforation and the section of them into two modes.
One kind of abscess is that which is called a sebaceous abscess, and because it comprises humidities.
And the second mode is due to places, in which it comes from the body.
Since the abscess occurs in the head, it is different from the accident of an abscess in the anus: and the abscess which occurs in fleshy places is different from the accident of an abscess in joints; and each of them has its own judgment according to operation.
And of the abscesses are those that do not need to be pierced unless they have been成熟d and their 完成: and of them are those that need to be pierced while they are crude and have not been成熟d according to their completion.
Such as abscesses which are near joints.
Since the abscess, when it occurs near a joint and is prolonged, continues to putrefy what is in its circumference which may have become corrupted because of the ligaments, or the nerves of that joint: therefore this is the cause of the closer contraction of that limb.
There is a blister on the main limb: for if you delay its piercing until it has come to maturity, it will hurt him or that main limb.
Or it is near the hip: so pierce it then that it is not yet mature: and do not, as you pierce, a raw blister, which has not been digested completely, unless it is near the hip, so that it does not rot deeply, and lingers towards the inner sides, and becomes a fistula, or comes to be on the edge of it, so that it does not heal.
It is necessary that you know the time for piercing the blister, which has come to maturity in accordance with the complement: and it is at the sedating of pain, the recession of fever, and the decrease of rubor, and pulsation, and acuteness of head for the blister: and the other signs.
And it is necessary that you make the same piercing in a lower place of the blister, and more prominent: and let the piercing be made running along the length of the body, if the blisters are in the parts of the hands and feet, and in the places of the spine, and of the strings, and of the nerves, and of the arteries, and to the last in all places equal, in which there is no reflection.
In those, however, that reflect, pierce with a view to that limb.
When, however, the blister is in fleshy places: then it is better that you should leave off piercing it until its digestion has been confirmed, as we have said, in accordance with the complement.
For if you pierce it before that, the course of the virus will be prolonged from it, and there will be much putrefaction and corruption, and perhaps it will harden its lips, and its depth will be increased.
And some blisters are pierced in accordance with the length of the body when there is necessity: or in accordance with that in which the limb feels pain.
And it is necessary that you administer a small piercing to small blisters, and a wide piercing to large blisters: or sections in accordance with the similarity of the size of the blisters.
And these are the pustules in which the skin should be closed: and let it be incised when it has been made, like a cloth, and made at the border, since it is already dead: like that which happened to many, such as blisters, and boils.
And these are those that are sutured with three angles. And of these is one which incises like the figure of a fig-leaf.
As an pustule of the groin.
And of these are those in which a round section is applied, and a lunar section: and similar to them are the sections.
That indeed to which there is no head, such as are the soft pustules on the surface, it is necessary that you should pierce it with a superficial puncture, or merely flat.
And it is necessary, when the pustule is thick, and has already collected a lot of puss, and pierce it, so that it does not ooze all the pus out at once: but extract a part of it. Then cover the pustule with a poultice until the next day. Then extract some more pus again.
Do this many times according to the degree, until it comes out: especially if the person is feeble of spirit, or a woman expectant, or a young boy, or an old man decrepitous: for the animal spirit often resolves from the animal with the egress of pus: and perhaps the infirm one dies, and you do not perceive it.
Therefore take great care in this chapter.
And after your puncture, when you have pierced these pustules, it is necessary that you should wash with water: and consider. But if the puncture of the pustule is small, or it is a flat section, then apply a poultice of straw, or an old cloth. But if the pustule is large, and there are many punctures, then it is necessary that you should introduce a poultice into all the punctures, until they are completely closed over.
And if you have cut off a part of the skin in an apotome, or have circumcised it: then you should fill it with old cloth, or as when the fabric is wrinkled, or rubbed with haircloth without moisture: and bind him firmly until the third day.
Then let him throw it off, and care for that with him what is necessary from unguentary, until he is healed.
But if there should happen to be a flow of blood during your operation, then administer cold water and vinegar, after which he shall dip the cloth into it: and let him lie on the spot of the bleeding many times.
But if the flow of blood persiste, then you should administer regime, care and powders, which I relate in various places in this our book, and from division.
But if it is in the time of winter, and the place of apotome is full of nerves: then you should fill them with wine and hot oil: and let them lie on the places.
And if it should be in the summer, and the places are fleshy: then you should let him lie on the fabrics imbibed with water and oil, or with wine and oil, and all that is cold. Until the third day, as we have said, then you should let fall the apotome, and cleanse him, and administer to his care what is fitting, until he is healed.
This is therefore what is necessary from the knowledge of the cure of apotomes universally.
But according to the halfway point of the distinction, I have already said about every apotome, how it is a way to the cure of its specific detail.
Head 31.
De the section of apotomes which occur on the skin of the head.
Apotomes which occur on the skin of the head are small, and they have a certain resemblance to knots, which are contained in tunicles, which are sacs for them: almost as if they were little hens.
There are many types among them.
From among them there are some who are scarce; and from among them there are those that retain moisture like mud; and from among them there are those that retain moisture like lime and clays; and those similar to them, and also among them are the hard stones.
And in all of them, and their extraction is not afraid, as long as it does not cause contradiction in the arteries at their section.
And the operation on their section is, as you experiment with it by an instrument, whose shape came after this, which is called Incision, until you know what it contains.
For if that is what contains moisture, then dry him up by sectioning along the length of the surface section: in this form.
And begin with the section from line B to line G. And so when the moisture is drained, then remove the skin that contains this moisture, and do not leave anything inside it.
For many times it will return if there remains anything of it.
Then immerse the cup in Egyptian ointment if it is present: and if not, in water and salt: and fill it with it, and leave it until another day. For this cup will corrode whatever remains inside the skin.
Then repeat the application of the Egyptian ointment to the cup a second and third time, and if you endure it, until you are convinced that nothing remains inside the skin, then no longer worry about the ointment, for when it is dried up with the wound, it will be healed.
That if it contains a swollen nodule: then dry him up by this form, having a cross-shaped section: and throw away the hooks between the two sections, and scrape off the skin completely: and test your skill in extracting the tunic that contains the nodule.
But if it causes contradiction for you in the arteries, then make what I will tell you about after.
And also do the same in the swollen joint, if it is stony, from the section, and with the same cure, as we have said.
Cutting through stones is easier because there is little blood and moisture. And sometimes some of these boils that are in the head of certain people who have no moisture within them.
That is because I cut through a boil on the head of a married woman, and I found the boil like a solid stone, hard, white, which could not be broken; and if anyone struck it with an instrument, he would wound himself.
But in other boils that occur on the head, except for those that happen on the heads of boys and at the roots of the ears, all of them are only a superficial section.
Or put a hole in them from their lower part so that the blood flow runs to the lower side.
Then take care of those with what is appropriate for them after treatment.
As for the cutting through of the stapes in the neck.
Chapter IV.
These boils often occur in the neck, and under the chin, and in the groin, and sometimes elsewhere on the body.
And over those which occur from them in the neck, there is one kind and many kinds; they originate from a joint; and every staph occurs within its own skin, as we have said.
And the kinds of boils are numerous. For some of them have leaves, and some of them contain moisture, and some of them are evil and do not submit to treatment.
In that one which you see is of good disposition when touched, whose color is close to the color of the skin, and which moves in all directions, and which is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the arteries, nor is it deep: it should be cut off with a superficial section from its upper part to its lower part of the body along the line, d. to f., and scrape it off completely: and extend two skin folds with hooks, or with many hooks if you wish, as we have said in the case of boils on the head, and then remove it slowly.
It is necessary to take great care so that no new wound occurs, nor a nerve damaged.
And the blade should not be too sharp so as to cut deeply: lest it give you your hand with an incision, or disturb the sick, and you should fall into what is not necessary.
But if you have cut a vein or an artery, or if it prevents you from operating, then place in the wound some ground pegs or some powder that stops the blood, and tighten the bandage and release it until the sharpness has subsided, and the wound is softened: otherwise it may start to rot.
For blood is stopped by the poultice. So return to your work, until you are finished.
Then examine with your index finger whether anything remains of the stiches; then cut them off and clean them out.
If there is a large new blood vessel at the base of the stitch; then it should not be cut from its root: but it should be tied with a strong double knot and left to fall off without harm.
Then fill the wound with old cow dung, which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then care for yourself.
If the entire stitch has come out, then you should bring together the two edges of the wound: and immediately close them up as soon as you see that there is no excess.
But if you see that there is excess due to the size of the stitch, then you should examine whether it remains attached to its root and remove it; and administer the stitch we have described.
And if any of the stitches contain moisture, pierce it with a shallow puncture: so that you can see the place where it is mature: and place the puncture from there, since it follows below the body, as we have said.
Then administer licorice after the puncture with ointment, and similar things to corrode whatever remains of corruption, until when you see that the wound has healed: then care for yourself with a gentler ointment made from meat, until it is well.
Chapter XLI.
Regarding the section on epiglottis removed from the throat due to an accident.
The ancient doctors described this operation on the epiglottis and no one in our land has done it, and this is the writing of their words.
But if there is a block, the epiglottis section should be removed: not because it provides an opening, since the larynx and lung are already paralyzed.
Indeed, those who have a hot swelling in the mouth, throat, or tonsils, and there is no illness in the canal, should use the epiglottis section to avoid the danger that results from obstruction.
Therefore, when we want to use this, let us remove the epiglottis with a small circle under the width of the epiglottis, in such a way that it is between two circles according to its quantity, so that it is at the tip of the sifilings, not in the cartilage: and this place is suitable for the section because it is separated from the flesh, and the blood vessels are far away from it.
If the doctor is timid, then he should spread the skin of the throat with a hook. Then he will find the skin, until he reaches the canal: he should free the blood vessels, if he sees any of them.
Then he will cut the sifilings that we mentioned above: and indicate on the section of the canal with phlegm that comes out from it when it is broken, and with the loss of voice.
And remove the hook at a time when the voice has stopped.
But when the hour of fear passes, gather together the two lips of the wound and cut them off alone without cartilage.
Then administer medicines that make the flesh grow again until it heals.
Says Al-Buqasi. Here is the summary of the talk that we have mentioned above, it is not exposed unless you know, that some of these accidents in the throat have already been covered with a patch: and he has been saved from death, and has breathed a sigh of relief from his illness, and has been cured by this medicine: and for this reason they have ordered to remove the hook, until the evil of the illness is consumed, and it is like its own self: then, therefore, they have ordered to wipe the hook, and to take care of himself, until he is healed.
And this which I saw myself, that a serving-maid took up a scalpel and sent it into her throat, and cut with it a part of the canal of the lung.
And I was called to cure her, and I found her gurgling, as does the gurgling of a dead person.
So I took off the bandage, and I found blood flowing out from the little rib cage. I was therefore convinced that she had not cut her tendon, nor any other vessel: and wind came out of her rib cage.
Then I took off the bandage, and also checked the tendon, and cured it until it was sound: and nothing happened to the maid, except that her voice became hoarse: and after a few days she returned to her normal state of health.
Therefore I say: there is no danger in cutting the epiglottis.
As for cutting the hernia in the throat.
Chapter 44.
This hernia named "guttural hernia" is a large one, second only to the colour of the body: and it occurs very often in women.
And it has two causes: either it is natural: or it is accidental.
Certainly there is no artifice in the natural one.
But the accidental one has two causes, of which one is similar to the nodules in the groin, and the other... And the other mode is similar to an ulcer that is formed from the inflammation of a blood vessel. And there is danger in it, and one should not dare to make an incision into it with a knife, unless it is small: and you should test it out, and investigate it with the probe. If then you notice a hernia similar to a large nodule, and it is not suspended with any blood vessels: then cut it off, as one cuts off nodules: and if it is contained in a sac, remove it with the sac: and if it is not in a sac, then examine it all over. Then care for the place with him as is necessary for the cure, until he is healed.
Head L.XLV.
§ On Section Above the Species of Knots.
There are many kinds of knots, and I have already spoken about their different types in the division; and it is necessary that I should explain here the difference between a Knot and an Entanglement, when there is doubt.
I say then, that when there is a fever and heat, and painful throbbing, until the efflux of pus has subsided, and decay has completed: for then the fever and heat subside.
When however there is a Knot, there is neither heat nor fever, nor pain, and they are contained within their own sacs, which is their own skin, and is of the color of the body: it is like a chickpea, and forms like a bag, and is greater or smaller.
And they are of two species: or they are fat: or they retain moisture. And the colors of moisture are many, according to what I have said in the division.
Therefore, when you are treating a Knot, you must try it out, and inquire into it with the instrument called Intromissum, according to which its form is in the chapter after this.
And the method of questioning the aprymous, and all Knots, is that you take this instrument, and introduce it into a moist place which you have prepared for the purpose: and you spread out your fingers with it little by little, until you know that the instrument has penetrated the skin. Then bring the last hand of yours according to the measure of the apurmous.
Then take out the Intromissum, and consider what comes out of its tip.
If however moistness runs out, whatever color it is: then dry up the place with a superficial section, according to what I have said in other apurmous.
And if no moisture comes out in the tip of the Intromissum, then you will know that it is fat: so dry up the place with a section having the form of a cross, according to this form, as I have taught you: and hang it by a hook, and scrape the skin from all parts with ease: and guard the case, if you can, over it, that you may take out the sound one with a Knot.
If, however, the bladder is torn during the operation and it is not possible to extract it whole, often it happens that then, if it is extracted at all, it is done haphazardly, until nothing remains of it.
For if a little or a lot remains of it, the knot returns secondarily by far the most.
If it hurts you and a little remains of it: then fill the ulcer with some acuter corrosive powder: and tighten the ligature, and put it above the seat of the ulcer with a warm poultice, and take care of the rest with care until it heals.
If then there is a large knot: then cut the two lips of it and take care of what is scarred with it.
If then it is a young contrarian ulcer that pulses or does not pulse: then approach, and fill the place where it lies with dried ash, and leave it tied for two days or three, until the ulcer putrefies, and the efflux of blood ceases: then return to cut what remains of the knot.
Chapter LXVI.
Regarding instruments from outside the body for cutting and piercing.
From these are the forms of introtrous devices, and they are three in kind.
For out of these is a large one, and out of these is a medium one, and out of these is a small one.
Let there be made out of iron square-ended rods that project from the centre so as to direct the introduction into the aperture.
And these are forms of experiment, and not, that is to say, piercing: and one of them is called a bore, that is, a piercer: and they are three in kind.
For out of these is a large one, and a medium one, and a small one.
Let them be made to project from the openings, and from exits, and from tubes, and from abscesses out of which are bones.
And others are round, thirdly smooth, as large needles out of which are sutures used for stitching, made out of amber, or out of copper, or out of iron, or silver.
And their better things are those that are made from citron.
And also experience is made with black lead, which is convenient so that through it they may experience the tubes, of which there are reflections to reflect with gentle reflections on them with its own reflections.
And again there are three species. For from them are the long ones, from them the medium ones, and from them the short ones, according to the quantity of the width of the tube and its tightness.
The shape of the rings, and there are many species.
For from them are the simple ones, that is to say those which have one depth: and there are three species as you see, Great, Medium, and Small.
And from them are Blind Rings: and there are three species.
And from them are hooks having two depths, and there are three species: and all these are necessary in their place.
And these are the shapes of Scalpels, with which they cut and scar Nodules and Apostenes: and there are three species: for from them is the great one, the medium one, and the small one.
Their ends with which they make a cut are acute, other ends are not acute: and they are not put together except so that the iuuamentum is made in scarfing Nodules at the risk of cutting the skin, or the nerve: and to heal the sick by it, and find a little tranquillity from the drying which it finds when healing by the scarification of Apostenes.
They are made of brass, and they are similar to the radio, with which it is made alcohol: and in the long end there is a little point called Spatemilis hidden: and it runs inside when you see it, and outside when you cut it as you see it.
The shape of the Spatemil, which hides between the fingers at the perforation of the Apostenes: and they are not felt by the touch: and there are three species, great, medium, and small.
The forms of incisions made to stop the flow of blood: and there are three kinds, large, medium, and small.
Let them be made from brass or copper, round, about the same length, as you see: and let them be of fine quality.
And let there be these kinds of incisions with you, large and small: so that you may cut off the blood through them in haste when it is necessary, and then when there is no medicine for you.
However, do not use them for cutting blood everywhere in the body, and do not use them except in fleshy places: such as those of the legs, and hips, and arms, and breasts, and feet, and groin, and like them, from those of the flesh, moist.
And when they are made from them small instruments like the blades of knives, according to their shape: so that blood is cut when it flows from a place of bleeding, or when a wound is cut in the vein, or artery: and sometimes they are made from them round ones according to this form.
Chapter LVII.
Regarding the care of the breasts of women, which are like the breasts of men.
When the breasts of some men swell up to the size of a woman's breasts while they are sleeping until they resemble women's breasts: and remain full of milk.
Whoever does not like this, should cut off the breast with a lunar section, according to this form from the line, b, to the line, g: and then scrape the skin all over. Then fill the whole thing with a medicinal paste of burnt flesh. Then join together two wounds of the lip with stitches, and take care of it, until it heals.
If, however, the breast sways downward and softens because of its size, as happens to women: then let there be found in each side of it two sections according to the lunar form, each one holding the other from either side, so that the larger line holds the smaller one together, according to this form from the line, b, to the line, g. Then scrape the skin between the two lips, and remove the milk, and administer what we have said about the stitch and the powders, which is necessary in the treatment, until it heals.
But if you do not like the incision that needs to be made on you for the purpose of incising, due to a disturbance of the sick or due to a flow of blood: then it is necessary that you fill the wound with a corrosive ointment immersed, and leave it until it corrodes what remains from pinged. Then take care of the wound, until it heals.
Regarding the pustules that occurred during the Typhus.
Chapter 58.
These pustules that occur during the Typhus are of a hard species of Staphylococcus, which contains a casing, and from which there comes moisture.
These pustules that contain moisture must be incised with a lunar section, according to this form, from line b to line g; and when all that is in the pustule is drained out of the liquid, then fill it again with an old ointment, and leave it until another day.
Then remove the ointment, and treat with a suitable ointment to suit the wound, until it heals.
If the pustule is of the species of nodules of Staphylococcus, then cut across it, as we have said in the section on Staphyluses that are equal.
But if the wound extends in this way so as to emit pus, then administer a cauterization to it, according to what we have said above.
Chapter 59.
Regarding the incision of a pustule that occurs due to an artery or vein.
When an artery is severed and the skin that is above it hardens, then often a pustule occurs there; and also occurs the same thing with veins, so that a pustule and swelling occur there.
And the signs by which it is known that a pustule and swelling occur due to an artery and vein are these: because when a pustule occurs due to an artery, it is long and aggregated in the depth of the body; and when you touch the swelled fingers, you feel as if there were a whistle.
And what is for the vein, is round in the manifest body.
And the section on this emphysema is an error, and especially that which is under the armpits, and groin, and neck, and in many places of the body: and it is great indeed. Therefore, so that its care be avoided with iron, and that which is from it also in the extremities, or in the head, let it be avoided.
On this then, what is from it from the inflation of the orifice of an artery, find in the skin in the section in length. Then open the section with a hook, then the artery: and free it from the tunics, until it is detected.
Then introduce underneath it a hook, and let it penetrate as far as another side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I taught you in the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
Then poke the place that is between the two ligaments with a hook, until all the blood that is in it has come out, and the emphysema has been resolved.
Then administer the cure which generates pus, until the ligaments fall: then care for that with ointments fitting to it, until it heals.
If the emphysema is from the section of a vein, then you should hold your hand to it that you may extract it from the skin. Then introduce a hook under the place that you held with your hand, and let it penetrate: and let it be in it a double thread, until you extract it from the other side. Then bind the emphysema with that good ligature: according to what I told you in the ligature of a thread, from two parts with two extremities of the thread.
If you are to extract a thread, then introduce a hook with another thread under the emphysema all around the incision of the blade: press, and tighten your threads in four places.
Then dry up the abscess in the middle of it until you see what is inside; then make an incision over the skin and release what is tied up from it.
Then put a little pulse on it that you immersed in wine and oil. Then apply the cure, which is made with liniments and ointments, until it heals.
Head of Latin.
This is an abscess that has occurred from a torsion of the nerves.
As has happened with an abscess in an artery or vein, so it has happened with an abscess in a nerve: what has happened to them is percussion, or it has happened from excessive work, and similar: and it often happens to them in the places of aid, or calcanei, and in any place where the joints move: and it is a gray abscess.
Its color is similar to the rest of the body, and it is in many dispositions without pain: and when it is squeezed with a trembling, it feels in it a similar stupor.
And this abscess is not gathered in the depth of the body, but under the skin, and it moves to all parts, and does not come out in front, or before, or behind.
Therefore, what is in the joints should not be moved with iron. Perhaps, however, this contraction may happen.
In that, however, which is in the head or in the front, find skin with a hammer. If, then, it is a small abscess, then hold it with tweezers and cut it off at the root.
And if it is a large one, then hang it on an hook and scrape it off: then take it off, and join the wound with a stitch: and care for it, until it heals.
Head of Latin.
Regarding the section of abscesses, which occurs in the belly.
To some people often happen in their bellies, and in the rest of their bodies, growths, which they call mushrooms, because of the similarity of these to mushrooms.
Of these the root is subtle, and their head is coarse, and their lips are large. And of them there is little that is wonderful.
And I myself have seen a man, and in his stomach there were two little thorns, which were more like other things than to the rest of the plant: there was no difference between them, they were white, small-rooted, and their lips were large and dry, and always moisture flowed out from them.
So I cut them, and I found in one of them about ten and eight grains and in the other about six. And the operation with a sharp knife on these is such that you consider then, if he is ill, moist, and the color of the thorns is white, moist, subtle-rooted: then cut him with a wide chisel, and let them be in your presence while they are heated in fire.
For often much blood is discharged by them when cut. So if blood hurts you, then cauterize him.
That if you see him weak, fearful of being cut with an iron knife, then take a wire made from lead that is slightly bent, and tie it with a thistle: whose way this is as I have said, and let go of him for two days.
Then add to the constriction of the lead. So do not stop constricting the lead when it imprisons the thorns, until it is cut off and falls by itself without work.
But if the thorns are coarse-rooted, then there is some fear and anxiety when cut: especially because it is in the belly.
However, it is possible to cut half of it. Then cauterize him, so that he does not bleed again.
Then take care of the wound, until the sore heals.
And do not assume that cutting the thorns, which is of a reddish color, has little sense, eats little, and looks tasty: for it is an ulcerous cancer: and I come with a memory of the crab after this.
De cura eminentiae Vmbilici.
On the care of umbilical hernias.
Umbilical hernia may result from various causes. It may arise from a fistula running below the navel, or it may proceed from the intestine, depending on whether it occurs in other rupture sites. Or it may come from blood flowing from a vein, or from an artery, as mentioned above. Or from a constricted hernia.
If, however, it arises from a fistula running below the navel and its discharge is thin: then it resembles the color of bruises and is soft, without pain; and it may appear at various locations. And if it arises from the exit of the intestine, then its location is with that which we have mentioned, more variable in character. When you press it with your fingers, it is hidden: then it returns, and perhaps there is a sound with it; and it grows louder towards the navel opening, and causes pain.
If, however, it is due to moisture, it is soft; then it does not disappear when pressed with your hand, and does not close, nor does it increase.
If, however, it is due to blood, then with these signs a bruise appears turning black.
But if it is from newborn meat: then it is a grayish, thick, hard bruise, and its color varies with the quantity.
If, however, it is due to wind, then your touch of it is gentle.
And the operation on it is such that, when you examine it, if umbilical hernia is due to blood from an artery or vein, or wind, then you should refrain from treating it. For in that is fear and dread, as I taught you in the chapter where I said that bruises arise from an artery and wind.
If umbilical hernia is due to intestine or bile, then you should instruct the sick person to hold his breath and remain standing with his arms extended. Then mark with caustic around the navel all around. Then order him to lie down on his back between your hands. Then with a flat blade mark around the navel on top of the spot you marked with caustic. Then extend the middle finger slightly towards the top, with a large hook. Then bind him firmly around the navel with thread or a silken cord; and let the knot be tied with the cord stretched taut.
Then open the middle finger that was extended slightly upwards, by unlinking it from the ring finger. If you then find the man already captured by the ligature: then pull out the ligature and insert the index finger inside of him, and push inwards towards his insides: and if you find a bulge, then take hold of it with a hook and cut off the excess.
But if the opposite artery is on the right or the veal: then mark him well. Then return to your operation. And take two hooks and insert two strong wires into them: and insert the two hooks you made around the lump in a cross-shaped manner so that they penetrate.
Then tighten the lump at four places on the hooks: and if it is a vein, remove the hook and let the place bleed until the flesh around it rots: and let it fall away on its own: or cut it when it becomes slimy and rotten.
Then take care of the man with the ointment as is necessary until he heals.
If the navel's eminence is flesh within it, or from moisture: then you must cut off the lump as we have said. And extract the blood or moisture that you find inside of him.
Then take care of the man with the ointment so that the hole heals over.
Chapter LIII.
Of the treatment of cancer.
We have already spoken about the classification of cancer and how to treat it with medicines; and how to beware of treating it with iron so that it does not ulcerate; and we have spoken about cancer born from the womb, and about the caution to be taken when treating it.
And the ancients said that when ever cancer is in a place where it can be eradicated: such as cancer which is in the breast, or in the thigh, and similar things, from the member placed to extract all of it: especially when it is starting to bud.
For when it is old, and is great, it is not necessary that you approach it.
For I could not heal from it anyone: nor did I see another before me who came to it.
And the operation on it, when it is placed like we said, is, as the saying goes, to go first, and to resolve the disease from black cholera sometimes. Then phlebotomy for itself if it is a sore with evident swelling.
Then prepare the sick with preparation, where it is placed with operation.
Then throw on cancer the claws which are suitable for him. Then close up the cancer by all its side with a skin, according to the investigation, until there remains nothing of it's roots: and let the blood not run, and do not cut off it quickly, except you express places, and wash away the gross blood completely with your hand, or with whatever is possible there.
If however does not agree to you the running of the gross blood from the incision of an artery, or a vein: then cauterize a vein, until there is cut off blood. Then care for the cancer with the remaining cure, until it heals.
§ De care for Hidropsis.
Head LIIII. We have already spoken about the division of the species of Hydropsis, and how water is aggregated: and the signs of each species, and the cure of it with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron, is not but one species of aching: and does not approach to iron of the timorous type: nor does it go deep into the hipo-sarcous: for that is deadly.
When you already treated this species of Hydropsis with timorous medicines, and did not yield to your treatment: then consider. If the disease has now progressed and there is a debility, or else there is another infirmity besides hydropisis; as if there is coughing with him, or urine loss, and similar things to these: then take care not to medicate him with iron: for this is dangerous.
But if you see a sick person with a vibrant vitality, and there is no disease other than hydropisis only; and he is not a boy nor an old man: then the method of operation in him is, that you should take the sick man standing between your hands, and let him discharge his wind by pushing water into his lower chest.
Then take a spathula with sharp spines, shaped like this. Sit the two sharp ends, one long, and the acute end like a spathula. But in him there should be something that does not hurt him little by little, so as not to hurt him during the operation until the intestines, and let him go.
Then look at it carefully. For if the generation of hydropisis is from one part of the intestines, then it should be extended with a length of three fingers' width from the umbilicus to the lower side directly above the chest.
But if the generation of hydropisis is due to liver disease: then your section should be on the left side from the umbilicus by three fingers' width.
And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then your section should be on the right side: and it should not also be that the section should be in the place where the sick one used to lie, so that excesses do not go to that weak place.
Then pierce the skin with an instrument all over. Then introduce it into the section, and squeeze with your hand with a spathula between the skin, and rub it as if you were cleaning it: and let the amount of what is rubbed be the same as the nail's amount, or around that place.
Then pierce the skin until the spathula reaches a vacant place: and this is a place of water. Then remove the flesh, and insert into the hole a tool of this shape. And it is similar to a cannula; it is made of silver, or gold, or brass, or wood, or lead, smooth: and its lower part has a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes, two on one side, and one on the other side: and its end is incised, according to the mode of incision of the pencil, as you see: at its upper end there is an annulus.
For when the instrument reaches the water, then immediately it descends on top of the instrument, so it empties from the water at the moment a medium quantity.
For if you empty it out more than is necessary, in an hour perhaps the sick one dies by resolution of his animal soul: or it happens to him that a fit approaches death.
But empty it out from it according to the quantity of its strength, and according to what I tell you about the dispositions of the nurse out of its pulse, and out of its goodness.
Then remove the instrument, and retain the water.
That is, because it retains immediately by means of the skin which holds the hole that is over the syringe: of which I told you, so that you do it according to that method.
Then repeat the instrument on the other side, if you see that the sick one can bear that: and remove also from the water a medium quantity.
Do it for several days without fear, and guard yourself against an error: until there remains in the water nothing but a little.
But if you are able to bear on the sick one, and you let go of a great deal of water: then take care for him with a burial in hot sand, and with much sweat in a bath and in the sun, and he shall wait on hunger: and take care for him with doctors who dry out, until he is healed: and cauterize over his stomach, and his spleens, and his liver, after removal of water: according to which I told you beforehand.
Of the care of infants who are born with their bladders not pierced.
Chapter L. Of the care of infants who are born with
If any baby comes out of his mother's womb, and the skin of his head is not pierced, or has a narrow opening, or is not in its place:
It is necessary to attend to the piercing of it immediately after its birth with a soft needle, according to this form.
Then put a small plug made of lead into the opening and bind it: and hold it for three days, or four.
When he is about to urinate, let him move his body, and let him go. Then bring back the baby.
And if you do not put lead on, it is possible that the urine which comes out over the place should not cause it to be closed.
But the one of whose opening is narrow, is treated with lead, as we have said, for many days, until it widens.
But those in whom the opening is not in its place are injured. Which is, because from those who are born, the opening is at the end of the penis: so that he cannot urinate standing up, until he raises his penis with his hand towards the sky. And there is no generation for him, therefore his semen cannot come to the mother according to its straightness: and it is a foul disease.
And the mode of operation in that is, so that the sick one lies on his back. Then extend the penis of the sick one with your left hand by a long, powerful movement, and cut the head of the penis from the place that is suitable, with an edge, or with a sharp needle: just as you cut the string, or like you cut some grass, so that the middle part comes out like the head of the penis, and let the opening fall in the middle, according to what should be.
And have care with you during your operation from the flow of blood. And it happened many times. So when he came back with me and cut off the blood, and healed the wound, until it was cured.
Regarding what happens in the foreskin and head of the penis, and corruption, blackness, and adhering substance.
The head.
And these albاثers happen in the penis, and there is an eminence of flesh that is foul-smelling.
And from it another is malicious, and another is not malicious.
So do not hang the non-malicious one with a fine hook, and cut it off, until you have completely washed it. Then put on top of it a basket immersed in Egyptian ointment. Then care for the person after that with dyacinon ointment, until he is cured.
If the albather is malicious and of foul color, then you should administer a cauterization after its incision and shaving it.
But if the albather is caught in the foreskin, not circumcised, and part of the albather is within the foreskin, and part outside: then you should remove the albather that is within first, until it has grown solid, then care for him from outside: because when you care for it at the same time, the foreskin does not heal securely, since it will be pierced.
And these also happen in the testicles, and blackness and corruption in the foreskin. So you should gather together all that has already been degraded, and what seeks to corrupt, or has already been corrupted.
Then put a strip of cloth over it after that with honey that has already been crushed with flour of crushed grains, and dried herb of three grains.
Then care for that with the remaining cure, until he is cured.
But if blood flow occurs, then administer a cauterization with lunar cautery, according to this form.
For the cautery is in two respects at the same time, namely toward the blood flow, and toward the corruption of the wound.
If the head of the womb is corroded and it is destroyed altogether in an hour: then you should introduce a pipette made of tin into my meatus, so that the ill person can pee on it.
But in reality the prepuce adheres to the head of the womb, and this adhesion does not occur unless the prepuce is healthy, and circumcision is not required on it; and when this adhesion occurs because of a strain or a swelling, then you should cut it off with a dull spatula until it dissolves the ligaments and frees the head of the womb from all parts.
If you have difficulty distinguishing this closely, then you should cut off some part from the head of the womb and from the prepuce. Because the prepuce is thin, it may pierce itself quickly because of its thinness.
Then separate the prepuce and wash the head of the womb with a soft linen cloth that has already been soaked in cold water so that it does not adhere again.
Then treat it with wine or vinegar until it heals over.
Chapter LVII.
On the purification of infants and on the treatment of them after birth trauma.
Circumcision is not a cure for continence, as are other wounds; but since it is an operation carried out at our pleasure and used only in boys, we must mark this operation as superior and more beneficial to the boy, leading to health.
I say, that the ancient did not write about circumcision in any of their books: because they do not use it in their laws and it is only what we have acquired by experimentation.
Because I have discovered most of the arts, including bloodletting, blistering, and cutting with blades; and they use leeches and threading, and incise with nails.
And I myself have already tested all these methods, and I did not find anything better for purification than cutting with blades and sewing with thread.
For when washing with water, the skin often escapes quickly. For the skin of the prepuce has two layers; so perhaps the upper layer may peel away, and the lower one may stick to it; so it is necessary to make an incision in order to cut the other, and to expect pain. And when cleaning is done with the hand, that is to say, with the finger, by those who use sutures, the incision at the end of the male member does not secure; because perhaps it enters into a hole.
But when washing with a nail, perhaps it will rub the iron and spoil your work; and indeed the skin of a boy is naturally short, and often grows in such a way that it does not need washing: I have seen this.
But with tweezers and thread for binding, I have found by experience that this is good: because the tweezers are of a proportion to the incision; so that the sharpness which is above is like the sharpness which is below. But when you press your hand with tweezers, the two sharpnesses are proportionate and act in one direction at a time; and there results a compression of a similar figure, holding the skin of the penis from all sides, so that there is no mistake at all.
And the method of operation is its own, so that you can roughly estimate, especially if he is one of those who understand a little, that you do not bind the thread in the penis unless it is in his own hand: and you leave him until another day.
Then let him enjoy himself and be glad in all ways as much as possible for you; since he receives his understanding. Then let him stand between your hands which are prepared to hold him, and not sitting; and hide the tweezers in your sleeve, or under your foot, so that he sees them not at all, nor any of the tools.
Then insert your hand into his penis, and blow on the skin, and pull it up until the head of the penis comes out. Then wash it with water from the dirt that is collected in it.
Then tie the spot marked with double thread. Then tie the lower part with a little more than one knot of the second ligature. Then hold it with your index finger and thumb at the place of the lower ligature held in good position, and cut between the two ligatures. Then wipe the cut quickly with oil, and pull out the head of the awl. Then let the blood run slowly (for it is better) and put the powder from above; and on the powder spread a cloth in which the awl that has been heated in boiling water with recent good oil is wrapped: and let it rest on the wound to another day: and take care of the rest of the wound with cure, until it heals.
The shape of the awl for cleaning is this.
There are two ends of it, and they are joined together: let not a knothole come into it; and make the length of the two points equal to the length of the two arms evenly.
But a fall in cleaning is an error: for perhaps it omits the whole inner skin, or a part of it at the incision.
Therefore you should spread it out from your hour with your finger before examining the place: and cut it according to equality.
If you cannot hold it with your finger, then remove it with an awl, and cut it.
But if it has passed three days and what is under the swelling remains soft, examined: then let it go, until the swelling cools down, and the scar gets well, and cut it according to how you prepare it for yourself: and keep away from the head of the awl. For that will not harm him.
Take care for this when the callus is hard from powders, which we have described in the book on powders: and if it cuts through the skin above the line, and goes up to the top, that does not hurt him either.
So treat this case as we have said, until it is healed.
Head LVIII.
On the extraction of a retained verrugae from a urethra.
Retentive urinary tract in the urethra, is caused by an operation performed with a stone, or frozen blood, or pus, or meat born, and similar things from those that we have said on the mode of cure in division.
And if the verrucae does not heal, and you see that the retention is due to a stone, which is now in the neck of the urethra; then it is necessary that he be healed lying on his knees. Then put his feet together on his back, and extend his belly from the upper part of his back, and the sick one shall strangle his desire as much as possible. Then it is considered with the neck of the urethra to the expulsion of a stone towards the back: so the verrucae is cured.
If it is not healed with that which we have said, and the issue is pressing on the sick person; then you shall administer the extraction of it with an instrument, which is called a syringe, whose this is the form It is made of silver, and is subtle, smooth, sharp like the feather of a bird in subtlety of its radius, long in the similarity of the palm of one hand and the middle: to which sits a thin cannula in its head.
And the mode of exit of the verrucae through it is, as you take a double thread, and ties on its end with wool, or cotton, good knot: and introduce the end of the thread into the lower part of the syringe: and cut with scissors if there is anything that comes out of wool; but really introduce in the cannula with vehemence, as it were an alzer.
Then dip the syringe in oil, or in butter, and in alum; and let the sick person sit on a seat, and embrocate the urethra, and his penis with wet oils, and olive oil, and warm water.
Then introduce the syringe into the penis with ease, until it reaches the root of the penis.
Then double it above the navel part.
Then push the syringe inside itself until it reaches the bladder, and feel that it has already reached the end with a weak pressure; and do not do this according to this order unless the urethra, in which you insert it, is in the place where there is a bend.
Then extend the thread with wool slowly. For the thread follows the wool.
Then pull it out and let the urine run through the urethra channel; and again introduce the syringe, and do not cease doing this until the bladder is empty, and feel a relief.
On the quality of cleansing the bladder with a clepsydra.
Chapter LIX.
When a sore happens in the bladder, or blood freezes up in it, or pus is confined in it, and water distills into it and medicines: then do with the instrument which is called a clepsydra, and this is its shape.
For it is closed, that is to say, shut. And in it are three openings, two on one side and one on the other side, like you see them.
And the cavity where the plunger is placed is second to the quantity that it obtains without addition, until when it is pulled out with it something is drawn out from the moistures: and when it is pushed in, it expels it far away: as does the clepsydra, which throws out naphtha, that is to say, Greek fire in battles.
So when you pour water into the bladder, introduce the end of the clepsydra into the water, and pull out with it what pushes it up; for the water is drawn out into the cavity of the clepsydra.
Then introduce the end of it into the penis, as we described in the syringe. Then push moisture with him because he pushes that moisture because moisture reaches dry skin immediately so that the sick one feels it.
Form a thin clot so that the wound is coated.
Let it be made of silver, or copper-alloy; whose head is higher like a collar with little, and under it a bag between which a ligament is laid.
Then take the wool from a sheep, and put moisture on it, which you will use to coat the wound. Then tie it between two bags with a strong knot and double thread: and heat it slightly with moisture over fire.
Then insert the end of the clot into the penis, and then tighten your hand over the wound with the moisture with a tight hold until the sick one feels that moisture has already reached the skin.
But if you do not have a present wound, then take a piece of parchment, and make it into a circle, and pierce it from all its roundness. Then insert a strong thread into those holes, like threads unravelling. Then gather the circle together, as you would a ribbon: once you have put in what you want from moisture, oils, and water.
Then tie it to the instrument: and do with it as you did with the wound from expression with your hand, until moisture reaches the skin.
Head LXX.
The extraction of a stone.
We have already spoken at length on the classification of stones, and their treatment with medicines: and I have distinguished between a stone that is generated in the kidneys, and a wound, and the signs of both: and I have described a stone that is generated in the skin properly: and that which is figured on the branch: and I am narrating that with manifest illustration and abbreviation.
I therefore say, that a stone generated in the skin happens mostly to boys.
And from its signs it is that urine issues from the penis, similar to water in subtlety; and in it appears white sand; and it rubs the weak man's penis; and he works with it, and often hangs it. And then it is erected, and issues from it the anus with many of them.
And the cure of boys is easy from him until they reach the age of twelve years. And it is difficult in the elderly. But in young men it is medium, because it is between that: and if the stone of him is larger, the cure is easier; and if it is small, it is turned away from that cure.
But when we come to the cure, it is necessary that we first clean up the sick man with a clister, which should bring out all the dung that is in his intestines: for he sometimes prevents the discovery of the stone during investigation.
Then the sick man should be taken with his feet, and shaken, and moved to the lower parts: that the stone may descend into the depths of the bladder, or sometimes come out from its high place.
Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be under his buttocks, so that the bladder should all fall into the lower parts.
Then question him, and touch him from outside.
If then you feel the stone in a space, then immediately approach it with the section over his body.
If it does not fall under your hand at all, then you should wipe the index finger with the oil of your left hand, if the sick man is a boy: or the middle finger if he is a complete youth: and push him into some part of his anus, and question about the stone until it stands under your finger: and turn him slowly towards the throat of the bladder.
Then press with your finger on him, and push him towards the external parts against the place that you mean: and order a minister to touch the bladder by hand, and order another minister to extend his testicles by hand from the right side to the upper part: and with another hand, he should remove the skin, which is under the testicles in the part where the section is.
Then insert the Spatulum incident, whose form this is. And find in it what is between an and the testicles, and not in the middle, on the left side of birth: and let the incision be on top of it, and your finger is in the anus: and let the incision be transverse, so that the outside incision is wide and the inside incision is tight, according to the quantity that it is possible for the stone to come out of it not larger.
Perhaps, because the finger which is in the anus comprimes the stone at the incision, and goes out without difficulty.
And you know that from the stone there are angles and margins, why it is difficult to come out of him because of that.
And from it is soft, like a gland, and round: and the exit of it is easy.
So then, to those who have angles and margins, add a crack.
That if it does not go out like this, then you must try to turn on top: or tighten it with a very awkward gesture, the end of which is like the Moon, which tightens over the stone, and does not come off from it: or as you insert under it a thin instrument, curved at one end.
If, however, you cannot with this, then widen the hole slightly. That if something makes you bleed, cut it off with a scalpel.
If, however, the stone is more than one, then push into the first large hole at the tip. Then incision on top of the stone. Then push in a little behind it: and do the same if there are two or more.
That if it is very large, then ignorance is how to turn off on top of the stone with a wide incision. Since it has happened to someone who has two of these things, or that he dies, or that there is frequent urine distillation: soon, because the place does not consolidate at all.
But administer the expulsion of it until it comes out: or devices in breaking it with forceps until you pull it out quickly.
When you have thus completed your operation, then fill the wound with thistle, and aloe, and dragon's blood: and bind it on, and place over it a cloth dipped in oil and wine, or in oil of rose, and cold water: that an ablation may be induced by heat.
Then support the neck of the patient on your knees, and do not untie the bindings until the third day. When you have loosed him, wet the place with much oil and water.
Then care for the patient with the ointment of daphno, and the ointment of basil, until he is healed.
But if, in the wound, the hot ablation is added and it corrodes, and there are similar symptoms: let it be known from the exit of blood with urine, and know that it is because the blood is corroded with urine. Then insert your finger into the wound and draw out the blood. For if it remains, it incites to the corruption of the urethra and the decay of its parts.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt: and oppose all manner of things that are proper to the cure, until he is healed.
And it is fitting during the whole course of the cure, that the two hips be bound, and that poultices be placed on the place, because medicines laid on the place are added.
If the stone is loose and lies in the meatus of the urethra, and it gets stuck there, and prevents the passage of urine: then care for the patient with it as you go before you make an incision. For many times have I been prevented from the section by this cure, since I have tested it.
And is, that you take the Iron Piercer, which has this form, a triangular end, sharp, fixed in wood.
Then take a thread, and tie it with the urethra under the stone so that it does not return to the urethra.
Then introduce the piercing iron into the penis with ease, until it reaches the stone: and remove the piercing iron from your hand little by little on that stone: and feel the piercings, until you make him penetrate from the other part.
Then urinate immediately.
Then press your hand on that which remains of the stone from the outside part of the penis. For it is itself broken, and discharged with urine, and heals the sick.
But if this cure is not prepared for you because of something that prevents it from him: then tie a string under the stone, and another string above the stone. Then dry up on the stone in the penis between the two ties. Then remove it. Then loosen the tie, and clean away the frozen blood, which has formed in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie the string under the stone, unless it should return to the wound: and a string from above, unless when the string is loosed after the stone has come out, it should return the skin to its place, and cover the wound: for that reason it is necessary for you to do this when you tie the upper string, in order that the skin may be raised to the top, so as to return at your complete expense, and cover the wound, as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
As for the extraction of the stone from women's wombs:
The stone does not form much in women.
But if the stone should happen to form in any of them, then the cure is difficult, and prevented by many things.
One of them is: that a woman may perhaps be a virgin.
And the second is this, because you do not visit a woman who has taken to herself a physician, when she is a virgin, or among those who have husbands.
The third is this: you do not visit a woman who knows the art well, especially the operation with the hand.
And the fourth is distance from the stone: why does it require deep dissection, and there is fear in that.
Which if necessity compels to that, then you should take a female doctor who is well-versed in the matter: and it is found rarely.
But if indeed you desire her, then ask a married doctor who is subtle and well-versed in the matter of women: or a woman who is skilled in part of this art: so make her present, especially to him, that he may do all that you command him out of inquiry about the stone.
First of all, that she may examine if she is a virgin: then it should be that she puts her finger in some part of her, and asks about the stone.
But if he finds it, then she should put her finger on it, and then command the obstetrician to put his own finger in the vagina of the weak place, and ask about the stone, after he has put his left hand on the pubic bone, and squeezes it with a good grip.
But if he finds the stone, then it should be that he slowly moves it from the opening of the vagina to the lower part with all his strength, until he reaches it with it up to the root of the pelvis.
Then he should cut over it at the middle of the vagina opening at the root of the pelvis, from whichever side it is prepared and feels the stone in that part; and his finger should not move away from the stone, holding it down: and first there should be a small incision. Then he should put his hand on top of that cut.
Then he should put his hand on top of that cut. But if he feels the stone, then he should add to the incision a quantity in proportion to how much the stone moves from it.
And you know that there are many kinds of stones. For these are small and large, smooth and sharp, long and round, having branches.
Know therefore his kind, that it may be shown to you through this that you see.
If then the blood annoys you, then put in that place three bandages, and hold it for an hour, until the blood is cut off.
Then return to your work until the stone is discharged: and do as you prepare yourself with the instruments which I said for extracting the stone from the urinary bladder that you may add them to your work in your operation.
If then the blood annoys you, and you know that the outflow of blood is from the artery which has been cut: then put powder on the place, and squeeze it with a tight pressure as it comes down: and do not change that: and let go of the stone, and do not take it out. For perhaps the woman will die, if she is weak. Then take care of the wound.
When then the sharpness of the blood subsides after a few days and the place becomes putrid, then return to your work until the stone is discharged.
Head LII.
Regarding the section on cutting above the hernia with water.
The ramet with water is not, unless there is an aggregation of moisture on the scalp or in the skin of the scrotum, which is called siphacus.
And when it is in its own proper place, which nature has prepared for it in the skin: that is another thing, and it is called the scrotum of white, which I said: and this is not done rarely.
And the generation of this ramet is from the weakness that happens to the testicles: why then does this substance flow into them. And when it has happened from a blow on the testicles.
This moisture is having many colors. Or indeed the color of it is veiled towards yellow, or it is blood-red, or foul-smelling, black, or it is white-colored water, and that which is more is this:
And the signs by which is known where the aggregation of water is, are these. For if it is in the scrotum or what we have said, then the swelling is round in length about like the figure of a ball: and the testicle does not appear, because humidity contains it from all sides.
And if there is humidity in the skin itself, then the swelling is round with a part, and for this reason man estimates another because it is one different.
And if the humidity is between the skin of the testicles and the white scrotum, then it falls down.
Now when you want to know the color of the humidity, then experience the color of the humidity in the swelling with the square insertion, which shape preceded. According to this, therefore, when it moves into the space of the insertion, judge about it that it is between itself.
When we have come to the cure with the iron, then it is necessary that you order the sick person, if possible, him to bleed, and you will see his body full of blood.
Then he should lie on his back on a high thing, and put many blankets under him.
Then you should sit on his left side, and order the minister to sit on his right side, who will extend his penis toward one or two sides of the skin of the testicles, and toward the side of the testicle.
Then take a broad spatula, and dry the skin of the testicles from the middle in length, up to the chest: and let the section be according to the equidistant line that divides the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white scrotum encompassing: and observe the wound itself or carefully take off from it, as you will, in order not to tear it: and examine cautiously with the wound according to the quantity that you can.
Then pierce the white scrotum full of water with a wide piercing of water, and drain out all the water.
Then separate between the two lips of the incision with a hook and extend the knife to the top, and do not touch the skin that includes the testicles: and cut the knife in whatever way you can cut it yourself, or with its whole, or in a hasty manner, especially the side of it is subtle. For if you do not understand carefully, there is no security in this incision, but water is returned.
But if it goes out from its skin during your operation: then when you have completed the incision of the knife, reduce it. Then gather together the two lips of the skin of the testicles with a stitch.
Then take care of the flesh as with the rest of the wounds, until it heals.
What if there is a corruption of the flesh with other color, then you should tie up the clothes, which are called suspenders, fearing the flow of blood.
Then cut off the testicle with the suspender and remove the testicle: then take care of it as we have said.
But if water is gathered on the two sides, then you should know that there are two branches: therefore dry one half according to what you have done in the other equal way.
And if it is even with you, so that the operation is one, then do it: and then wash away the blood. And put in the incisions wool immersed in oil, or oiled; and place another wool that you have dipped in wine and oil on top of the two testicles, and stretch the testicles: and put on top of it double cloths, and they are thin: and tie them from above with a knot that has six strands according to this form.
Then the two cloths are taken, and they are stretched, and filled with red wool, according to this similarity: and their ends which are pressed from a string, or wet wool: and they are added with a knot in the lumbar arms: and one end takes on top of some until the back, and the second takes on to the side of the pelvis: and the two ends take on below the two hips, and the other end takes on above the two groin, and the whole knot is tightened in the lumbar arms.
And sometimes this wire is treated artificially with a cautery in the place of section with iron: and it is so, that you take the cautery knife and separate the skin of the testicles with it; and it is lit up, as we have said: until such time as it is discovered by the सफّة [white] consisting of water: then take the cautery, according to this form.
It assimilates Greek letters.
Then pierce it with that सफّة [white], and it is lit up, until all the moisture has gone out.
Then extend that सफّة  [white] with a hook, and scrape it with a lit cautery knife, and cut off all of it as well as you can: until you have completely cut it off.
And then cover the wound, so that it does not burn itself.
And you should know that this operation is more beneficial, and longer in effect against the flow of blood, and better than an operation by section.
If, however, it causes you an opposite effect in the hour of section, or in the hour of cauterization, a hot apostema, a flow of blood, or something else: then you should do what will correct that effect for you with the cure that is appropriate to it, according to the premise given above.
If, however, he is a shy man, and does not wait for this operation, because of its terrible appearance: then administer the piercing according to what I have told you above: and that is enough.
When it is certified to you by me through that which we have said about the meanings of the wire, that it is wet: then you should make the sick one sit on an elevated seat.
Then pierce the apostema in the lower part of his body with a sharp knife: and place the piercings according to the length of his body, and keep the openings wide, until all the water has run out.
Then put a cloth over the place, and tie him up, and let him go so that he can run off with any remaining water: then take care of the wound, until it is healed.
If, however, there is resistance to the flow of water at the time you make the hole: and it is only for that reason, because the white membrane resists at the wound's orifice and prevents the exit of the water; then you should insert a straw into the wound, or an instrument with which the water of hydropic wounds is withdrawn, whose shape precedes it: or add a little to the operation of the wound.
And know that the water returns and accumulates after six months or so. So when it is gathered together, then it turns back in the same way, and it spends its days in illness.
Chapter LIII.
Regarding the care of the ram's-horn plant.
You should know that in this section on the ram's-horn plant, it is said that it is prone to causing harm in multiple ways. Therefore, I turn my attention to the remedy against its harm.
And I remember the operation in it, and the appearance of blisters.
I say, that many blisters occur in the bodies, from which the testes are composed: and it is due to many causes, indeed.
Or from acute sweating or bitterness, which oozes onto the testes. Or from a blow.
And the color of the blister corresponds to the color of the body, and pain is not felt; and the blister is gray.
And perhaps it is a stone-like blister, whose color is dark, and there is no feeling of it.
And sometimes it is due to the swelling of arteries and the inflammation of veins: as it has already been remembered; or from the inflammation of foot-nerves.
So whatever is due to the swelling of arteries, it is known through the appearance of blisters when you squeeze your fingers together. And you should not touch him completely.
But that which is due to the inflammation of foot-nerves does not dissipate anything when squeezed with the fingers.
It is also possible that this section be made on this shape and on the remaining flesh, and it is as if you separate the skin of the testicles. Then extend your hand to the top, and pull it out with the scalp or: and free the suspenders from the water, and tie the bandage: and cut the suspender after you have freed it from all parts of it, when you.
So if your consolidated hand is with those born muscles, then it must be that you attract the hand and cut it off.
And if the adhesion is between some of the siphaches, or in it that is between the water: then you should free all this adhesion, and cut it off with a round incision.
But if the birth of the flesh is in the place of the adhesion that is behind: then it must be that you cut off all this, and pull out the hand, as we have said.
When your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool infused with rose oil and wine: and then take care of the wound with the rest of the cure, until it heals.
Chapter LXXIV.
Of the care of the vine, which is with the fig tree.
It is a painful swelling that is somewhat swollen with softening of the testes: and it becomes difficult on the part of the sick person to move, exercise, and walk.
And in the cure of this disease is from fear, because of the recollection of that which preceded it.
But it should be said, that we will speak of the operation in it according to what did those first.
I say then, that you should make the sick person sit on an elevated seat. Then push the suspenders of the testes to the lower side. Then hold the skin of the testes with your fingers, with the water that is near the root of the penis: and let another hold it as a servant, and stretch it with a violent extension.
Then cut with a sharp chisel in a transverse direction through the direct vesicles, until they are detected.
Then scrape off from all sides, as we have told you in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Then fix in them a sharp awl at the place where the two nerves come together, and tie it at the first of the places where the vines are located; and tie it again at the last of these. Then dry them out in a straight transverse section along the length of the body, and pull out what is gathered from the腐臭的湿润物质。
Then heal the wound with care of the other wounds, so that they heal well, so that the vesicles which nourish one testicle drop. It is not bad because of that.
But if all the vesicles are cut off because of this, then they should remove the testicles with the vesicles for this reason: so that their nourishment is not blocked by the incision and does not become dry or scarred, and does not form a lump with them.
Chapter LVI.
Regarding the care of the intestinal ramus.
The opening of this ramus is from a section which happens in the soft part above the gut in the groin region on one side of the body.
Why do the intestines come down from that rupture to one testicle? And this break-open is either from the soft part or from the length of it.
And these two kinds of events happen for various reasons: either from impact, or from a slip, or from a loud noise, or from carrying something heavy, and the like.
And the sign, when it is from the length of the soft part. It is that which happens gradually over a long period of time, and does not happen suddenly; and it is an inflammation which is the same depth as the киш: because the soft part compresses the intestines.
And the sign of it is when it is from the break-open of the soft part, because it causes sharp pain at the beginning; and it is an inflammation which appears different, visible under the skin near: and this is due to the exit of the intestines, and their course towards the outside of the soft part.
And sometimes when it goes out with the small intestine: and this is called Ramex intestinalis, and zirbia: and sometimes made with the windiness.
And when it runs into the dung of the intestines, and is held there: and with it comes the disease of the entrails: for it causes pain in front, and especially when it is pressed.
And in the cure of this disease of the body with iron there is danger: for which reason it should be guarded against.
And the method of operation is, that you instruct the sick person to bring his hand into his abdomen and move it in a circular motion: if he complies, he will return. Then let him lie on his back between your hands: and wash his legs.
Then extend the skin that follows the skin upward, and dry the skin of the testes completely in length. Then fasten in two lips of the incision, according to which it is opened by you: and the section be second to the quantity, that it is possible, that it goes out from it an egg.
Then scrape the skin of the testicles, and what is under the skin, until it is found when it touches the white skin, hard from all parts: then put your finger into it that follows the testicle, in that which is between the white skin, that is under the skin, and between the second skin, and separate with it the adhesion that is in the back part of the skin.
Then move with your right hand to the inside of the skin of the testicles: and when you do this, extend the white skin upward, with your left hand: and wash the egg with the skin to the side of the section: and order the minister, that he extends the egg upward: and you solve the adhesion that is behind the complete solution.
And look with your fingers that there is nothing there from the intestine that has been washed in the white skin, hard or durable. If then there is anything washed out of it: then push him towards the downward wind.
Then take the acume, in which is a thick filament, made of ten fils; and insert it between the last siphach, that is to say, the tunic, which is under the skin of the testicles which follows the section: then incise the extremities which protrude from the filament, until they are four fils. Then compose some of them together with a figure which is in the form of a cross: and bind them up with alsifach, of which I have spoken, because it is under the skin of the testicles, a binding of great strength, until no one of those which nourish them can send anything to them: so that no fever may arise from it. And put again another ligature second after the first, far from it by two fingers. And after these two ligatures let go from the siphach, which is under the skin of the testicles, a quantity equal to the size of a finger; and cut off the whole remaining one according to its circularity, and remove it.
Then dry up in the lower part of the skin of the testicles the section from which runs the blood and pus: as we have said before.
Then administer the wool which has been soaked in oil, and put it on the spin; and administer the ligature which I have mentioned. And when the siphach of white albumen, which we have spoken of, is cauterized after the incision in fear of the flow of blood. This happens many times. And let go of the ligature, until it falls by itself.
But if its fall is delayed, then let it be broached with hot water: and put over it that which I have spoken of, until it falls.
Then take care of the spin with the rest of the cure for the wound, until it is cured.
Chapter LVI.
[The Reeds of the Spring.]
In this reed of the spring, I did not see any who dared to heal it with iron.
And first they said that it was done as we have related in Rambus who is with the Vine. That is, so that the wounds remain after the section with ease below: then dry them in the middle, and care afterwards with what opens it up, until the wounds fall off: and cure the wound, as we have said, until it heals.
Chapter LVII.
Regarding the dissection which takes place in the groin.
When the rupture takes place in the groin, as we have said, and the opening appears, but nothing of the intestines descends to the testicles: and if it does descend, it is not much, and returns in all times: indeed, if it lasts a long time with it, a fissure is added to the scrotum, until the intestines descend into the scrotum.
And this happened because of the enlargement of the scrotum, which takes place in the groin, as we have said. That is, because it extends the scrotum: then it softens, and the opening appears, and the discharge takes place.
And care for it is with a poultice, as preceded by its report.
And when it is treated with iron, in this way: and it is so that he lies sick on his back between your hands. Then dry the place where the rupture has opened and the discharge has taken place, with a section from side to side, according to the quantity of three fingers.
Then tighten it with a thong, and what is beneath the skin, until, when it is touched, the scrotum gives off white, which is under the skin that follows it.
Then take a ray, and place it on the discharge-taking place from the scrotum, and press it into the deep of the groin.
Then take two discharge-taking places from the end of the ray from the scrotum, and join them with a stitch one to another: then remove the end of the ray.
And do not at all strike the thong, nor stretch out one, nor anything else, as I told you to know in the cure of the intestinal ramus.
Then the cure for that wound. When you fall and hurt yourself, clean that wound, and mend the break, until it heals.
For Sisach was struck, and no merit is added to the rupture.
And the wound should be cauterized better here: for it is nearer to health.
Head 85.
Regarding the softening of the skin of the testicles.
The skin of the testicles is sometimes softened in certain men, because the flesh between them is softened and its appearance changes.
Therefore it is necessary for the one who is asked about his cure to lie down on his back, and strike all of the softened skin over the natural skin.
Then he should add two lips with a stitch: and if necessary, in the first place, three stitches of the softened skin, or four, and a firm stitch.
Then cut between the stitches.
Then the cure for the remaining wounds, until they are healed, and the stitches fall off.
Head 89.
Regarding castration.
You should know that castration is excommunicated in our law; and because of that, let it remind me here in my book: and its reminder is not necessary except for two reasons.
One reason is so that it may be in the knowledge of a doctor when he is questioned about it: and so that he may know how to cure himself if such an accident happens to him.
The other reason is that we have often used castration on certain animals, because of the risks involved with their reproduction, such as sheep, horses, and cats, and similar animals.
I say then that castration is done in two ways. Or by friction. Or by a slit and cut.
In that one which is done by friction, the procedure is this: that we make the animal sit in warm water, until his testicles soften and become loose, and hang down: then we tear them apart with our hand, until they are healed and do not appear under the touch.
In castratione autem per fissuram et sectionem, oportet ut teneas animal, et premas cutem testiculorum eius cum manu sinistra.
But in castration through an incision and section, you should hold the animal, and with your left hand press the skin of its testicles. Then tie the suspenders, and dry all of one section's cut, until when two balls go out: then incise it after you have scrubbed both of them, and do not leave on top of them any cloth other than a thin fabric, which is above the scrotum.
And this method of castration is better than that which is done by rubbing: for by rubbing perhaps some of the testicles are left behind, whereby the animal desires copulation.
Then take care of the wound, until it heals.
Head
As for the care of hermaphrodite (individuals with both male and female reproductive organs) there are two ways:
Hermaphrodite is from a man's genitals, according to two ways: A man is from the genitals because it appears that it follows a space, or in the skin of the testicles, in that it is between two testicles, figure like a woman's hares, and when it runs urine from it which is in the skin of the testicles.
But in women there is only one kind, and it is woman' figure over the comb like a man' small testicles, sticking out to the outside: of which one is like a penis of a man, and two are like two testicles.
And the cure of the three kinds, two from a man' genitals, and one from a woman' genitals, is this: for you must cut off the added flesh, until the impression disappears. Then take care of these in the treatment of the remaining wounds.
But in the second kind of a man' genitals, from which runs urine which is in the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is there any cure at all.
Chapter LXXI.
As for cutting off the hair from the genitals of a woman, and sticking out flesh on men:
The head should be tightly bound with a bandage until it has healed and the appearance of the wound is no longer unattractive; and sometimes, so it is said, in certain women, it swells up to such an extent that it resembles a penis and can even lead to intercourse.
The excess of the tendinous tissue should be cut with a knife or pinched between the fingers and pressed down; and this should not be done at all near the root of the limb, especially in deep places, so that there may be no flow of blood.
Then care for the cure of the wound until it is healed.
But the flesh that is between the legs, which is born in the womb of the mother, should be allowed to fill itself up, and perhaps it will project towards the outside like a tail; for because of this some call disease with a tail. So cut it as you would cut the tendinous tissue and care for it until it is healed.
Regarding the treatment of an ulcer in a woman that has not been pierced.
Chapter LII.
It is, so that it is a female's wound and not pierced, or there is a small opening in the windpipe. And it is either a natural one or an accidental one.
An accidental one is from an underlying disease; and this itself may be either born of flesh that has been added, or from a splinter of bone, or from a thread; and it may be in deep places within the womb, or in its sides, or above or below it; and it prohibits intercourse, fertilization, pregnancy, and perhaps menstruation.
And knowledge of this can be obtained by the appearance of the Obstetrician, if the swelling is apparent nearby.
But if it is not apparent, then feel for it with your fingers or a ray of light.
If the swelling is from a small splinter and is near to two lips, then bring it close and remove it.
And let it be placed on two lips, dry.
Then put your fingers together with both hands and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread wide. Then spread apart the two lips firmly until the delicate foreskin is separated and the prepuce opens.
Then take a sheep's wool, immerse it in oil, and place it on the spot; and have the woman sit there every day so that the wound does not become inflamed due to another pressure.
If, however, the foreskin is thick and coarse, then one should cut it with a smooth blade resembling a myrtle leaf.
If, however, the prepuce is made of flesh that has grown out, then hang it on a hook and cut it: and have with you medicines that will stop the flow of blood without causing pain, such as acacia and dragon's blood, and also quicksilver with alum.
Then administer a large lead tube so that the wound does not heal quickly, keep it for several days: and administer iron from dry linseed, then treat the remainder with the usual treatment until it heals.
And when a baby is born from the womb of another woman, it is necessary for this method to be followed: while there is no apoplexy (which apoplexy, being cancerous, arises from the womb), there must be no opposite with iron at all.
Chapter LIII.
For the care of hemorrhoids, Athelil, and both red boils on the vagina of a woman.
Hemorrhoids are an opening of the vaginal openings, so that a lot of blood runs out of them.
So when they begin to hurt from hemorrhoids, then they become tender; and I have already mentioned in the classification of these hemorrhoids and their signs, and I will now speak about those that receive treatment and those that do not.
I say, then, that hemorrhoids that are in the opening of the womb, and do not become tender; then there is no cure for them with iron.
Which, however, are on the birth canal above which the sense falls, are those which cure.
It is necessary that the woman should enter the cold house. Then spread out the athamel with forceps or a rough cloth and cut them from their roots.
Then dust on them near the flow of blood from one powder-cut without mortification: such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and thorns, and similar to them.
Then push her feet against the wall at one hour. Then put her in cold water.
If the flow of blood persisted: then let her sit in a decoction of sumach, and bran, and gall, and similar things.
Then take barley flour, and make it into a paste with honey and vinegar, and make a sponge with it for her back.
If, however, blood is shed along with it, that is good: and if not, let adhere to her back streams, and bumps, without scarification.
Then take wool, and immerse it in taratissium juice, or arnoglosseum juice, or ramorum aluatis juice, that is, aglanter, Pontic wine, and let adhere to her loins.
When she has recovered from the blister, then take care of the place with ointment, until it is healed.
Albarth is, however, like blood to the heads of hares, and has a rough appearance.
It is necessary that you cut what appears like blood from it, according to which I said about the limbs equally: and take care of it, until it is healed.
Head LXXIIII.
Of the Exitious Wound Which Occurs in the Uterus.
Occur in the uterus many blisters, such as cancer, and stone-like blisters, and ulcers, and pustules, and scabs, and frost, and fistulas, and hemorrhoids, and rags, and blisters hot from the sun.
And I have indeed already said all these diseases and their species, and the signs of them, and their cures, in a division: it is necessary that I say in this tractatum an apostema which happens in the mother, when it is from those apostemas which collect the blood, and to know how it is made with iron.
It is necessary therefore that you should reflect on this. Then if the pain of the apostema in its beginning is acute with its percussion, and the flame, and fever: and you see it red: if it falls on it, then you do not approve with its perforation: and cure it with him as long as he endures, until it has rest from the pains.
Then it is necessary that you should make the woman sit on a seat which she will be able to reach with two legs, and let her recline, or lie down on her back, and support herself on her heels, and keep her knees apart, and put her arms beneath her knees, and tie each one of them by means of a ligature.
Then the midwife shall sit on the right side, and administer the instrument with which to open up the opening of the womb.
And it is necessary that when you administer this instrument, you should make it fit with the iron in the womb of the woman: so that it does not enter into the instrument more than the depth of the womb, and does not hurt the weak.
But if the instrument is more than the depth, then it is necessary that you should put a pad on top of the depth of the womb: so as to prevent the entrance of the instrument into all of the depth: and it is necessary that you should put a turner which runs in the instrument from the upper side, and hold the instrument, and make it rotate until the depth has opened up.
Then when the opening appears, and is touched by the hand, and is soft and pliable: it is necessary that you should separate it from the head with a smooth edge.
When then the pus is drained, then you should put a piece of lime wood soaked in rose oil: or oil of yellowwort, where there is some styptic quality; and put limewood, and draw out a piece from deep within the wound.
And put outside on top of the wound, and over the woolen cloth dipped in water where there are some bad boils.
Then it is to be dressed after two days with the ointment which suits that, until it heals.
And when the wound and skin are washed away so that it is sloughing off with water and honey: then with water in which there is a boil of Lily or long arnoldia: then return to the ointment.
That if the nail is hidden within the wound, then it is necessary to refrain from curing it with iron, or rather cure it with it as we have said in division.
Chapter LXX.
Doctrines of obstetrics, how the fetuses are treated according to a non-natural shape emerging.
It is necessary for the obstetrician to know first of all the natural form of birth.
From these signs then, you can know that when you see a woman compressing herself towards the lower parts, and desiring to smell air, and being lightened towards her when she is on the point of giving birth, and having the exit of the fetus go over her head, and the second with it: or suspended, or hanging from the navel.
When then you see these signs, then it is necessary to compress her abdomen so that the fetus may come down quickly.
For when it has gone over her head, the second one goes with it, and is cleansed from it by good cleansing.
But if this birth is after that, it is not natural, but worthy of being heard.
For when the fetus also goes out on his feet, and his body goes out before his head, and his feet, and his hands one or two: or his head and his hand go out: or his navel goes out: and perhaps it turns over its neck, and such like figures are worthy of being heard.
It is therefore necessary for the Obstetrician to be prudent, subtle in all these matters, and to guard himself against error and delusion: and I am showing you all the figures from them, and how the genius is expressed in each of them, and what it signifies by means of that, and stirring over itself.
When the fetus has exited from its head by its natural exit, and it is heavy upon the woman, and difficult for her to give birth, and you see its strength already weakened: then make her sit on a chair, or let the women hold her: and pour over her with a solution of fennel seed, and with moist oils.
Then the Obstetrician shall insert between his fingers a small spatula, and find with it the second, and dry her with his nail, until he takes what is in it from the moisture: and press the womb of the woman, until the fetus comes down.
If then it does not come down, then it is necessary that the woman be clenser from a fennel seed mucus with siseamin oil.
Then order her after the clisterization to compress herself: and make her sneeze with a condiment, and hold her nose and mouth for an hour. For the fetus will come out immediately.
What if two hands of the fetus exit first, then it is necessary that you reduce them with ease gradually. If then it does not obey in the entrance, then put the woman on a chair, and lift her feet up: then set the chair on the ground: and let the woman hold on to something, so that she does not fall by the concussion.
If then the hands do not exit, and the fetus dies: then cut them open, and remove the remnant of the fetus: and tie her hand with a cloth, and remove it whole: for he will come out.
The exit of the embryo under its own feet. When the fetus exits from under its feet, then it is necessary that you push them up: then turn the fetus gradually: and make it even.
Then he should take one of his feet and extend it slowly.
When they have gone as far as the hips, then order him to squeeze himself and make him sneeze with a gag if necessary: for he will go out, if God wills it.
And if he does not come out with him as we have said, then reduce the fetus slowly until you put it back into its normal shape. For he will go out at that time of ease.
That if he is prohibited from going out with all that we have said: then take a ball of moldy hay and olive oil and gum: and beat it all together in a mortar with a good pounding: then put the lower part of her uterus in it. Then make him sit in warm water until he gets chills.
When you see that her lower parts are now warmed, then put Myrrh on it and support him. When he has held the siff for an hour, then make him sit on a seat. Then make him sneeze: and tighten his mouth and nose: and lightly squeeze the lower part of her uterus. For heat will come out immediately.
Exit the fetus over the knees and hands. When he has gone out in this form, then put his hands on him slowly while going into him. Then the woman should lie on her back and hang her feet down to the ground: and she herself should sit on a bed, and put her hands on it. Then press upwards on her navel slowly. Then extract what is under her feet from the nail: until it sits prepared in the lower part. That if the fetus does not go out, then take his feet and move them with a powerful motion. Then press what is above her uterus slowly, until the fetus goes up to the upper parts. Then introduce your hand and gradually stretch out the fetus: and order the woman to compress, until the fetus walks out.
The exit of the fetus hangs downward between the hands. Let her hand be freed from reduction. If she cannot reduce herself, then let the woman take care of herself, and let her walk.
But if she cannot walk, then let her lie on the bed: and strike her legs with a strong blow.
Then apply the ointment you have prepared from mucus.
That if she should take hold of the birth, then let her sit on a chair. Then study the hand to reduce it, and place the fetus according to its natural form: and order the woman to sneeze, and tell her to compress herself, until the fetus walks out.
The exit of the fetus is over its neck, with spread-out hands, and its face is towards the back of its mother's body. It is necessary that the midwife hold the fetus by the hand, then slowly turn it over, and gently stretch it out.
When it is even, then place it on the pad we spoke of before, made from oil and mucus.
Then order her to move slowly. When you have done that, then let her sit on a chair, and tell her to lean towards the right side. Then order her to compress herself: and make her sneeze with condiments.
The exit of the fetus is prepared on the side. When it descends towards the opening of the womb according to this mode with the second finger, then cut the second finger with your nail, until it is discharged from the moisture.
But if it hangs over the face of the fetus and its neck, then cut it from the navel: so that it does not hold on and dies.
Then push the fetus towards the inside, until you put it in its place: and order the woman to compress herself a few times: for himself shall walk out on the outside.
The exit of the twins, or the fetus of many. You know that the Gemini are often born: and sometimes three, and four. However, that is strange, and seldom happens.
Five, however, is a thing contrary to nature, and they do not dwell together securely: and it will hold them, though they be multiplied, by a second one; and they will separate from each other by means of a cord, distinguishing between them that which is bound in the navel of each.
And sometimes they go out like a single fetus going out of a natural exit, easily: and they go out by an agreeable exit, as we have related.
If any of them be difficult at the birth, and obtain to that which we have said out of a non-natural figure, then take care of them as we have related: and let it sit upon a soft cradle, and make what it can make with ease and delay, and shape itself after all the figure in which it is prepared by nature leading it to salvation.
Remember that it is formed in the womb out of embryos, and are aborted.
When one is formed in the womb, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten: and now it has been proved with me that a woman has emitted seven, and another fifteen, all formed.
That which was done by the measurement of the glorious sage.
This therefore altogether must be that it is in the knowledge of obstetrics. Perhaps indeed will it come to that which is like it: oppose, then, to it with what is required:
Chapter LVII.
Regarding the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you are concerned with the dead fetus, since I have spoken about extracting it in the division of medication, and does not go out, and you should be forced to use the operation by hand, then you should consider.
If, then, the woman is of sound virtue, and is not with any of the accidents out of which she is afraid of perdition: then it is necessary that she should lie down on a bed, on her back, and should have her head inclined downward, and her legs raised: and an assistant should hold her from both sides, or bind her to the bed, so that her body should not be extracted at the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the bone of the marrow with moist oils along with mucin of the althay, and fenugreek, and linseed.
Then the obstetrician shall moisten her own hand with these oils and mucins: then she shall insert it into the womb easily. Then she shall seek out the place where she shall fix the hook from the fetus and the places suitable for that.
Therefore consider at that time, if the fetus is ready to come down on its own head: then fix the hooks into his eyes, or his neck, or his mouth, or his palate, or under his beard, or in his chin, or in his sides, and near his ribs.
If however the descent is towards its feet: then fix it in the pelvis, and between his ribs.
And it is necessary that she hold the hook with her right hand: and place a knot on it where it comes between the fingers of her left hand: and insert her hand easily, and fix the hook in one of those places which we have said, until it has come to the free part.
Then she shall fix another hook opposite to it, or a third one, if you are strong: so that there is an equal tension, and it does not lean towards one side.
Then it shall be extended with an equal extension, and not only be extended in a straight line, but also move on all sides, so that the exit is eased: as happens with a tooth during its extraction.
And it is necessary in this one that is between that, so that the extension is softened. That if a part of it is held back: then the obstetrician shall moisten some fingers with oil, and insert them from the side, so that they rotate with them which hold it back.
If then a part of the fetus comes out: then the hooks shall be moved to another place which is higher: do this until the entire fetus has come out.
If therefore the hand is put out before another, and it is not possible to reduce it, through its coaptation: then it is necessary that a cloth be wrapped over it. Then pull it out until it comes out completely, cut it or in the joint of the plant, or on the kneecap: and so you should do to the other hand, and in two feet.
If the head of the fetus is large, or if there has been a coaptation in the exitium, or water is collected in its head: then it is necessary that he introduce between his fingers the spikelet with thorns, and take away with him the head, and drain out the water: or dislodge it with the instrument which is called Almisdac: whose shape has come from the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter after this.
Similarly do if the nature of the fetus is of a large head, then it is necessary that he separate the algengemat: or take out with the Misdach, as we have said. Then pull out the bones with pincers.
That if it is put out the head, and is coapted by the fork: then find out, until the moisture that is in the chest is discharged.
If it does not become complicated, and does not submit to the exitium: then cut the head hastily, according to what is possible for you.
That if the lower leg is apostematous, or there is hydropisis in it: then it is necessary that you perforate it, until the moisture runs out of it.
If the fetus is above his own feet, then its attraction is easy, and its direction to the mouth of the mother is light.
If it is coapted by the belly, or by the chest: then it is necessary that you take out with a cloth which you wrapped over your own hand: and find out the belly, or the chest, until what is in them runs out.
If other limbs are taken away, and returns the head: then the midwife should introduce her left hand. If then the jaw is open, then introduce your hand into the depth of the jaw, and ask it with your fingers, and draw it towards you up to the jaw: then introduce one hook, or two hooks, and draw it with them.
That if the jaw is locked, because of the heat that comes to it: then it is not necessary for him to work on it, but then he should administer an infusion of liquid, thick: and administer plaster: and sit in waters that soften and moisturize.
That if the fetus is on its side, then it is possible to make it even: then he should administer what we have said about the single fetus.
That if that is not possible, then cut it short, and extract it.
And you should not leave anything at all inside the second
When you have finished your operation, then administer what we have said about the heat that happens in the wombs of the mothers.
That if blood flows, then go down into the waters of stiffness, and administer the remaining cure.
And I have already seen a woman, in whose womb a dead fetus was: then she became pregnant with another fluid, and then a different dead fetus also developed. Then it happened to her after a long time that she had an apostema in her navel, and it was swollen, until it opened up: and it began to emit pus.
So I was called to treat her, and I treated her for a long time: and the wound did not heal.
I then put on top of it some strong plasters of attraction: and it came out of its place, from the mouth. Then a few days passed, and another mouth came out. So I was amazed then, when there is no mouth inside the womb.
I therefore thought that there were bones of a dead fetus.
I therefore enquired about the wound, and drew out many bones, while the woman was in better health. And she now stayed a long time, and sent for a little pus from the place.
And I did not find this strange here, except that knowledge and help is found in it for the healer, the artisan, with his hand from healing.
Chapter LVII. On heads.
On the forms of instruments necessary for extracting the fetus.
Form of the spring which opens the womb.
Here is the form of the strictorium, with which the books are made level; and two springs are equal at the ends of two beams. However, this vertical should be made finer for the strigorium; and so it is made, either from ebony or from hickory wood.
And the width of each beam should be like two fingers; and its length should be a palm and a half, and its middle is a little less than the length of the palm; and there are two pieces of the same kind of wood in the middle of the two beams, which have already been fixed on both sides, whose length is the half of a palm and a little more; and the width of each is like two fingers or a little less.
And these two pieces are inserted into the mouth of the womb, so that it opens to them when you turn the two springs.
A different form for its similarity, finer and lighter.
It is to be made of Ebony wood or hickory, according to the similarity of the fork. However, at its end there are two pieces as you see above; and the length of each piece is like a palm; and the width of each is like two fingers.
But when you want to open the womb with it, then let the woman sit on a bed, her feet hanging down from between her thighs. Then insert these two pieces joined together into the womb; and you hold the lower end of the instrument between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument, as you would with tweezers, equally according to the quantity that you wish to extract from the opening of the womb, until the midwife does what she wants.
The form of another vertigo than those ancient ones: The form which is driven forth by an impulse of the fetus.
Form that is called "Almisac", in which the great head is compressed: and it is equal to a pair of forceps, which have teeth at their ends, as you see them.
And when it is made round, like this form of forceps, as you see, whose teeth are like those of a sickle, by which it is cut and compressed.
Form that has a single spike:
Form that has two spikes:
Form that has two ends for cutting the head:
Form of two spatulums and also of tweezers.
These instruments are all used, and the more they multiply in kind, and are prepared by the art of the artisan, the faster they carry out their work, and the higher among men due to their quantity.
Therefore do not despise these instruments, but have them prepared with you. For necessity is inexcusable.
Head 78.
On the extraction of the second.
When the second is retained at birth, then you should let it go, so that it does not retain its breath. Then make her sneeze with a ball, and squeeze your hand on the opening of her nose, and then pull her hair. If, therefore, she goes out through this, it is good.
But if not: then take a stick and pierce through the lid: and put into it herbs opening up the opening of the womb, such as calamus, rosemary, fennel, chamomile, sage, cassia wood, and centaury: take all the herbs or some of them, and soak them in water with wine, and place them on fire.
Then put on a bandage around the foramen coopertorium of the hollow bone, and the other end at the mouth of the matrix: and hold it till the steam has reached the matrix's closure.
Then make him sneeze, as we have said. For the second time he will come out with ease.
But if after this cure he still remains and does not want to come out: then instruct the Obstetrician to dip his hand in oil of sesame, or in mucus of an elder plant. Then insert it into the womb, and ask her if she feels a second movement. When she has found it, then take it, and stretch it out little by little.
But if it is stuck deep inside the matrix, then insert your hand, following what we have said, until you feel a second movement and slowly pull it out according to the direction, so that the matrix does not tear due to sudden pulling: it should be rotated so as to change its position from one side to the other with ease: then add oil in quantity. She herself will submit then, and move about, and rid herself of the adhesions.
If the matrix' mouth is constricted, as we have already described: treat it with sneezing, and after the cure with herbs.
But if it does not come out with all that we have described, then be careful not to tire yourself out trying to extract it.
But it is necessary that you tie a ligature around the woman's waist so that the baby does not slip down inside her. Then clean her with a four-fold ointment. For it will rot and dissolve after some days, and come out.
But when it is rotting, a bad smell rises from it to the stomach and head, and causes sickness. Therefore it should be administered appropriate vaporizations to it.
Some have already been experienced in the sufumigation of nasturti and dried figs.
The form of the instrument for sufumigating a woman during the second and menstrual period.
Make it from a kind of vine or grain, and place the wider end on a fire; and let the sufumigation be placed on plums; hold it, until that sufumigation is consumed; and then take another one.
Chapter LVII.
Regarding the cure of an unercted ani.
Many boys are born with their ani not yet pierced, and already the subtle sirocco has dried them up. Therefore, it should be that the midwife pierces that sirocco with her finger; and if she does not, then she should pierce it herself with a sharp Spatumili; and let her take care, lest she touch it.
Then put over it the wool soaked in wine and oil. Then care for the wound with ointment, until it heals.
But if you should happen to notice that it is getting oily, then put a lead tube in the hole for many days, and remove it when the boy wants to defecate.
And already the ani has become oily from the constipation of a wound or pustules. Therefore, it should be that this consolidation is removed, and then cared for with what we have said regarding the cure and lead.
Chapter LIII.
Regarding the cure of fistulas which occur in the lower part.
Fistulas which occur in the lower part are either Induration or Grossness which occurs near an anal opening: or in a space of one part: and there is one fistula, or many.
Therefore, when that induration is aged, it opens up, and runs out of it a watery white discharge, or a subtle pus.
And when they are from these fistulas which penetrate. Therefore, the penetrating ones are known by that which comes out with defecation, and windiness, when a sick person uses defecation; and perhaps it comes out from them clean.
And they are from them Fistulae when they are in space penetrating up to the ischium, and up to the pubic bone. And they are from them those who penetrate up to the hip joint, and up to the tail of the horse.
But from this where the fistula is recognized penetrating up to the anus, and also not penetrating, that is, when you put your index finger in the anus: and you put a very small tent in the fistula of brass or iron: when there is no curvature.
That if there is a curvature in it, then put in it a tent of small brass, or a nail from horses' hooves, until you feel the tent, or a nail in your finger.
That if you do not feel it hot, and there does not come out anything from the hole of discharge, and no curvature, and not rough as I have said: then you will know that it is not penetrating: so get better.
And when the fistula is penetrating up to the ischium, or up to the pubic bone: then the meaning of it is the discharge of urine from it, and its prohibition from this so that the place with medicine hardens.
But if it is penetrating up to the hip joint, or up to the socket of the hip: then its sign is that it reaches the tent as far as there is no curvature up to the socket: and the finding of pain around the part, and that it is always discharged pus from it: and that it does not dry in it with ointment, and hardens with medicine.
And in these fistulas all those who penetrate have no cure at all: and the cure of them is work and vanity from foolish doctors, on whom a form is created.
But in that which is not penetrating, and is not old, there is hope of cure with a knife: for I tell you, and I have already proved it: and it is as if the sick person lies between your hands on his back: and you wash the back of him up to above his knees, and his knees are bent towards his belly. Then let him introduce the lead or air into the fistula until he knows where the loop enters.
If however he feels it weak around a certain part, then you should put your finger as an indicator in that part.
If then you feel a certain sensation in your finger that it has already penetrated into itself by passing through the skin, and not only between your finger and the skin, or the flesh: so then you know for sure that it is penetrating: do not therefore worry about it, because it is not a cure, as we have said.
They said, However, that in some people it heals with flesh and from the treatment that they hoped for a cure, that is, to light small fires of cauterization according to the width of the fistula, as above, and let him introduce the lit fire into the fistula until he reaches a certain part. Then repeat that a couple of times or three times until you know that all the added fillet flesh has been burned, which is similar to a feather-like canal:
Then the care with liniments to rub in butter, until the flesh comes out, which has been burned: then the care with oils that generate flesh and solidify it.
If then he is healed, it is good.
And if not, then he does not heal with any other treatment.
And if it comes out and does not reach as far as your finger which is in the anus, and is between the skin and the loop: and you see a fistula running along the surface of the skin: then dry off the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you see drying what is in the fistula until it reaches where the end of the loop comes out, and the loop comes out and falls.
Then clean off those fillet flesh which are like feather-like canals so that nothing remains of them.
If however blood overcomes you and dissolves between you and the operation so that it separates those flesh: then it is better that it happens, and faster in its recovery, to cauterize it with fire, or with sharp medicine.
For the cauterization, since it gathers good habits with fire, to the burning of their flesh, and to the cutting off of blood, and drying up of moisture.
Then that care with the liniments of wine in butter, or triturated caul-pieces, until the place lets out pus, and those meats dry up in the pus.
Then care then for that wound with consolidating ointments, which make the flesh hard: and there are medicines wherein are septicitis and drying up.
For when they begin to heal, then they are healed already: and do not put off repetition.
But if the fistula has already reached as far as the hip-bone, and has elongated from the excess of the body's fluid: then introduce your hand into the canal, and ask it.
But if you feel the attempt, and between you and it is a wound of sinew, or of flesh, and is near to penetration: then there is no operation in that, unless after a second time of trust and hope.
That is, for there are two ways of dealing with it: either as we have said, to cauterize it, or to separate it, until you obtain the desired concavity, so that you may be able to introduce liniment, and cure from near at hand. And do not proceed far with the section, lest you should fall upon a lizard that keeps a certain fastness, and chance to happen upon an unwanted exit of exhaustion. Then care for that with what we have said.
Perhaps it will be healed: or it may lengthen the wound, and dry up that which is before you, as we have said, or with an attempt, or with another acute instrument. Then cleanse those meats that are filthy, which are in the section, until you can reach them with examination.
Then endeavor to repair the wound of all the body with the section, and examine where it is consolidated: and there remains an open fistula in the interior part of the anus, which will be lighter on infirmity.
And sometimes a fistula is followed in this way: and that is when you insert a probe into the fistula; and it is on one side of the anus near the surface of the body with skin and margin of the anus: then take hold of the extreme end of the pierced, which is like a needle's eye, that is, the corium, prepared in this form. And insert into it a thread wound around five fils, and all around it. Then insert the probe with a thread into the fistula until you feel its convexity.
If therefore it penetrates into the margin of the anus near, then remove the thread from that hole: so that you can insert your finger in the anus, and remove the end of the thread, and gather the two ends together: and tighten them well, so that they are released one day or two days: and as much as the thread penetrates into the flesh, tighten it well until those muscles which are between the two ends of the thread fall away: then take care of the wound, until it heals and is cured.
If however the hole of the fistula does not penetrate: then make it so that it penetrates in any way you prepare it for yourself, unless it is in deep places. For indeed it is not good for you, to make it because of the snake, so that you do not fall on it.
Then do with it as we have said, until it is cured.
The shape of the needle-shaped thing which is found in the fistula, whose curvature is acute keenly, and one side is not acute, so that it does not hurt what does not need to be done, as you see.
Chapt. LXXXI.
From the suture of hemorrhoids, from which runs blood from the cut of them: and take care of the tears.
There are hemorrhoids after two ways. For they are either within the anus, similar to coal of wood, or like grain of corn: or almost like pease-grains. And from them are small ones and great; and blood flows out of them always, and it is one, and there are many. And outside of the navel, and at the extremities of it.
But these that are outside the navel, are according to the most part few humors, from which runs water yellow, or a little blood in an anxious course: and they are according to the color of the body.
And the cure that is within the navel, is, as you order to the sick person that he should make himself weak: and it is expressed, until it comes out from the anus, and appears to thee a little thick fluid. Therefore therefore hang with a hook: or hold them with your fingernail. Then cut them by the roots.
But if they do not retain them in them hooks, because of their moisture and their own softeness: then take them with a rough cloth, or with a twig of linden-tree, and draw them out with your fingers. Then cut them and sprinkle on them after the cut some hot powders that will keep them in place as a cautery. Or cauterize them according to what has preceded in the chapter of cauterizing. Then care for them with the rest of the cure, until they are cured.
That if the anus does not comply to come out, then prepare the sick person with a small clister that will be like a little mordercation to him, that it may be wet with what is in the anus, and comply to come out quickly, when it comes out the sick person.
But if the athelial are drawn out from the anus, then their affair is light and easy: and it is as if you take them with your fingernail, or take them with a hook, and cut them off. Then care for them with that which I have said, until they are cured.
And who hates cutting with a sharp iron, then it is necessary to administer a sutura to them in this manner. Take the fillet and insert it into the cavity. Then remove the thistle from above and insert an aiguille with a point on the left side of its root; make the two ends of the fillet cross each other, at the lower part of the aiguille, and let them be parallel to each other; and tighten the thistle strongly with a strong ligature. Then mark the fillet, and remove the cavity.
Make it with all the thistles, and leave one; do not take your own flesh, so that there is no excess of blood.
Then put it on a cloth soaked in oil or olive oil and put it on the patient; and order the sick person to lie down. Then remove the cloth, until he falls.
When the thistles fall, take care of them with ointment, and with the rest of the cure, until they are healed.
§ On the treatment of fissures. For often a dry stool and nature's contraction cause problems.
When they are old and do not respond to treatment: then you should shave them with the scalpel of Salivula, or with your own finger, until they are wet, and remove the upper crust that prevents them from being consolidated. Then take care of them, until they are consolidated, for which it is necessary to apply a medicine with a string, or a ligature, so that it holds them together.
If they do not consolidate: then shave them again with a sharper razor than before, until they bleed profusely, and then take care of them until they are healed.
§ On the treatment of scurvy (scurvy) and not on the treatment of scurvy (cough): and for thistle (flea) and moth.
Chapter LIII.
You should know that scurvy is a round knot of the color of the body, similar to the head of an axe; and it is found throughout the whole body, especially in the lower parts of the feet and toes; and it causes pain on walking.
It is necessary therefore that he should be cut out, what is in the situation of the claw, and be held with forceps, or with a hook, and be removed from its root.
Then care for that: and if you wish to cauterize that according to what precedes in his chapter.
From the flesh there is one small eminence, rough, strained, round over the surface of the body. And often it occurs in the hands of boys.
And the cure of that is, that you should stretch out the eminence, and strike it: or stretch it with silk thread: or with hair, until it falls off. And if you wish, cauterize the eminence according to what has been preceded with fire, or with acute medicine: and already the eminences immersed, and not immersed with an instrument that I call:
The ant however is also a small eminence, strained, thick, over the surface of the body, which runs into the depth far away: and when it comes to feel cold, it feels on it a kind of stinging of an ant, and becomes all over the body: and most of it is made in the hands.
And the cure of that is, that you should take a tube from the feather of a duck, or a strong quail's feather: and put that tube over the ant, until it holds a circle of the tube from its parts. Then turn your hand with the tube, until you separate what is in the situation of the ant: and put that in the depth of the flesh, and remove the ant from its root.
And if you wish, do it with an air-tube, or a iron-tube, according to this form.
Let the tube be placed above the limit, dragging a hard-covered finger, to avoid pain while turning the grip of it and its rotation.
And if you wish, cauterize the ant according to what has been preceded in cauterizing Athelil in the chapter on cauterization.
Chapter LXVIII. On the forms of instruments used for enemas to treat ailments
On the forms of instruments used for enemas to treat ailments of the rectum, and for washing away urine and colic.
When clistic enemas are made from silver, or from gold-plated brass, or from cast iron, or from hammered bronze.
And when they are made from these small or large instruments, depending on the nature of those in which they are administered.
Therefore what is administered to the cure of young boys who are small should be small, and those whose rectums are weak or sore, their enemas should be like them.
A large enema.
The shaft of the instrument, that is to say, the upper part in which the uterine is tied, should be wide according to this manner: and let there be a distinction so that it is tied as you see, and the lower extremity which enters into the pelvis, let it be closed, that is, not open, gentle, very much, pulling towards subtility: and on one side of its shaft there are two openings, and on the other side one opening.
And let the width of the opening be according to the thickness of the radii, and the thickness less, and let the uterine in which the medicines are placed be of a dry animal's skin: or of a piece of paper which is according to the form of an envelope, small; whose root is a palm.
And let multiple openings be pierced as it were, and let there be space between each opening the width of a finger. Then insert into those openings a strong filament from raw silk, which should be from ten threads, or about them, and bind it with the others so that it is like an envelope. When therefore it is placed in this uterine, let it be pulled at the head of the enema between two distinguishing marks with a strong constriction. Then wash out with it.
And this is the shape of the uterus here depicted and of the openings.
The quality of the poultice to be used with it is this: that it may fill the wound, or dry up the pus from the medicine which has been heated according to the tolerance of the nurse; and let it not be too hot or too cold.
Then the sick person shall lie on his back, and raise his legs to the upper side; and put something under him, that is, leather over which men lie, or a blanket.
Then he shall smear the extremity with oil, or with alum, or with mukilage of fenugreek, or similar substances. Then insert him into the wound with ease. Then let the assistant take both of his hands and squeeze it with force until all that is in the poultice has been discharged into the wound.
Then remove the poultice, and raise the legs of the sick person towards the wall.
If the medicine considers him to have exited, then hold on as long as you can. And if he sleeps all night with it on, it is more effective in healing.
But if you apply the poultice to a wound of the lower limbs and the discharge is rapid: then change the poultice again until the wound is healed.
If there are hemorrhoids or itching warts, then put a very mild poultice, soft as it were, from the poultices with which you poultice the boys.
And this should be the form of a mild poultice, on top of which is a tight skin.
Chapter LIII.
I have already spoken in the division of the treatment of wounds which concerned the book, and I now speak here of their treatment with the hand, and with medicines according to the second principle.
I say, therefore, that wounds differ according to the site from which they originate, and according to the place on which they fall.
Therefore, the wounds that are often made are like a stone's impact: or a cut with a sword, or a knife; or a blow with a spear, or a piece of wood, or an arrow; and many similar things.
But wounds that are made according to the places of the body are like a limb that falls on the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the abdomen, or the bowels; and many similar things from among the limbs.
And I am telling about some cures of wounds, so that I may put forth reason and rule concerning the remaining wounds.
And I will begin with simple wounds of the head: since the memory of the composers will come at the beginning of Chapter Three.
I say: I say: When there has happened in the head a simple wound, and there is no fracture of the bone: then, if it is from an impact of a stone, or something similar, and it has already broken the skin only a little: and it is a great wound, and you fear for the outcome of the inflammation that will come: then approach, and immediately perform cephalic phlebotomy: and do not delay that: and extract therefrom according to the quantity of its virtue: if it should not forbid phlebotomy, especially if it should be blood that comes out from the wound in little quantities. And let phlebotomy take place on the opposite side of the wounded part.
And let phlebotomy take place on the opposite side of the wounded part. And let the sick person abstain from drinking, and wine, and coarse food.
But if some restraint prevents him, then he should decrease from food, and do not approach meat, nor wine.
And place on the wound if it should happen that there is a warm aposteme, a liquid infusion in oil of rosewater alone, or with wine in which there is a styptic.
But if you are safe from a warm aposteme, then place on the wound if it is still young with its own blood, and has not changed the air, the powder that I will tell you about later: and if it has already changed the air, then place on it some balm, until it is healed.
If the fracture is large, or if there has been an incision, and they are similar: and their lips are not gathered together by pullies, then gather them together with stitches, as I shall relate concerning the wounds of the hand regarding the stitches.
If the fracture has already been detected and is hanging from the bone, and there is no retention of it except by a small suspender: then incise him. Then the care of the fracture with medicines, and restore in it hard flesh at the place of skin, and order the sick person to eat food in which there is thickness, such as are heads, and cooked wheat, until it is like a pulse: and let them eat it.
That if an injury is in the skin and does not adhere to the bone: then incise the whole putrefied thing and throw it away: and then take care of that.
If there is an artery in these wounds, or a new one from which blood flows: and it does not stop by medicine, then inquire about the artery. But if you do not cut the injury, then dry it with Spatem or bind it. That if necessity compels you when you do not confer what I have said, then cauterize it, until the blood stops flowing.
But if these wounds are small and simple, then the matter of them is easy and light: so that you put dust on them, this dust: for they are consolidated before they change them with air.
The method of powder for incised wound. Take a part of olive oil, and two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of non-extinguished lime: mix them all together well, and filter them: and fill it with the wound, and constrict it with good constriction, until it adheres well to the flesh, and is coagulated with blood.
Then bind him from above with powder, and leave him, and do not remove him until it is stable, so that it does not come loose. But until he has recovered his health, let not medicine be eradicated from him.
And when that calx has been made alone by itself, when you do not have olive oil with you at the moment, and even dragon's blood makes the same operation on many large wounds, when it is placed upon it and pressed down on it, and there are recent wounds with their own blood, which he did not change
which I changed it somewhat by air especially when it is in the time of summer, then it is not in the position of this powder's intention: so take care of him with that which we have said, so that you put on it some digestible ointment: or put on it a poultice made from barley flour, made with water and honey, until it discharges pus. Then take care of the rest with the cure, until they are healed.
If it is broken with a fracture in the bone and it is small, then remove it with Gesti: and I have already said the cure for fractures of the head in that which will happen.
For the wounds of the neck.
If a wound has occurred in the neck, then there is no difference between it and the cure, and there is no difference between the wound of the head when it is simple.
But if a cut has already occurred in the nerve of the neck, or an artery: then if it is a nerve, there is no skill in it, unless it is cured with a bitter stinging as with the zinnia and with healing poultices and with similar things. For they are harmful to nerves, and turn them back.
And do not put on any cold thing at all on a wound: for the substance of nerves is cold, and its continuance is with the brain, which is higher than the members: and let that be put on which cures with linden-wax, sometimes diluted with sweet water and oil, or with rose-oil, and theriac, when it is washed also with sweet water: and other mineral stones, according to this way, and moist ointments.
If the fracture is large, then administer suturing; or, cover his lips with powder. Then take care of him, until he recovers.
If, however, the wound is deep, or an abscess has already formed in the lower part of it, where there is already pus, then pierce it at a slightly depressed point.
What if the artery in the forearm has already been cut and blood is flowing from it? Then separate, dry up, and bind it; or, if necessity requires, caustic it.
If, however, he has been bitten by a snake and the wound is only on one side, and it seems that he will recover: then sew his lips together with thread over the wound, and do not touch the wound, but reduce it to its natural shape. Then bind him tightly with a bandage, and let him go for several days. Then take care of him with ointments, until he recovers.
If the fracture has already made an impression on the bone, then examine it; if there are any bone fragments, remove them all, or as many as you can: and if it is not prepared, leave it, until the bone rottens, and separates and comes out from the sides.
What if the fracture is recent? Then powder it with powder which you have scattered over it. If the limb is twisted and a fistula has formed: then take care of it with that which comes to mind in his own chapter.
The Arm in Spades.
If the impact is from a spear or a knife, and you can see the depth of the wound, then examine it carefully. If, however, from the forearm there comes a vapour of evil scent, when he feels unwell after it, then you know that the fracture is deadly.
What if it is not deep and the blood is recent? Then do not put powder on it immediately, and do not bind him so as not to retain the blood in depth, and let it run into his heart, causing evil: but put on it an attractive ointment, and let it go for two days.
If you do not have ointment with you now, then put in the wound a raw cloth moistened with oil, so that it sucks out what comes from it by means of moisture: and make the sick person sleep on the wound, so that he runs what is gathered in him.
If then the wound has already been cured three days or more and no spasm has occurred in the sick person, nor has there been any bad tremor of the heart, nor has there remained a constriction in the breath, and the other symptoms have all improved: then you will know that the wound is healed. Then take care of yourself and with ease, and continue with the treatment until it is healed.
If then the healing is completed and it has already opened forever, then you will know that it has already become a fistula. Then take care of yourself from its own head.
And if the wound is from a cut with a knife, and it is simple on the surface of the breast, or of the back: then take care of it with what preceded from the stitch, if it is large: or with dust, if it is small.
But if it has already made an impression on the bone, and has come from it by a twig: then inquire about the wound, and approach from outside to remove those twigs, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them, until the wound rots, for the extraction of those is advantageous.
But as for the other wounds in the other members, the judgment in the treatment is the same as I have said.
Regarding wounds of the belly and of the entrails, and their issuing forth.
The rupture that has happened in the belly is great, medium, and small.
From a great one, then, when it issues forth, or from the number of entrails.
Why do they enter in, and their stitching is more painful and more difficult.
And a small disruption also does difficult from another mode. So then, as it follows that the reduction of them is more difficult if you don't immediately come into contact with its place: for it swells, opens, and thickens: so why is the entrance to it difficult?
For this reason, then, a small disruption is better than a large one: for when the reduction of the intestine does not difficult, as it is difficult in these two kinds.
You should know that the suturing takes place according to four ways.
Two common sutures meet in the suture of the eye, and in the suture of the remaining parts of the body: and two other sutures communicate with the rest of the body in a proper way. However, they are more private when it comes to the suture of the eye: and I will tell you both with exposure, and explanation.
I say then, that when the bone is small, and it comes out of it a little of the intestine, and it is difficult to reduce it: then it is because of one of two ways. Or because of the size of the disruption, as we have said: Or because there is a swelling in the intestine because of cold air.
So then, when that is so, you should warm the bone, so that you dip a sponge, or a wet cloth into warm water alone. Or simmer in water with squink, and celery, and spice, and simmer it with the intestine, until the swelling goes down.
When then does that wine make which has stitches: and it is better than water alone in solving swelling.
When you see that the swelling has already gone away, then moisten the intestines with water in which there is a high temperature, or bitter. For by that way the entry into it is relieved with the small one.
If the return of it is excuses after this cure, then you will find a small disruption with the instrument which severs hemorrhoids.
The first cure is better when prepared than when performed; and there should be no compulsion to perform according to necessity and want of instruments.
The part of the body which is twisted, acute, and the other part not acute, and the end small should not be with subtility, but rather more obtuse: and it is that which resembles a gash, as you see.
When therefore the fracture is increased and the intestine is brought in, then it should be that it is reduced according to its own natural form in its own place, if possible above it: for this is better.
When however the fracture is wide in the lower part of the pelvis: then it should be that you make the sick person lie on his back, and set his legs higher than his head. And if it is in the upper part of the pelvis, then you should set its head and its chest higher than its lower parts.
And also if the fracture is in one of the two parts of the pelvis, then you should set your intention and your attention always in this, that the part in which is the fracture should be higher than the other part.
And thus it should be, so that you receive that in large wounds, and in medium wounds.
In wounds however which are small, set it according to what is prepared for you.
Then make a minister who has the whole fracture in his hand present between your hands: and add to it the lips. Then find out from him who follows something after something: and this is the common method of sewing one.
And it is, so that you take an acute angle, or a number of acute angles according to the quantity of the width of the wound. Then let go from the end of the fracture a quantity of the index finger, that is, the doctor: and set now one besides which you introduce into it a thread in two ends of the skin, with two ends of the suture which is under the skin from within, until you make it penetrate from the other part, and you have already added the two ends of the skin, and the two ends of the suture: and there are four orders.
Then tie tightly with a double thread around the needle from both sides until the two lips of the wound come together as they dry out.
Then release the grip with your finger and fix it with another knot: then sew it straight as you did with the needle first time. So do not cease doing that while holding on to it, until you have completed the tightness of the wound.
And let the needle be of medium thickness between the thickness and the fineness; for the fine needle wounds the flesh quickly: and the thick one is difficult to enter into the skin: therefore it should be such that it is of middle thickness and fineness.
And it should not be fixed by the needle at both ends of the skin near by much: so that the flesh does not get wounded quickly, and the wound does not open before its consolidation, and also does not stretch out with the sewing, so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
Then cut off the ends of the needles so that they do not hurt the sick person while he sleeps: and put feathers from silk or wool at both ends of the needles: then release them until you know that the wound is consolidated.
And these kinds of sewing with needles are much more convenient for small wounds. Since it is enough to sew them with one, or two, or all around.
The second common stitch is to gather the four ends together with sewing: the two ends of the skin, and the two ends of the thread on one side, with a needle that has a thread attached to it of equal thickness and fineness.
Then when you pierce with the needle all four ends, reduce them from the part from which you began in order that the thread may hang from the upper part of the wound: so that it is a stitch like the stitching of the cloth when it is gathered together, and put between every stitch the quantity of thickness of the little finger.
This type of sewing is known by people.
And with this stitch I sewed up the wound that a man got in his belly, which had been wounded with a knife, and there was a rupture of the gut by about one palm: and he came out of the intestines around two palms from the middle intestine, and there was a rupture in the middle of the abdomen.
So I reduced it after he had stood for twenty-four hours outside the wound.
The wound was then healed in a space that had been for about fifteen days: and I tended him, and he was cured: and after that he lived for many years, in good health.
And the doctors judged that it would not heal.
But by a miracle, I did not cure that with ointment. For I was in a place where the ointment was not found, and there were no medicines. So I put on the wound a wet cloth twice a day, and tended it with a wash of honey water until it was cured.
Two kinds of stitches, I will call them, I shall mention according to the account of the speech.
And is, as you begin with the sharp stitch: and introduce it from the outside to the inside part.
When the needle therefore enters into the skin, and goes into a fold according to the length and breadth of the whole body: release the extreme end of the siroc that you introduced from the outside, and let it penetrate into the extreme end from the inside part to the outside in the other end.
When you have made it penetrate then, so let it penetrate according to this in the same extreme end fold from the outside part to the inside: and release the extreme end of the siroc that is in that place, and let it penetrate into the extreme end from the inside part to the outside by means of your penetration with which you make it penetrate into the siroc end, which is in this part, until it penetrates into all of it.
Then also from this same fold, and draw it with the end that is out of the siroc, which is on another side, and take away from the skin from whence it penetrated by means of the same end.
Then reduce the wound in that skin, and the extremities of a siffac, which is in another side, with this extremities mirach: and take it out from the skin that is on a part of it, and make that one way, and other: and make that way behind the first, until his external whole be second to this example.
And the summit of this suture is as his suture that are between the skins that they are: so that his siffac way one from a part of one end of the skin: and leave it by another way from another part, until you complete it.
The second species of suture is its own, which said Galen.
This speech is told, that his is according to the similarity with which they are some healing, so that they add all part up to compare his proper by nature: and apply the extremities of a siffac on its other extremities, and the extremities of mirach on its other extremities. And this make you according to what I tell you.
It is necessary that you make this on the mirach end near to you from the external side, and make it penetrate in the internal with this soil: and leave the two extremities of a siffac. Then turn this again, and make it penetrate from the external side to the internal with two extremities of a siffac, that is, everywhere.
Then turn them both, and make both penetrate from the internal to the external, in two ends of mirach different, that is, opposite.
And this way of suture is a better suture common easy, and is the suture which its precedent memory.
This is therefore the speech of Galen also.
And said some: The suture of the hand with two knuckles is straightened out. That is, so that you put in them both one string: and begin with the putting of an accuser, from where it is for you, and make it penetrate until another side, according to their suture which they are equally.
And thou shalt know that when disruption is in the middle of the eye: then the suture thereof is more difficult than the rest of the places of the eye.
The judgment of medicine on wounds, it is the judgment of the other wounds.
That is, for when you treat a fresh wound with its blood, before it has become dried up: and you reduce the intestines, and their content, and mend the wound: then place it on the powder of the inflamed flesh.
That is, if the air has already changed the wound: then place on the wound a certain ointment that is at hand, so that it may make pus: and let the threads fall away, and the sifac [scab] be solid, and the mirach [grew]. Then care for that as is the cure of the other wounds, until it is healed.
But if you have not at hand the medicines, then place on the wound immediately, so that it may begin to discharge pus, and change the dressing twice a day, as I taught you, until it is healed.
For thou dost not need other medicines in many places when wounds are simple.
But if you shall know, that the wound commingles with the principal members in injury, then it is necessary that thou shouldest dip the wool with lanolin in oil of moderate heat, or in rose-oil: and place it on the circumferents of the places which are between the hips, and under the armpits.
That is, if it feels pain, or prickings, or corruption in the intestines (for this often happens): then bind up the wound with bitter wine, black, hot: especially if putrefaction has already set in on the intestine, and a piercing has come to its head.
And thou shalt know that what is of the large intestine is easier to be healed: and what is of the small one, is more difficult to be healed.
But the intestine which is called Jejunium, does not accept healing from a wound that has befallen it at all: and that is because of its multitude, inasmuch as it is of intestines, and of their great number, and of the fineness of the body thereof, and of the nearness thereof to the nerves of nature.
But if that which proceeds from the ulnar is sharp, and you have found it so: reduce it according to your reduction, as you reduce the intestines evenly.
If, however, there is a space beyond it and the wound has already been made dark or light: then you should hold it with a thread above the place that has turned black from it, so that blood does not flow. For in the knuckle there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament, and place two ends of a thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside the knuckle: so that there is an attraction towards you from it, and extraction of it at the knuckle's edge, and emission of the wound's pus.
Remembering the wound that happened in the intestine.
When the disruption has occurred in the intestine, and it is small: then it is possible for some people to be restored: since I saw one who was wounded in his belly with a lance, and there was a sharp wound on the right side of his stomach, and an old injury: and there was made a fistula, and it came out of it a discharge, and a pus.
So I applied the treatment, until I was not confident in his recovery: and I did not hesitate to examine it, until he was healed, and the place had been strengthened.
After I saw the place had been strengthened, I feared for the illness that might happen to his belly, since there was a bad accident in his belly: and that did not happen to him from that accident. And he remained in better health, eating and drinking, and enjoying himself, and entering a bath, and exercising in his diet.
And some experimental people said, for when it happened in the intestine a sharp wound, and it is small: then it should be bound according to this way. And it is, so that you take large ants' heads. Then gather two lips of the wound, and place one ant with an open mouth on both lips of the wound. So when he has taken hold of it, and has tightened his grip upon it, cut off his head, for it is bound fast, and is not loosed.
Then put another ant near the first, and do not cease to make it work with the ant after the second quantity of wound on the whole.
Then reduce the man, and bind his wounds. Those heads remaining attached to the Intestines, until the Intestines are fed, and heal, and do not cause injury to the whole by being torn.
And it is also possible that the Intestines be bound as well with a thin thread: which has been torn from the intestinal animal, attached to it once it has entered into the mass.
And is, that you take hold of the end of this thread from the Intestine, and cut off a great deal of flesh. Then bind on the end of this thread with a thin wrapped thread. Then insert that thread into the mass, and follow it up with the Intestine. Then reduce the man to dismemberment.
And this method of stitching with ants and intestine is not but second to the first in trust and hope.
You should know that the wound is great and broad, especially if it be in one of the thin Intestines: then it is not but a cunning device, nor is its healing at all.
Of care for Zoochus and Fissures.
You should know that every wound, or suppurating wound when it has aged and become old, and turns to a sore, and does not heal, and always discharges pus, and does not close: then it is called by the universal name of a Fistula wherever it may be in any member. And we call this same Zuchenus.
And the Fistula is indeed by virtue of age a filtered, hard, white discharge, not causing pain, which has a small curly hair: and for that it is called by some Risatus, that is, a hair.
And it is in certain hours damp, which emits pus. And perhaps the moisture splits in certain hours. And when this moisture is much and little, and it is thick and fine.
And I have already pre-empted in the division, then when I said wounds, that every wound which does not heal and does not grow in it, is not this but because of a new cause of causes.
Of which one is because there is little blood in the body: or because of wickedness in it: or because it is between itself and the lips is hard flesh, preventing the birth of flesh: or because there is much dirt and filthiness: or because the wound is putrid within itself, and the matter that is cast out of it is of a bad quality: or because the medicine is inconsistent in its cure: or because corruption falling into the region is a kind of pestilence, or by virtue of the region, as happened in Caesar Augustus: in which it is difficult for diseases to be digested, and the healing of aphses by nature is delayed: or because there is one hole, or a number of bones.
And I have already shown all the stations and causes of these and their cures with physicians in a division: and it is necessary here that I make you aware of the cure of the Fistula and Zuka, which happens through a path of operation with the hand.
You therefore know that the Fistula happens in all the members of the body. For from them are Fistulas that reach into large veins and arteries, or nerves, or intestinal tract, or urinary bladder, or some of the ribs of the back, or some of the joints of the compound: such as the hand and foot: and from them are those that reach into the vicinity of a main member, or others.
Which therefore of these Fistulas is according to this manner, it is from diseases that are difficult to be cured, and does not receive healing, and the employment with it is labor and ignorance. Et si sic sicut deos iustis praesumerem, quod in qua est peccatio, et peccatio in qua est imperitia: qui cum dicamus, et agimus, ut saepe facimus, nonne illam curare deb
If it is from the fistulas any of which does not reach to these places which I have said: and you hope, and trust in its cure, and perceive into it, then take hold of it trying out of air, or iron, if the fistula tends according to rectitude, and inquire it with itself.
But if there is a tortuosity in the fistula, then investigate it with a thin lead. For because lead with its own lenity lightens it, and deals with the tortuosity.
That if the fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to indicate over it with a try out. So make use of the opening from its openings.
For because of the moisture which clisterizes itself, it turns toward other openings, and runs out of them.
Then inquire with care how it is possible for you: that you may know what is there a mouth, or a nerve, and is the fistula long distant, or close by: or is the fistula one whose openings are many, and lies over all of it, with your great strength: with your questioning, which questions about the sick, and with the finding out of pain at the pressure with your hand on the place, and similar signs and causes of accident.
But when you are standing firmly on all these positions, then take a try out toward cure according to your confidence: and it is, if you consider then, that if there is a fistula which appears near by, or in a place healthy far from the joint, or from a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or one of the places which I have said to you: then stop up the fistula according to what has been preceded from my account, and remove what is in it from filtration, and corrupt meat, which comes out of its opening by the flesh, or the sinew, and similar things: and care for it, until it is healed.
But if the fistula is a long distance deep, and extends according to rectitude: then it is necessary that you should separate it from the depth as much as is possible for you. He then cleanses it from all its corrupted flesh.
Then he applies the poultice of fresh blood mixed with acute medicines and inserts it as far as the fistula comes together with the iron: you should do this a few times until the acute medicine completely corrodes what is left in the fistula's hole from corruption.
Then restore it with ointment that generates healthy flesh until it heals.
If it does not heal through this, then you should cauterize it according to what we have described.
If the cause of the fistula is an opening, and you have verified this for yourself: then examine the patient, and dry it up according to what I have told you: if it does not allow you to remove anything from its blood, or nerve, or main member, as we have said.
If a hole is detected within it and there is some corruption and blackening: then shave it, until all corruption is removed from it. Then take care of the patient with what induces flesh to grow on his flesh until he heals.
That if it does not heal, and it discharges pus as it did before: then you should know that you have not achieved total eradication of the corruption.
Detect therefore on top of it again, and carefully examine what kind of shaving it has, and wash it with your last strength.
Then restore the patient. If he heals, then that is good: and if not, then you should know that that corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which you have not achieved. That is not in it for you to do, unless you release it from nature.
If the corruption is in a small opening, and it is possible for you, attract it with subtle hooks that suit it.
If there are many bones, then carefully examine all of them, and do not release any from your strength.
If it does not suit you to release any of its humors, and there is no fear or mistake in cutting them: then cut those humors and flesh, if there is any, and free the bones.
If you are not prepared to remove the bones from your own body at a given time, then place them over the elbow joint so that they rot away; and leave them until they rot away completely, as long as they rot away along with the surrounding muscles and fluids.
And guard the elbow joint so that it does not stiffen. And tighten the section that you have cut on your own body during your surgery. Then place the bone, if necessary, in a bath of sulphur treated with oil: or in a bath of Egyptian ointment, or some other kind of ointment.
For when those fluids rot away and the bones separate from them, it is a relief to remove them, and their attraction diminishes.
But if it is one large bone, such as a leg bone or a hip bone, or similar ones, and the part that has rotted away is large, then saw off the last bit with a saw, until the blackness and rot are removed from it. Then restore the elbow joint.
But if the part that has rotted away is large, and the rot has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it must be sawn off, and cut all the way through to the place where the rot has reached: then take care of the bone, until it stiffens up.
And I will tell you the story of the man who cut his leg. So that you have an example and a help for your surgery.
He was a young man of about thirty years of age, who felt a pain in his leg, which arose from within the body, that is, from the inside, until it reached the bone, and there was an ulcer; and there was no external cause.
Then, at that time, when he went to the doctor, the ulcer had already opened up and many substances had collected around it. And his treatment was delayed until his leg was tied up, and many holes had been made in it; all of which were emitting puss, and fluids from the body.
So many physicians had been working on him for about two years, and there was no wisdom in the art of his hands until I was called to his side, and I saw the crux of his body and the materials that were flowing out of his orifices with a great flow: also, all his body was already covered, and his color was citrin.
So I entered one of his orifices, and the probe reached his mouth.
Then I scrutinized all the orifices, and I found them all coming together at one place from all parts of the body.
So I properly looked and followed one of those orifices until I reached a bone part: and I found it broken: which was already broken, and discolored, and rotten, and pierced, until it penetrated all the way to the marrow.
So I cut off what I had found, and prepared it from corrupt bone.
And I removed what was not in the bone, but that corruption, which I took out and cut off. And I have now removed it.
Then I put in place a repair of the wound with long- consolidated medicine. And that was not consolidated.
Then I probed again, and I found a second bone above the first detection: and I found continuous corruption with bone, which I cut off what seemed to me also from that corruption.
Then I tried to repair it. And it was not repaired.
So I probed again on the body, and I did not cease to hit the bone with a sharp tool, and tried to repair it: and it was not repaired until I hit around the base of a palm bone, and took it out along with its marrow.
Then I repaired it with medicine, and it was quickly consolidated, and healed: and this repetition of his operation and sectioning out of him was not necessary, except for the weakness of the nurse, and his lack of tolerance, and my fear of him dying: for it often happened to him in all times from an excessive evacuation of bad syncopes.
He is therefore whole-heartedly healed: and the new bone has grown up in place of the old, and the arrangement in his body is good, and his power has returned; and he has adapted himself to his dispositions: and he has not done him any harm at all in walking.
But if the jaw is broken in place in the body already: then it should be bound, according to this method: and so it is: that you take the ligament, and tie it tightly at the end of the prominent bone: and order someone who extends it upwards: and put another ligament made of thick wool after the first ligament. Then bind the flesh above the bone: and extend its end so that you can pull the flesh down below: and you cover the flesh over the place that you want to bind, so as not to hurt the flesh by cutting it.
Place the ligament, or a board below the bone: because when you do so, you are not forbidden to cut the corrupt flesh.
And it should be so that it is closed over the corrupt place a little, so that it does not appear in its appearance to the sense, and compels its own closure by another force.
That if the bone is corrupt, and it does not stand out, then a part of it continues with another part: and corruption is in its middle, or in some part of it: then you detect the flesh from all parts entirely. Then place the ligament below.
Then close it from the first part, where there is corruption, until it continues to be closed from the other part: and let it be closed according to the length a little, according to what we said.
That if corruption is in the joint, then cut that joint corruption, and close the bone where it continues from the other part.
But if corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no strength in that except for a scar.
That if corruption is in the palm, or in the sole: then the matter is difficult to mend very much. It is true that you should inquire how corruption appears to you. And if it cracks, dry it and make it as clean as you can by means of whatever instrument is at hand and whatever skill you possess: when it does not give a contrary vein or nerve.
And know that there are many chisels and saws for cutting these bones, depending on the position of the bones and their preparation, and their thickness and fineness, and their size and porosity, and their hardness and their rarity. Therefore you should prepare instruments suitable for all kinds of operations.
And know that these operations require a long-term study of the instrument you are using. And knowledge of these ways of practice is a testimony to the types of sicknesses: for then you will find out by yourself what is suitable for him from instruments, for every disease.
And I confirm to you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments, which you place as examples for those that you cut, and a proof from your experience on other ones.
(Shape of another saw)
(Shape of the scalpel) (The head of this scalpel is shaped like a star-shaped claw): and its dots are shaped like the dots of an elk's horn.
And it is not suitable unless it rubs against the scalpels when it is cutting, when it is corroded, or has a wide and large mouth, and is great in size.
(Shape of a larger scalpel)
(Shape of a wide scalpel)
The shape is sharp.
The shape is sharp.
The shape is sharp.
The shape is sharp.
This is similar to the radio, and the end is like a saw: it appears in many places from the cutting of bones.
The shape is sharp, which is suitable for its incision, as it is pierced through bone.
The end of it is triangular, and its ends are acute.
This fits from India. And likewise it is necessary that all that we have said of the rasors, and the incisers, and the saws be made.
Regarding the incision of ends, and the sawing of bones.
The ends rot, either from an external cause, or an internal one.
But when the patient has been cured by medicines, and does not respond to treatment with medicines, and you see corruption affect a limb, but it does not spread to the whole body, so it is necessary to cut off that limb to where the corruption spreads, so that the sick person is saved from death, or from a greater defect of the limb.
And the sign that has happened to it, namely that it becomes corrupted, should be cut off until it is cured: for fire burns it and puts out its ardor, or腐敗後，直到它被治好：當它腐朽到身體那部分，並蔓延到全身。
Then approach it with care, and likewise, if the cause of corruption is from percussion of certain venenosae (poisonous creatures): such as the sea scorpion, the spider, the rat, and others.
Then if corruption, or percussion is at the end of a finger, then cut off the finger, and not leave room for corruption, so that it is cut off up to the remaining hand.
And likewise, if it happens in the hand, then cut it from the root with a sharp knife, and not leave room for corruption, until it is taken off into the sharp-witted arm.
And if it has broken into it, then incision is made on the arm at the joint.
But if corruption has passed through, and you see him around the hip: then death is in him. And to administer in addition to this cure, is a quantity of virtue.
And likewise do for the foot, when corruption has entered into a toe, then incision is made on it at one of the joints: and if it has entered into the nail of the toe, then incision is made on the entire foot. But if it has ascended to the knee, then incision is made on the leg at the joint of the knee.
That which if corruption has already reached above the knee, then there is no power in it, except for discharge, and leave behind the sick to death.
And the mode of incision on the limb, or of wrapping it up is, so that you tighten the ligaments below, which you wish to incise: and tighten another ligament above the place. And let one minister extend a ligament to the lower: and let another minister extend a ligament upward to the upper. And you separate flesh which is between the two ligaments, with your finger, until all the flesh is visible. Then incision is made, or it is wrapped up.
And it should be so, that you put a cloth from all parts before the wound, and so that it does not touch the healthy place of the incision: and so that the sick person suffers from injury, added to it, and the swelling is hot.
But if blood flows inward while you are working, then the place is quickly burned: or put on it some powder which cuts the blood. Then return to your own medication, until it is complete.
Then wrap the wounded limb with a suitable ligament, and care for it, until it heals.
And I tell you what happened to the man in his foot, this is the same accident that I tell you.
That is, because it happened in his black foot, when the ash which resembles the burning of fire: and that corruption first occurred in one of his toes, until it began his entire foot.
So the wound was healed when he saw that a boil had formed on his limb, which he felt due to pain and itchiness, and he cut it open at the joint, and was cured.
And after a long time had passed, the same corruption again occurred to him on his finger of his right hand.
So he came to me and I tried to remove the excess with him when I put on his hand some medicines after purifying his body: and there was no response to the excess, and it began to itch again on another finger: until the corruption began to spread on the hand.
He called me to cut off his hand: and I did not want to do so, hoping for a response from it regarding the excess: and I was afraid even of cutting off his hand himself. For the strength of the arm was above falling.
After he had despaired of me, he turned back to his land: and he approached me about it, because he wanted to recover, and he cut off all his hand: and he was cured.
And I did not bring this story forward except to make it an aid in the case of such a sickness: and that it may be a sign, and according to what is relevant.
Regarding the treatment of boils, and the quality of the lancing with medicines.
When a boil occurs in some fleshy member, and the boil remains for a long time without breaking, until it makes the juice rise: then it bursts, or pierces, and the pus that is in it comes out, leaving a hole like a wound, and the skin over it becomes like a thin cloth: and it does not reach the end of its corruption, nor prints into the bone, nor into the tendons, neither does it touch the ligaments: it seemed to be called a Sinus: but it is not called a Fistula: however, if it prolongs that space, until it prints the corruption on some of those limbs, then it is called a Fistula, or a pustule.
And the cure is such that you should strike off all of the skin like a garment; and most especially when it has been thinned out, and made like a piece of cloth; and be confident because it would not adhere to the place, for its corruption.
But if you hope that the skin will adhere, and does not follow from it that corruption: and if there is a thickness of flesh there, then the cure itself with the use of the plaster: and is, as you should consider towards the sinus.
Then if it is large, and the pus that is discharged from it has a foul odor: then plaster it itself with the use of Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, oil, and myrrh, equal parts, mixed together in a vessel; and let it boil on the fire until it turns red: and let it come to a consistency of honey.
Then take from it what you need: and dissolve it with water and honey, and plaster it up with the sinuses; and tightly close the opening, and release the medicine into it for a duration of two hours.
Then extract it with an expression: let it be for days, until the sinuses are cleaned out, and the smell is gone.
And whenever you plaster it with water of ash, when this medicine is not present: and is, as you should take ash from wood of oak, or ash from oak-wood: and pour it over the ash. Then dip it in, and plaster it up with it, until you are confident that the sinuses are now clean.
That if the sick person does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine and water of ash, then plaster it itself with water and honey, in which has already been mixed a little crushed myrrh. Or plaster it itself with honey and wine because the property of honey is to clean and wash away: and the wine makes the sinuses adhere, especially when there is a surplus of stinginess and dryness.
Whenever you do this, and are convinced that corruption has already been removed: then cleanse him with water along with what he does to give birth to flesh within him.
And is, that you take from an ointment dyafinicon: and dissolve it with oil of roses, and wine astringent: or cleanse him with certain medicines, and other ointments, whose properties I have written in a book about ointments.
That if the opening of the sinus is strict, in which the cannula of the clister does not enter: then increase it slightly with iron: or put in it a little licorium that has been infused in Egyptian ointment, or in basilicon ointment, until it increases.
And also if the opening is also wide, then add the lips together with a stitch: and let go out of it a quantity in which the clister enters without addition.
And also if the opening from which there runs pus is raised upwards: then dry it in a lower place which is in it, so that the pus runs down: for when the pus is held back in the depth of the sinus, it prevents flesh from being generated in it.
That if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus all around below it according to what you want: then be careful, that you prepare the member with a preparation which runs out of it pus easily according to which you are prepared. Be careful, that nothing of the pus is retained within it at all: and take medicines that are put on the patch, which are suitable for the sinus you want. And extend them over a linen cloth. And place such a quantity of the cloth so that it communicates with all of the sinus. Then cut with pincers into the direct opening of the sinus hole, a slightly larger opening of the sinus. Then extend from the ointment soft things over another cloth according to the quantity of the hole: and place it on the member at a distance from the opening of the sinus so that it allows the exit of pus out of it: and do not remove the large cloth, unless after a few days one time.
But he who is above the sinus opening, is he who moves at all times so that he goes out what is gathered in him from pus; and know that this which runs out of it virus, is much or little: or digested or undigested.
And when you consider this place again of the sinus itself, does he not feel the master's pain, or is there no pain in it, and is there a pimple in it, or is there no pimple?
So when your treatment extends thus far, and you see the matter that comes out over the sinus opening, then know that the sinus is already attached, or approaching attachment; so then dissolve it in the morning, or on the third day: and when you dissolve the wart, then change the cloth with another, and renew the ointment.
But if the virus comes out of the sinus after a long time interval, then do not despair of its attachment, for its healing approaches, because from men there are those who delay the generation of flesh in their wounds, and from them there are those who act in opposition to it.
But if it comes out of the sinus after many days with undigested pus, then know that the sinus does not attach.
But if the attachment of the sinus is delayed and its course is prolonged, then add to the drying up of medicines, truly let doctors do so that they be in their substance moist, and in their virtue dry: as the balm of daphnescene, when added thereto an excess of addition with zagi.
And from the greater part, when it is cured, take the balm of daphnecene, and dissolve it with rose oil, and let it flow over the old wart in equal substance.
Then bind it up with that, and use it.
And this same action of yours is similar to that of the balm of daphnecene when it is not present with you, honey when you heat it up until it thickens, and use it. Take myrrh, and aloe, and olibanum: mix them together and reduce them to a fine powder, and sprinkle it on honey while it is being heated. Then cover the wound with a cloth, and bind it tight over the sinew: and cover the cloth with the honey you have prepared, until it has thickened: and sprinkle the powder on the wound, and put the cloth back over it, and bind it tight.
And when this is applied to him, take long-leaved aristochaos and the roots of the star lily, and there is a lily; and herb flour, and the daisy. Use them in their simple state, or crushed up, mix them well, and sprinkle the powder on the honey you have prepared, and use that.
If the injury does not heal with this treatment, then know that there is corruption in its depths; or it has already made an impression on the bones, or the other hard organs, or the ligaments: then treat it with treatments for fistulas, as has been set out.
Of the treatment of finger injuries and the use of ointments and incisions of the fingers and their sectioning.
Is a finger injury that arises under the nail of the thumb or another finger, and perhaps it also arises in the other fingers.
But when this injury persists and its treatment is neglected, and it becomes infected with pus: or it corrupts, and discharges it from the nail root: and perhaps it corrupts all of it, and perhaps the corruption reaches the mouth, until it has a foul smell: and the tip of the finger becomes swollen, and its color turns dark.
When you treat this finger, following the division that we have described, and your treatment does not bring about a cure: then you must cut off all the excess that remains from the nail. Then cauterize the finger after that. For a cauterized wound is very hot.
If the bone is actually sound, and the nail also is sound, and the calluses of the nail are already pressing the flesh to the interior, and they begin to sting it, and hurt it: then it is necessary that you put Radium subtil under the angle of the nail which stings the flesh, and push it upward: and cut the flesh with ease, and place over it what remains of the meat from the medicines burning, scorched until all of it has moved. Then the care for that with the nail, until it heals.
If however the corruption has already impressed on the bone, then it is necessary that you cut that bone and take it out: for the bone does not heal at all while it remains in it.
That if you see the corruption and the corruption entering into the finger, then cut it at one of its joints, according to what has been said above in memory of it. Then the care for the finger, until it heals.
If however there is a loss of the nail, or a knock: and there comes into it a severe pain, then it is necessary that you draw blood from the injured part at first. Then dry the nail with a sharp Spatula from above towards the nail.
And guard, so that the cut does not reach the flesh under the nail: for you will cause to happen through it a severe pain in the injured part, and it will be a cause of birth of flesh added in place.
Then the care for the place with him that sits with the pains.
The finger however that is added which is born in some hands of men, perhaps is fleshy all over: and perhaps are bones in it, and perhaps has a nail there: and the birth of some of its joints, or is the birth in some of its joints of the finger. This one then that is born in some joints of the finger does not move: and this one that is born at the joint of the finger, perhaps moves.
Therefore, he who has flesh, his sectioning is easy. That is, so that you strike him at the root with a broad flat chisel.
But as for the one whose birth is in the root of the joint, his cure is difficult. So then abstain from incising him.
But as for the one who is born in a finger at the very last of the nodes, then you must strike him first with a round incision all the way down to the jaw. Then tighten the jaw with one of the appropriate saws for that. Then cure him, until he is healed.
But as for the consolidation that has occurred in the fingers, it often happens or from the birth of man, that is, he is born with it, or from the consolidation of the wound, or from the burning of fire, and similar things.
So then let him separate that consolidation, until the fingers regain their natural shape. Then place between them a linen cloth, or cloths soaked in rose oil: so that they do not quickly consolidate, and separate them from each other: or place between them a thin lead sheet, until the area is consolidated as it should be.
And similarly, if a consolidation occurs in some fingers with the palm, then dry out that consolidation, according to how it is prepared and suited for the shape of the limb.
Regarding the Incision:
Veins are swollen, large, and full of melancholy excesses that occur in many parts of the body: and many of them end in the legs, especially in the legs of those who walk a lot, and those who carry loads.
So then let him administer to the body a strong exhaustion from black cholera sometimes with an infusion.
Then draw blood from the patient's arm with a bowl.
The cure of these veins with iron is according to two methods. They should cut off the leg, and draw out the black blood. And another way is, that they should cut away the vein, and draw all of it out.
The sectioning, however, is according to this method. First wrap the leg with warm water until the black, foul blood dissolves. Then tie the leg by the upper part of the hip, all the way down to the knee with sutures. Then cut off a wide strip of vein at one, two, or three places.
Then squeeze the blood out by hand from the lower part of the leg, all the way up to the top, and it should be done first by the phlebotomist so that the patient does not faint. Then cut off the nail down to the bottom: until a quantity of blood is shed which you see is sufficient, and which the strength of the nurse can tolerate.
Then tie it up: and command him to abstain from foods that generate black cholesterol; and again, to let go of the blood when the veins are filled, and this will harm the patient.
The raising, however, is according to this method. Shave the leg if there are many hairs. Then put him in a bath, or wrap him in the leg with warm water until he reddens, and the veins burst; or exercise him strongly if there is no bath present, until he warms the limb.
Then cut off the skin according to the direction of the vein along its length: or at the end of the leg at the knee, or on the lower part near the heel.
Then open the skin with a hook, and scrape off the vein from all parts, until you can see it; and when you see it turn from red to black, you will know that it is the right one. When, therefore, you have cut off the skin, you will see it white as a cord.
Then insert the rod under it until it comes out and leaves the skin: hang it with a blind hook, soft.
Then dry another piece of flesh next to that piece of flesh with three fingers. Then scrape the skin from the upper part of the buttocks until it appears. Then clean it with the rods as you did before, and hang it with another blind hook as you did at first.
Then dry another piece of flesh or more pieces if you can tolerate it. Then clean it again and cut it last near the heel.
Then pull it out to the length of the piece that is above it.
And make it so that you pull it out from the upper piece or longer pieces until it comes out completely: then cut it.
If it does not submit to you when pulling and cleaning, then insert a strong double thread with her and tie her and pull her out: or insert the rod under it and roll your hand all over it until it comes out. And cut, so that it is not cut. For if it is cut, it will be difficult for you to clean it well, and it enters on the injured part of the wound.
When you have completely pulled it out: then place it on the site of the wound that is soaked with wine and oil or rosin, and care for it until it heals.
That if the vine is contracted and has a twist in its parts to which it applies the involution, and is not like what we said according to rectitude: then you should find on it for all the parts of its twist, and the places of its involution.
Then hang it with a hook so that you clean it all: and be careful near the cut section on it so that you do not get hurt, or hurt your wound: for it will be difficult to clean it well on you, or pull it out. Preserve therefore your prudence.
Form of incision where the vine heals.
Form of incisions in a blind person.
It is not prudence like the rest of the vine, nor has it acute extremities, lest it wound the hand: and it is a great flexibility, soft: for if it were subtle, it would fall on the hand with its subtility: but it has superfluous grossness, as we have said.
On the extraction of a vein from the leg.
This vein is produced in the legs in warm countries, such as that of a horse, and the land of the Arabs, and in arid lands, hot and scarce of verdure, that is to say, where no grass grows, nor trees.
And perhaps it is produced in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And its generation is from putrefaction which occurs under the skin, such as happens within the bodies of serpents and flies, and of worms between the skin and meat.
And the sign of the beginning of this vein is, that which happens in the leg, a painful inflammation. Then the site becomes sore. Then the vein begins to exit from the site of its inflammation, as if it were a root of a plant, or an animal.
So when that end thereof appears, you shall wrap thereon a leaden rod, the weight of which is from a drachm to a centune, to two drachms, and mark it: and let go the lead hanging from the leg.
So whenever anything goes out from it towards the outside, wrap that on a leaden rod, and mark that: That if it is prolonged for a long time, then cut a part of it, and wrap the remnant on a leaden rod. And do not cut that root before it has gone out all together. For if you should cut it, it will contract itself, and go into the flesh: and it causes the formation of a boil, and putrefaction in that place, and a bad sore.
So then it should be handled gently and slowly withdrawn until it has completely emerged from the last of its own, and nothing remains of it in the body: and from this very vein emerges in some men which is in length of five palms and ten. And already I have reached him, for he has passed out through twenty palms.
But if you are injured during your treatment: then introduce a ray into the opening and pierce it through the long hole with the body until all the matter inside is emptied out: and administer medicine to the site with some drugs for several days. Then take care of yourself in curing the pustules.
And this very vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears in the ankle joint of the foot, or in the foot itself: and it has many openings, and emerges from every opening with a branch.
So take care of yourself, as we have said in the division, and with that which was said above.
Regarding the section on worms born under the skin, it is called "aegritudo bouina.
This sickness is called in some country "Aegritudo bouina" because it often happens that worms are born and there is a scaly single one which is born between the skin and flesh.
And it makes the whole body move up and down, and shows itself through the movement of a limb to another, until it breaks off at some place on the skin and emerges: and it disappears from that member to another.
And its birth is of some corrupted human flesh. As happen worms and snakes, that is, earthworms and roundworms in the stomach.
And they fear its evil. Because when it makes itself in the body, and moves to the head, and reaches a place: then perhaps it opens within, and emerges, and destroys the eye: and this happens often.
And so you should take care of him and extract it, then he will not feel that until he walks on it and feels the sensation himself.
It is necessary therefore that you should tie what is above him and what is below him with strong constriction. Then dry off on top of him, and extract it.
If it penetrates the flesh, and not injure him: then place on the spot a caustic with fire, until he dies.
And greater what is feared, is corruption of it, which corrupts the eye, as we have said.
But if you see him already reaching at the head near the eye, then tie under it a good stricture of the eyebrow. Then dry off on top of him, and extract it.
And it is necessary that the sick one should use his own purification, with physicians dissolving bad putrid humors.
And let him beware of foods that generate putrefaction.
[On the section on illness by Nakir.]
This disease is called in our land Nakir: and it is a pain that happens to some member: then it changes from one member to another.
And indeed I have already seen him, according to what I tell you. I was called to a sick woman in some wombs. And she held out her arm, and I saw an inflammatory swelling in the armpit of the arm.
And after an hour had passed, I saw one swelling go down with fire, like a burn, rising faster than it could go up: so that it is like shining silver when it runs from place to place.
Then the pain receded from that place, and was fixed in the shoulder.
Then after an hour he sat, and ran all over his body until it reached another arm.
Then he told me that he was running all over his whole body, according to what I saw.
I marvel therefore at the swiftness with which he changes from one limb to another. And I too did not see this disease with my eyes before this way. But I see many who suffer the pain of change from one limb to another: and I did not see him with my eyes, as I saw him in a woman.
And I do not think that this is because it is he who is from the scaly limbs of the spotted women: therefore, this sense of change seems to me to arise from that.
And it is necessary so that they do not appear in this way in those who are delightful and have moist bodies, of hidden women.
But when you are performing his cure, and the patient feels this pain: then if it appears to you with your eye, as we have said, then lift him up and move him quickly: and dry him above him until he is free of this change: and burn the place.
But if you do not see him with your eyes: then cure him by peeling his body, and along with it so that he expels the winds, and makes them red with the help of foul pills and pills made from serapine, and others like them.
Về việc loại bỏ các gai hành.
Gài hành khác nhau theo loài và vị trí của chúng trong cơ thể.
Nhưng có nhiều loại khác nhau: vì có những cái có gai lớn và nhỏ, và tròn, và nhọn, và đen. Và trong số chúng có những thứ có ba góc. Và từ số đó có lưỡi liềm. Và từ số đó có các sao.
Nhưng những thứ nằm theo chiều dọc của các chi thì rơi theo hai cách. Hoặc những chi chính của cơ thể, chẳng hạn như não bộ, tim, phổi, thận, ruột và bàng quang thì tròn. When then falls into one of these limbs, and apparent to you are the signs of death, which I shall tell you about later, then it is necessary that you extract this arrow from them, for death follows him where he is, in many dispositions. And when these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden deep within the limb, then extract it, and heal the wound.
For when the signs occur in which the arrow enters the bone and goes out through the skull, it is: for then happen from it violent headache, scotoma, vertigo, reddening of the eyes, swelling, reddening of the tongue, spasm, confusion of thought, and paralysis of cholera. and perhaps blood comes out from the nose, or ears. and perhaps speech is lost, and speech is destroyed. And comes out from the wound place a white, similar to pulp moisture. And comes out from it a similar liquid of meat.
If then these signs appear to you, then refrain from curing, and extract the arrow if it has not come out.
The signs of the arrow when it falls into the heart are: for it is near the left nipple: and feels as if it were fixed to a hard thing, not to a soft thing. And perhaps the arrow has a movement similar to a pulsation: and black blood runs from the limb. And follows it extreme coldness of the extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting. Know therefore that death has certainly come.
And the sign of the arrow when it wounds the lung is the exit of frothy blood from the limb: and the clothes that cover the neck are torn, and their color changes, as the nurses tell. And breathes a great, deep breath, and seeks cold air.
If the arrow falls into a wound that is in the chest: then it is near to the few ribs: and causes a great, painful sighing with a sigh: and shake all the shoulders of the arms.
And if a arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps it will come out of the ulnar bone with some undigested food.
And if an arrow falls into the belly and lodged therein: it will come out of the ulnar bone, or a piece of dung, or an intestine which has already been broken. There is therefore no hope for his cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
If an arrow falls into the bladder and passes out through it: and if anything comes out to the outside, and the pain is greater on the sick person: then you should know that it is a lethal wound.
The rest of the limbs, such as the face, neck, throat, jaw, aid, spine, collarbone, femurs, thighs, legs, and similar bones, are saved according to multiple dispositions: when the arrow does not hit an artery or nerve: and there is no deadly arrow.
And I will tell you what I have seen of these arrows, so that you may understand it with regard to your cure.
That is, because an arrow fell into the tear duct of a man's eye, at the root of his nose. So I extracted it for him on the other side, under the fat of his ear: and he recovered, and there was no harm to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from the Jew, which had fallen into his fat under his lower eyelid: and the arrow was now hidden, and I could not extract it except for the tip of his ear, where it adhered to its wood: and it was a large arrow of the arrows of the Turks, with soft iron, in which there are no ear-holes.
The Jew therefore recovered, and there was no bad accident to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And it was an Arabic arrow, and that one has ears. So I tied a knot around it between two threads; and it was already submerged in his throat. So delicate was I when I drew it out, that it bled profusely; and the man recovered.
And I took out another arrow from the belly of the man who had fallen; and we were thinking that he would die of it.
After that, he remained with us for thirty days, and there was no change in him regarding his condition, so I tied a knot around the arrow; and I cut it off from him, and he recovered, and nothing bad happened to him.
And I saw a man who had an arrow in his back, and the wound was healed over it. After that, he was out of bed after seven years, and the arrow had come out from the root of his thigh.
And I saw a woman who had an arrow in her belly, and the wound was healed over it, and the arrow remained inside her; nor did she have any change regarding her condition, and this woman didn't notice any harm in any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man, to whom an arrow had fallen on the face; and the wound was healed over it, and remained there, causing him no great pain; and similar things were many.
And I took out an arrow from the prince of the king, which had fallen into his nose, and had already fallen towards the right side a little; and the arrow was completely concealed.
So I was called to heal him after the loss of the arrow for three days. Then I found the arrow's shaft tightly bound.
So I asked him what it felt like, and he didn't feel it either; but himself felt the prick and the pain on his right side. I hoped that was where the prick came from.
So I applied a plaster to the place where the power of attraction and digestion came from, trusting myself that the place would heal; and it appeared to me a sign of the arrow, so that I could tie it up: and nothing happened in that place indicating that the arrow was still there.
Therefore be diligent with the plaster on it for many days; and there was no accident, and the break mended in the meantime; and he remained weak from the removal of it for some space of time, until one day he felt a bowstring in his nose. And he told me that.
And he told me that. So I put a sharp medicine on the break, and tried it after many days, until I felt a slight pain of the bowstring sticking to the wood.
Then I added more of the sharp medicine to the opening of the wound, until we could see the end of the bowstring clearly; and it passed by me with that space of time of about four months.
Then after the swelling of the wound had lessened, and it was possible for me to stick my finger into it, and move it, and not come out: then I did not cease to be diligent, and thought up means with which to deal with it, until one day I stuck it in with bent fingers, according to the form of their ends, so that I drew it out. Then I restored the break.
And some doctors say that the nose cartilage is not restored. I restored it, and the break mended, and the injury was healed completely in health: and he did not hurt him at all.
And I tell you the quality of the extraction of some bowstrings: so that you put that rule and sign on it which I did not say.
For the parts of this art and their distinctions are not understood when they are told: nor does that book understand, and the skilled craftsman compares little with much: and he finds a new operation and a new instrument for going down things which are outside the scope of this art when they happen.
I say then, that bowstrings do not come out of the member from which they are fixed, unless by two ways. He entered through a door from which he was attracted. Or by another part on the opposite side.
And that which had exited from where he entered, or is a projectile proceeding in fleshly place: and it is attracted, and it exits.
That if it does not obey to exit at the time in which it falls: then it is necessary that you should let go of that for a few days, until it putrefies the flesh which is in circumambiention of it: and the attraction of it shall be alleviated, and its exit.
And also if it is figured in a bone, and does not obey to you to exit, then you should let go of that also for a few days: and repeatedly make it with the attraction and movement every day, until it exits.
That if it does not obey to you to exit after days, then it is necessary that you should perform in circumambiention of the projectile in that bone with a sharp material from all parts until it increases. Then attract it, and extract it.
If however the projectile has already gone out from its place in the body, and is concealed and hidden from your sense: then seek it out. If you feel it, then draw it with some instruments suitable for drawing.
If you cannot stretch it out above the bone because of the constriction of the skin, and its length in the deep: and there is no bone, nor nerve, nor vein: then find on it till the tendon thickens and becomes able to be pulled out the arrow.
If it has ears that can hold the hook, then free the meat from within them with all your skill and effort: and if you cannot remove the meat from the break in the ears, and their twist, till it heeds.
And you, whenever you are extracting the arrow, whatever part it is in, then use your twisted hand with forceps to all parts, till you make it heede: and the finest of things, so that the arrow does not break, and makes it difficult for you to attract it, and its extraction.
If you cannot take hold of it in one hour, then leave it for a few days, till what is around it rotten. Then try again: for if the flow of blood annoys you, then administer what we said in our book on curing: and guard your skill from cutting into bone, or nerve, or tendon.
And administer skill in every way that is possible for you to remove the arrow: and let it be with ease, and quietness, or slowness, and strength, as I told you.
And it should be, that when you are drawing the arrow out, so that it is bent according to its shape, according to what it was like at the time of the break of the arrow in itself. Since it is more careful. If you cannot do that to it, then administer what is possible for you in shapes.
But the arrow which is coming out of the opposite part, or has already come out a little to the outside: or makes the end of the arrow go up by sensation from the upper part of the skin nearby, and you see it rising: so cut off over it, and let the section be according to the quantity that the forceps hold in it.
Then attract him: for it is easy to bring about death.
But if it is retained in the bone, then twist your hand according to the roundness, until the Arrow prints on the bone, and amplifies itself: then pull it out.
And if not: let it go for a few days: then repeat it, until it leaves.
That if the Arrow is in it, then push it with it.
But if it has fallen, and you administer a push: then introduce the sharp tool into it, so that its sharpness enters at the end of the Arrow: then push it with it.
But if the Arrow is sharp, then push it with the instrument that enters into it. For the Arrow glides through it.
That if the Arrow is poisoned, then let him make a sharp flesh, in which there is poison: if you can do that. Then take care of it with him when it comes to that.
That if the Arrow is falling in the chest, or in the belly, or in the vein, and is close to that which you touch by trying, and it is possible for you to cut above it: then cut, and guard against the incision of the vein, or nerve, and remove it.
Then take care of the wound, if you see it, and guard that, until it heals.
And this is the form of the pincers, with which the Arrows are removed.
The ends should be similar to the ear, which have been made like irons: when they grasp on to the Arrow, they do not let go of it.
And they are made in various shapes, large and small, and medium, according to the length of the Arrow, and its thickness, and the constriction of the wound.
Form of the Pincer.
And form of the Pincer is deaf.
This is the extremities of the radius as regards the entrance into the arrowhead and it is forced with it.
On venesection of veins.
The venesections, of which there is a tradition in the body, are thirty.
From which in the head are sixteen: two pulsating veins, which are behind the ears, called two herbs; and two arteries, which are appearing in two temporals; and two veins, which are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, called two aspics; and a vein prepared in the middle of the forehead; and a vein that is at the end of the nose. And two jugulars, which are in the neck. And two veins, which are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins, which are in the lower lip. And these are called Algecilla. And two veins, which are under the tongue.
The venesections, however, in the arms, are five veins in every arm.
One of them is the cerebral vein, and it comes from the side of the wood; and it is called by the common name of the head vein. And the Dull. And the Middle vein is composed of a branch from the basilar and the head: and it is called by the common name of the body vein. And the Basilica, which lies in the domestic side; and it is also called the Thick-flowering. And this is called by the common name of the vein of the hand. And the tendon of the arm, which lies on the wrist; and it is the one in which venesection takes place, and it is that which appears above the thumb by a visible contraction.
And Salutella: and it is new which is between the ring and the least: and there are two branches to it.
And on the thigh and on the foot there are three new ones. One of them is that which is under the thumb of the thigh from the side of the wood. And the second is the Saphenous: and its place is near the heel from the side of the house. And the third is the Nerve Seireo: and its place is near the heel from the side of the wood.
And on the other thigh there are three new ones similar to them.
Regarding the bleeding of the two new veins after the ears.
The phlebotomy of the two new veins which are after the ears, it is a contract to the ancient scabs, and to the hemicrania, and to the Sahafi, and to the bad ulcers of the head.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is according to that which I tell you. And it is, so that it rubs the head of the nurse: and scratches the back of its head in the place of the two veins with a rough cloth with good friction. Then tie the sick neck of him with a bandage, until the two veins appear. And the places of them are after the ears in two depressed places of the head. So ask them with your finger, and where you feel the pulse of them under your finger, there are the signs with the caustic.
Then take the scalpel of the phlebotomist, and he is that which is called the Incisions. Then introduce him under a vein in the flesh, until the phlebotomist arrives at the mouth. Then wash your hand with the vein and the flesh on the top, and cut the vein with the incision of the incision. And the length of the incision is the quantity of two fingers spread out, or about that: and let go out of the blood as much as you want.
Then tie her with a cloth, and let her go, until she is healed.
And yet he preceded in the beginning of the book with incision and their cauterization.
But the two arteries that are in the two temples for phlebotomy, are used for the ancient hemicrania; and the soul is calm, and the gaze is steadfast; and the course of the acutely flowing effluent is towards the eyes.
And the quality of phlebotomy of them is according to what I tell you. The neck of the sick is drawn taut until the two veins appear with a manifest appearance; and he reveals their pulse under your finger. For then are the signs with the caustic.
Then moisten the skin from above with your index finger, and insert the phlebotome below, and moisten the vein from above. And cut it as you did with the two veins elsewhere; and let the blood flow according to the amount of your need.
Then dissolve the constriction of the vein, and place your finger on one of the veins for an hour. Then put there over it a cotton and the pulse, and squeeze it strongly from above with constriction: and let go of it until it is healed.
And yet he remembered the incision of them, and their extraction at the beginning of the book.
But the phlebotomy of the vein of the forehead is after the phlebotomy of the skull, for the ancient diseases of the face; and for the hemicrania, and rudeness; and for foul ulcers.
And the quality of phlebotomy of it is according to what I tell you. The weak neck keeps his neck straight until the vein appears. Then take the instrument that is called a fossor.
Hit the prominent acme which is in the head of the skull with a mallet and strike upon it with a comb or some other implement and let the blood run according to the quantity that you wish. Then unfasten the incision and tighten it up until it is healed over.
And when it opens again with a bleed on one side. However, it is not necessary that the phlebotomist be of acute extremities, like the other phlebotomists, but rather of broad extremities. And phlebotomy it according to the转动: for the mouth is near: and perhaps in that very place the phlebotomy breaks when it is thin.
The handle of the two veins which are in the two lacrimal ducts of the two eyes, is to the eye from scabs and rash: and sore in an eye, and diseases of the face.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of them is, that he hold fast the neck of him who has a cold perspiration. Then phlebotomy it: and you are standing on top of his head.
And let the phlebotomy be according to the转动 along a little length, with a little mallet, for there is no flesh in that place. If the phlebotomist is of acute extremities, perhaps it breaks.
Then let the blood run according to the quantity that you need. And put a cloth over them, and tighten them for one night, and unfasten them.
However the veins of the nose are phlebotomized when there is acute fever and a rushing urination, and diseases of the face such as hemicrania and rash which occurs on the face: especially when it is old.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is, that he hold fast the neck of him who has a cold perspiration. Then take his nose with your left hand and grasp the phlebotomy needle finely, long: and fasten it in the middle of his rabbit, between that which distinguishes the nose according to its straightness. For the new one does not appear to the sense there, and because the blood begins to flow at once.
And it is necessary that you hold the needle slightly with your hand at the end: and make the blood run according to your need. Then bind him up for one night. For it is quickly healed.
Of the two phlebotomies of Guidegi, one is for constriction of the heat, and the beginning of leprous disease, and melancholy diseases, and impetigo and bad ulcers, and corroderents, that is, herpes are to be used.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that it should constrict the sick under each by the neck with a strap: and let the craftsman stand over the head of the sick, and let the sick sit sitting on the seat.
Then phlebotomy new one to the width of a phlebotomy is slightly larger. Then extract from the blood an amount of temperature, or according to what you see from the need that is for that. Then do in the same way with the new one.
Then remove the ligaments, and tighten two new ones tightly: so that the sick person does not escape. And let it go until morning. For the wound is healed.
The phlebotomy of Al-Ghafir. The veins of Al-Ghafir's phlebotomy is that it confers on the mouth, and corruption to the gingiva: and bad ulcers: and cracks of the lips, and bad ulcers, too, which are in the nose, and around it.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that you should make the sick person sit before you, and tighten his neck with a strap. Then unravel his lips and look at the two wings: the one is on the right side of his lip, and the second is on his left: and the demonstration of each is by the color of amber. And that is true: because around them are small wings, black. So cut both incisions with the same cut.
But if doubt is on you, and you don't know which of them is: then put your hand between the two incisions, and they will be more evident to you.
And also do the same for the two wings that are in the upper lip: and much more so does the custom run with it: and cut the two wings that are in the lower lip.
This is about the phlebotomy [taking blood] Under the tongue after the phlebotomy of the head. The two veins that are under the tongue should be phlebotomized: that is, the phlebotomy of the head is to remove the phlegm that is in the throat, and the illness of the mouth, and the sickness of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing them is so that he sits weak between your hands toward the sun: and wipe his tongue, and look under his lip on one side, and on the other side: and the color of each should give way to blackness.
Phlebotomize both: and guard, so that you don't put your hand into their blood after phlebotomy. For under them are the arteries, and perhaps it will happen that the flow of blood should come out from these arteries.
But the three veins that are phlebotomized in the bed, are in which the custom of phlebotomy runs in all humans.
And the phlebotomy of them is done according to two ways. Or with a needle and phlebotomize on the point of a pin: or oiling to soft the drying-out: or cutting with a knife, and it is Alnesil. And this is his form.
And from them are wide species, and subtle according to the width of their ears and their form The shape of the phlebotomy of the myrrh tree is wide, as you see it. It is suitable for opening closed veins, full, coming from the skin, apparent, thick, and those that contain thick blood, turbulent.
And this phlebotomist is smaller in width, and more subtle at its ends.
It is suitable for the phlebotomy of thin veins that contain thin citrines blood.
(But the "basilica" which is one of the three veins that phlebotomy should be performed on.) (Because it draws blood from the ailments that are below the throat and the neck, since it follows the chest and the belly; and it is suitable for the phlebotomist to cut her, so that he warns about her, and because under her is an artery.) (So if he makes a mistake, and adds to the incision of the phlebotomy, he will cut that artery, and will cause the flow of blood to stop.) (Therefore it should not be performed with the phlebotomist while he punctures it: but rather it should be performed using An-Nisīl.
(If the "basilica" does not appear with a clear sign, then you should separate it, and turn it to another one, or you should seek some of its branches: or you should perform phlebotomy at the place of its branch of the femoral artery.) (Indeed it is apparent, and dry it out with Al-Nisīl using the phlebotomist as we have said.)
(But if you want to perform the phlebotomy on its own, then you should touch the end of the arm before the pulse stops, until you know the place.) Then mark the spot with a caustic, and then the arm, and dry out the vein using an incision using Al-Nisīl as we have said. And so that the blow does not fall through space from the place of the artery.
And when you see, as you tighten the ligature, swelling at the place you have marked with cautery, then that swelling is swelling of the artery: so remove it.
That if you see blood rise at the phlebotomy site, like a boy's urine, and it is pale blood, red: then you know that it is from the artery's blood. Then therefore approach, and place your finger on the same space far away, then remove your finger. If then is severed the blood (for indeed it is often severed) then tighten the arm, and let go of it: so that he does not move at all: and let him sit on his fear.
And let him not move for several days, until he is healed.
If then is not severed the blood, and it knocks you down: and there is no present remedy for you at your moment: then cut the artery, if it appears to you. For its ends do contract, and the blood is severed.
Or take the skin of the palm, and find it: take a half, and tighten it over the place of the artery narrowing, with a ligature and powder until another day.
Then if is severed the blood, it is good. And if not: then take care of the person with him which his memory from the place of the powder-flushed blood: and severing that blood is not difficult in many dispositions, because of the small wound, and possibility of the ligature from the arm.
Of the veins However phlebotomy is a technique that draws blood from the upper part of the head, and the lower body: because it is composed of the branch of the Basilica, and the branch of the Cephalic, as we have said.
And it belongs to the phlebotomist to make it sit on his fear from its phlebotomy, because under it is a nerve. If therefore he adds phlebotomy to the puncture, and the nerves remain unhealed, then a stupor will occur, and its healing will be difficult, and perhaps it will not heal completely.
And this nerve often appears to sensation. But if it is concealed in some people and is fine and not visible: then you should put your phlebotomy there which you phlebotomize, section with Alnece, and remove the nerves with your strength.
Which if it is between two nerves, then find one nerve in length.
De the head. But the phlebotomy of the cerebral vein is a support, because it draws blood from the head, and contributes to the sickness of the eyes.
And you should use this proper vein if you want, so that you phlebotomize it with the phlebotomy oil, or with the phlebotomy myrrh: because it is salutary for all veins, because it is not under an artery, nor a nerve.
But it is necessary for you to phlebotomize, that you go with the phlebotomy only at the back of the head, and ask for a softer place: and it does not hurt him if he has not been discovered with percussion first, so that he returns over it with phlebotomy from time to time.
But perhaps he stops bleeding in some people when he is not phlebotomized in the first percussion, but it does not hurt him that stop-bleeding in some.
Of the utility of Phlebotomy and the observations to be made in it. The quality of Phlebotomy and the events from it that you should consider in its correction.
First therefore of its is that you should know, that phlebotomy is not administered unless in the conservation of health, and perseverance of it, and caution from the advent of sickness.
And let phlebotomy be made from one vein of the three that are in the bed, namely the cerebral, and the fuscă, and the basilica. In order that phlebotomy be performed at the beginning of spring, during fasting, in summer and autumn after a meal, when there are signs of bloating.
And let phlebotomy be performed on the first day, or on the third day, after three hours have passed since the last meal.
But phlebotomy that is administered to the sick does not have a determined time: but when occasion and need prompt it, at night, or during the day, and at any hour, and at all times.
And it is not necessary that boys be bled until they are fourteen years old. Nor should a pregnant woman be bled until the seventh month. Nor should elderly people be bled who have already passed their sixty years.
Since, however, anyone may choose to have phlebotomy in any way that he wishes: it is necessary for him to cleanse his bowels before phlebotomy with laxatives, if they have accumulated a great deal of waste therein: so that the venose vessels are not drawn upon by putrid excrements from the intestines which harm the principal members.
Nor should a patient who is dizzy or nauseous be bled: nor those who have drunk wine, until they have removed that from them. Nor a sick person with hydropisis.
And let phlebotomy be performed again after a fever, and a fainting, and a flux of blood, and an increase in sexual intercourse, and labor, and exercise, and vigils, and fasting, and any that dissolve virtue out of the corporal or animal body.
Then consider the temperaments of the humors before that, if the blood is thick with food and drink, and medicine: if it is possible to do so.
Then give him an enema of cold bath, if he does not object to anything: or let him exercise himself a little, as to subtilize the blood.
And let him place phlebotomy in his bosom on the third day of the week, as we have said: and take care, so that his chest is emptied of all animal evils on that day: such as anger, fear, and dread: and of all bodily evils, such as labor, pain, excesses, and things similar to them.
And so that these things may be present with her, for from which habit of man used to come, from the aromaticity and odour and mirth and similar things by quantity of possibility.
Then he shall sit the phlebotomator on top of the arm, which should be higher than the arm that is to be phlebotomized: then he shall draw out his own arm, and shall rub the phlebotomator with his own hand twice, or three times. Then he shall tighten the ligature with the thongs, and shall wrap it up twice.
And let the constriction be tempered, for when the constriction is uneven, or by excess in the constriction, then it prevents the course of blood: or in softening, then also it prevents the course of blood.
Then after the constriction, let the phlebotomator rub his hands together in opposite directions until the veins are dilated and feel to the touch.
Then the phlebotomator shall wipe off the phlebotomy with a little oil, old by itself.
Then he shall put his index finger of his left hand on the vein at the place where he wishes to make the phlebotomy, a little bit: so that the vein does not flee, and may it be struck by a blow. For from the veins it is as if a string runs, striking against the phlebotomy: and those are full of blood: and when you put the phlebotomy on them, it is struck by the phlebotomist, and does not open the vein: and if it does open it, then it is constricted: therefore, so that the phlebotomist may firm it, and be alert in all these things.
Then he shall lay down the phlebotomy. If then one vein opens from a single source, then it is good. And if not, then go to another vein below that place a little bit, or above it with force: if not, the place will not stand.
That if it should stop bleeding, or go away slowly, then send him off for a day, or two days: and do not tighten the ligature. For perhaps a warm poultice attracts pus. And let no ointment be added.
Then let the bleeding be stopped, if he loves life.
If the opening is small or the blood flows gently: and be careful not to lose a small amount of blood: then repeat the phlebotomy at the same site according to the direction, and add a little to the procedure.
And do it quickly before the place heals over, for the site of the poultice is dangerous in many people during surgery.
If you therefore see that the poultice has already been applied, then do not touch it again at all, for you will not excuse yourself from anything before me. And place something soft of oil on the poultice: for it soothes the course of blood. And this is better at this site than oil itself, and better than any other oil.
And administer the same oil to all your phlebotomies except where the course of blood is prohibited: and they make it with myrrh when placed from one of them on the site.
For blood is thinned and made smooth when it is thick.
If a large poultice happens to be placed at the site of phlebotomy, for many happen there, especially if the person has not been phlebotomized before, or if an opening in the skin is small, then properly place and put a sponge soaked with water and salt, slightly heated: and tie it for an hour. For it is made smooth.
And it should be done, so that you do the poultice after the exit of blood from the vein itself with its own plug, or from another vein.
For if it remains in place for a few days of blackening or reddening, it does not hurt that: and if it is swollen, place something soft of aloe, or of myrrh dissolved: or some juice of mint, that is, of calamus or similar to it.
At times indeed do occur apoplexes and eminences at the phlebotomy of the Basilica.
Place then your hand upon it; if then the wound is moist with pus under your pressure upon it, then that eminence is ill. Have therefore ready upon it something of what we have said. For maybe there flows from it blood of an artery.
But do make a plaster for him with the one upon which is the stitches, so that the place may heal. Then take care of the patient with the rest of the cure, until he heals.
And it is necessary, that every man should have a second amount of his blood of its virility. And which appears from the color that shines upon the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let him cease to go out, until it turns red; and likewise if you see him gross: then let him cease, until he grows subtile; and likewise if it is acute, until its acuity is taken away.
And of him who is full, strong, and accustomed to the extraction of blood, let one vein be enlarged for phlebotomy, and let the phlebotomist stand on the side; and of him who is weak, let that side be opposite to him.
And let him be extracted by the veins, and let there be a tight opening; and it is better that he should be administered in phlebotomy of the vein, that it be a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this mode of phlebotomy is safer from the flow of blood, and from the cutting of a nerve; and it is more praiseworthy, and healthier than phlebotomy by the width and length.
And of whom it is customary to syncope at phlebotomy, let him eat before phlebotomy with moderate bread and water: or if he is hot, let the secaniabin be used; and let him have blood from his blood in three veins, or four.
And if it is a pale complexion, then he should take before phlebotomy bread with syrup of myrrh, or with syrup of honey seasoned with spices, or with fragrant syrup.
If syncopis should occur during phlebotomy, and it is due to the exit of blood in great quantity, then he should take into a jug water of the flesh, and syrup with a strong odor: and he should apply aromatics with algars, and smooth out his chest with it: and he should use the other things which we mentioned in the division about syncopis in evacuation.
But whoever wants to cut his arm and let his blood out: it is necessary for him who phlebotomizes due to great evaporation, and his power is weak, that he should let his blood out little by little through a quantity of power over many days.
But whoever wants to cut his arm and let his blood out for the second time, and his body is strong: then he should do it after seven or nine hours from his first phlebotomy.
But whoever wants to draw blood from his body towards the opposite side of which he leans: it is necessary for him to do this on the second or third day.
But in whose body there is already much blood that has been warmed up and made sharp, and which causes fever: it is necessary for him to go out of it in a single direction, and to extract from it a great quantity: and to increase the opening until syncopis occurs: afterwards, you shall keep all the conditions of phlebotomy: and so that you put your hand on the pulse of his body at the course of blood, so that death does not occur at the place of syncopis. Many times, indeed, has this happened to him, when the phlebotomizer ignores it and falls by neglect.
And it is not necessary when you want to cut the arm and let the blood out for the second time, with the orifice of the vein already closed, and the exit of the blood becomes difficult, so that it presses upon him with vehemence, and extends itself quickly. For this is bad when there is vehemence: then let go of him until the second phlebotomy.
The thing that is removed with the sharp phlebotomy is this one that has been coagulated from blood in the hole of the anus, and put on it some dissolved salt in water. And put on it something from the tar-oil, or from the sage green, and put on the mass a soft compression, until the blood comes out.
But if the anus has already been opened, then let go of it, and do not seal it, until it heals on its own.
That if need requires to cure the blood that is flowing, and there is no excuse, then either phlebotomize the person above the place, or in another arm in a different anus.
But the vein of the arm is phlebotomized at the place of the fuscus, and of the basilica, if they are not found, and are hidden, because it is made up from them.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that it should put the hand of the sick in hot water until it turns red, and the anus appears clearly.
Then bind on it with a little constriction by means of a thread. Then phlebotomize a little bit at a time, not across and not along the length of it; and let there be an opening that is wide, and your phlebotomy should be like this one that you phlebotomize just below the wrist a little.
That if the blood is prevented from flowing out, then once more put the hand in hot water, and let the blood run into the water, until you satisfy your need.
But if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from the repetition of putting the hand in hot water. And indeed the blood course is put in hot water in the time of winter.
And the phlebotomy of this anus is healthier for all the anuses, because there is no pulsating anus under it, and there is no nerve.
The phlebotomy of the right hand of salutations does indeed give relief to diseases of the liver.
And the quality of phlebotomy is such that you should tighten the tendon of the hand with a ligature, or your own hand, after you have immersed it in warm water, until it bends and shows great sensation. Then phlebotomize it by passing a needle through. And if you cut it entirely, it will not hurt him at all.
And keep your hand away from the phlebotomy site. For under that are the nerves of the fingers stripped of their covering of flesh.
Then repeat the hand to warm water, and allow the blood to flow out of it. For if you do not heat it in warm water, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein, and the flow will be prevented.
When you do extract a quantity of blood as needed, then put oil and salt on the vein so that it does not solidify quickly.
And likewise you should do, so that you make it with any tight knot.
The grasp of the phlebotomy, however, is from the left hand; for it is suited to diseases of the spleen: and likewise do the same on the phlebotomy side as you did on the second one.
The grasp of the phlebotomy, however, is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as those of the uterus, and retention of menses, and ailments of the kidneys, and old ulcers of the hips and testes, and similar ailments from illnesses.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is such that you should put the sick foot in warm water: and make a friction on it until the veins bend; and tie above the knot with a ligature. And the vein does indeed lie near the heel, visible towards the thumb: and they ramify from it on both sides of the foot.
So phlebotomize it in a larger branch of the vein, or near the heel in a gathering of the veins; for it is better and more salutary.
If you phlebotomy her on the face of the foot, then cause the nerves that are under it on the surface of the foot.
And place your phlebotomy so that you do not cut into her from behind, as you wish to avoid injuring her: and let the phlebotomist be nesile.
But if the blood flow is prohibited, then dip her other foot in warm water: and let the blood flow out of her, until she is cleansed.
That if the phlebotomist makes an error in the first cut, then let him continue with the phlebotomy for a while longer, since the place is safe, and do not fear to come out of it with harm, when you cause the nerves, as we have said.
And similarly with the saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
But the Sciatic veins, as we have said, are located near the heel from the lateral side.
And the pledge of her phlebotomy is, to the pain of the aching, when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of her phlebotomy is, that she enter a lukewarm bath and refresh herself: and tighten her legs from the lateral side up to the heel with four fingers, for it does not appear otherwise except because of that.
When she then appears, then phlebotomy her according to what ability you have, or according to the transversion: and it is better, or as if you wish to cut her with an incision, or to separate her with a section. For the place of her is safer, and she herself is hidden greatly in many people.
For the place of her is safer, and she herself is hidden greatly in many people. That if you do not feel her at all: then phlebotomy a small branch of her, and that is which appears on the back of the foot, and towards the ear: and cause the nerves to be cut, and let blood flow in quantity as much as you wish.
Then bind it tightly, and place it on the site of phlebotomy, and tighten the site. He heals quickly.
Regarding ventilation and the quality of use.
Wind-sores arise from corns, from air, and from moisture.
And wind-sore is caused in two ways. When there is ablation and the drawing of blood: and a second type is wind-sore without ablation.
And this wind-sore, which is without ablation, is of two types. For it may be with fire. Or it may be without fire.
And the wind-sores that are administered with ablation and drawing of blood are four parts of the body. The four parts of the body where wind-sores may occur are as follows: one is the "Venosatio Alnocrati" and it is at the very top of the head; another is "Alkehel", and it is in the middle of the neck; two more are on either side of the neck together; a fourth is on the mind, under the chin in the lower mouth; a fifth is on the two spatulae; a sixth is on the end of the tail; a seventh is on the two palms, middle of the two arms; an eighth is on the two forearms; and a ninth is on the two legs.
And it should not draw blood from you through small scattered veins in the flesh, and for that reason its power does not decrease as it does with bleeding. Nor should wind-sore be administered with fire, or without fire for any sickness caused by a buildup, until the entire body has been drained.
If necessity requires the administration of wind-sore for any illness, or out of custom, let it be given at the beginning, end, and middle of the month, and at any other time as well.
That is, there is a man who, when blood multiplies within him, does not suffer until he is drained by wind-sore; in his head he has a grayish complexion, and he perspires.
And from these [surfaces] comes the expansion and redness on his face, head, and neck. And from these [surfaces] comes the itching on his face and forehead, darkness and dullness in his eyes.
And from these [surfaces] comes the place of his wound. And from these [ surfaces ] comes the laugh. And from these [surfaces] comes the taste of blood in his mouth, or he swallows it with his tongue and spits out the blood. And from these [surfaces] comes the sleepiness. And from these [surfaces] comes the vision of blood and redness, and the killed and the plagues, and that which is similar to them.
When therefore we see anything from these [surfaces], and especially if it is in the third month: we then make the wound heal, having passed over two or three hours after daylight.
But the wound-healing of the nape is this: for it confers weight on the head, and it runs out to the eyes. But indeed it should be, that it be after the evacuation of all the body.
And this  [wound] is a locum phlebotomy of the head.
And it is not appropriate to use it who has a cold disposition, or in which there is a catarrh. For indeed it brings great harm.
And because of this  [wound] it is not appropriate for the elderly to use it, and in which there are ailments of the head due to cold.
But who applies this  [wound] regularly, he makes himself forgetful.
And because of this   [wound] it is necessary that you order the Wind-healer, so that he puts his hand when wind-healing, a little lower towards the bottom, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Wind-healing or Alkohl is a locum phlebotomy of the purple color, and also of the purple color in the Basilica, and because of this it brings a soothing breath, constriction, hole, cough, and swelling.
It is necessary that Ventosa Alchehel be applied a little, since if it is put on lower down, it generates weakness in the heart and stomach.
Ventosation however (in the head) confers relief from headaches, eye pains, headaches, perforations, and toothache; and it is a place for phlebotomy at the Basilica.
And one should have the person using Ventosa not touch his hand with the scarification so that an artery is not struck and blood flow occurs.
However, if  (Ventosatio) is placed under the chin, it confers alcohol in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and similar ailments that occur in the mouth; and it is a place for phlebotomy at the side of the throat, which is between the two lips.
However, if   (Ventosation with a spatula) is done, it is applied to Alchafacham, which is made from a rebound and heat.
Ventosation on the inner parts of the body are two foci, which confers a facility for phlebotomy at the veins of the hand, Basilicae, and Fuscae, and Cephalicae: since it itself attracts blood from all those small veins that are in the flesh: and these small veins attract that blood from other larger veins until the attraction reaches the three veins.
And one should have the person using Ventosa not go too deep with the scarification: since there is a place that is bare of flesh, and under it are nerves and arteries.
However, if    (Ventosatio) is applied to Alchaus, it brings hemorrhoids of the Anus and ulcers from below.
And one should have the person using Ventosa so that there is a strong suction, and perhaps they break because of the subtle application of Ventosa: and it is scarified with a deep scarification.
However, if     (Ventosae) are on the knees they decrease gradually: since they attract blood from the whole body, and bring about pains of old age in the kidneys, and membranes, and venereous members: they provoke menses, and bring about bothy and seduction; and they stand at the place of phlebotomy between the two saphenous veins, and Alhorcoben.
Indeed, the body weakens greatly, and causes fainting in many people.
And the treatment of ventilating two crura is near to the treatment of ventilation.
The quality of the position of the wind is that you put the wind in the first place in vacua and pour on a moderate suction: and do not prolong the position of the wind, but put them quickly and move them quickly so that the humors come to the place of entry equal: and do not cease to repeat this and continue, until you notice the place already red and swollen, and appears redness of blood: then therefore cut, and again suction slowly. Then consider in the disposition of the bodies.
For he who is of a tender body, rare porridge, should cut himself once, not more: so that the place does not ulcerate.
And order the wind-sucker to make the incision deep, and a little shallow: and moderate the suction in ease, and velocity, and movement he move.
That if there is grossness in the blood, then you should cut yourself twice. In a vessel indeed the first opening is subtilization of blood, and aqueous of it: and in the second quidem perscrutation of exquisite extraction of gross blood.
But if the blood is very foul, then let the incision be made in a fourth place: that it may bring about the last thing.
And to the last, when we have cut off the blood little by little, a single incision is enough for us. That if we wish to extract the blood many times, we shall cut with many incisions.
And if we measure that the blood is gross: then it is necessary that the incision be deep: and an equal end in the incision is the depth of the skin.
What is this that needs to be administered from oils when positioning the wind? And what does the wind-sucker guard?
IN illo quidem cuius cutis est grossa, dura, fusca, et pori eius sunt stricti, oportet ut ungantur loca Ventosare cum oleis apertiuis, lenitiuis, resolutiuis: si est in tempore aestatis, sicut est oleum alkeiri, aut oleum uiolatum, aut oleum de amigdalis dulcibus, aut oleum de semine cucurbitae.
And if it is in the time of winter, then let the places where wind blows be anointed with oil that is open, soothing, and healing: if it is in the time of summer, as is the oil of ale, or the oil of violets, or the oil of sweet almonds, or the oil of cucumber seed.
But if there is too much hair, cold: then let the oil be bitter, or of myrrh, or of white balm, or of gold; and similar ones.
But if it is windy and has wide pores, soft flesh: then let it be forbidden from oil, and it should be washed with rose water, or cold water, or sunshine water, or cucumber seed water, or portulaca water; and similar ones.
But he whose blood is very moist should wash the windy places with vinegar, or with myrtle water, and sumach; and similar ones.
But if there is too much fluff, he should wash his windy places with old wine, or with sarsaparilla water, or with a decoction of fenugreek, or of chamomile; and similar ones.
And let the bathing be done in a bath, or in a bathhouse; and it should be administered after leaving the bath for an hour, or two hours.
And let no one sleep after bathing.
What is it that should be done to treat wind and bleeding before bathing?
And after that, it should be considered first of all: then if the wind is in him and his blood is sharp and inflamed: then let him take cooling things, such as granated fruit; and also lettuces, vinegar, and tarragon; and similar ones.
And put his food, poultices, and meat that he might drink, and prepared food with fruit: and the same for him.
And if his complexions are cold, he should take syrup of honey or of almond or alssecania made from seeds; and he should drink a little wine with aroma, which is between new and old; and let him be instructed to eat a little food. And put for him poultices of fowls, and carnes ouium sekebiget, and food prepared with fruit; and let him eat pigeons' flesh.
And it should be, that the drink of the day of bloodletting and phlebotomy is more than food; and it should be given to some men in syrup of myrrh or medicine of musk, or alssecenia, before bloodletting: and before phlebotomy, or after: so that the principal members are comforted, and the blood is made subtle. And they should not take it in hot drink.
On Bloodletting without Scarring. Of Bloodletting without Scarring, those which are made on the skin without scarring, are made on the liver, and on the spleen, and on the kidneys, and on the belly, and on the places of the testicles, and on the pintle: for these members do not suffer from scarring.
And it is not sought after them, unless there be a flow of blood from one member to another: as we make Bloodletting on the breasts in disease of flux of blood to the nose. And we use them, that we may cure a cold bloodletting in the belly: as we make Bloodletting on the belly and on the pintle. For itself it rarefies the member, and warms it, and takes away the pain, because it resolves the bloodletting.
Also is laid on the kidneys when there is a deposit of ochre, or a stone. By virtue of its power of attraction it may open the wound and extract the stone from its place.
And in like manner when placed on an opening, and splen on a wisp of hay to be held in both hands against it so that it rubs the wound on either side.
And these are administered with a small saw with only a section. And sometimes they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered with warm water when the patient has a pleuritic illness: and that is to the effect that the Ventosa be full, and great, of only warm water, or of water in which herbs have been boiled which are suitable.
The form of the administration of the Ventosa with fire.
It is to be the width of two clenched fingers, measured as we have made it: and its quantity in the depth is half an inch: and it should be at the edge of its place which is about the middle of it, a small hole, according to the quantity which it ingests from the point: let it be made of brass, or yellow metal, of thick margin, soft, equal, of three parts: so that it does not hurt the limb in its position over it: and let there be run through it a wire from brass, or iron, where the candle with fire is placed.
And this kind of Ventosa may be large, larger than we have described, and less small ones, according to the illness and age of him who uses it.
For the Ventosas are different for boys, and for those who are weak, and for men, and for large bodies.
But the quality of placing this Ventosa with fire on a limb is that you kindle a small candle with fire from hay, or a small wax candle: and place it on the middle of the transverse wire which is in the middle of the Ventosa: so that the heat of the fire be all around its lower part, so that the body is not burned.
Then place it on the limb: and let the finger be over the hole which I have said, until we hold it in place: but when we release it, a vapour will come out of that hole, and the Ventosa will instantly become looser.
Then, with fire, burn the wound according to its kind, and repeat this if you wish.
In the case of Ventosa, which is administered in illness with water, there is no twisting of the sinews, nor a hole; and it is not administered unless it is filled with water and placed on the limb alone.
And this is its form.
And this Ventosa is all the better as it takes in much water, for that makes it better.
[On the Suspension of Blood-Sugar.]
The Blood-Sugar should not be administered in many cases, unless the limb is in a position where it cannot be put on account of its smallness, as the lip, or the gums, and such like. Or on a member of the body bare of flesh, as a finger, or a nose, and such like.
And the quality of the use of them is: that you take those from Blood-Sugar which are in sweet waters, clean from corruption.
Then let them be left off day and night in sweet water, until they are hungry, and let nothing remain in their stomachs. Then the body is to be evacuated first with phlebotomy, and then with blood-sugar. Then wash the limb with water, until it turns red. Then let them be placed on the body itself.
When they are filled, and fall, and it is possible to move the spot with blood-sugar, then it is more dangerous in the making; and if not, then wash the place with vinegar. Then with much water, and a friction, and press out.
What if the course of blood is prolonged after the application of Blood-sugar, and it remains a residue: then let a cloth of linen be soaked in cold water, and let it be placed upside down, until the residue is separated.
What if the blood multiplies, then let a powder of astringent be scattered on the body that is crushed, or eggs, and such like: until the blood is separated.
Let them be placed on the spot half-way between the wounds to be extracted: and let them cease, until the beans stick to the place, for blood is cut off.
And it is necessary, if necessary, to make a journey of the blood-suckers, when possible, to change them.
But if they prohibit the blood-suckers from suspension, then the place is cleansed with recent blood. Or let them be tied now in the places, until someone goes out with some blood. Then let them be placed, for they themselves, when they feel some blood, stick at once.
When then you wish that they fall down, sprinkle on them some powdered aloe, or salt, or ash: and they fall down at once.
This chapter is also often necessary in the art of Medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures, and the dislocation of accidents in bones.
Know, O sons, for they mock this chapter, the stupid doctors and the people, and do not examine at all the ancient book, nor read from it a word.
And for this reason it is made, that this method of knowledge is private to our country. And I was not pleased with it at all, and I was not satisfied from it unless because of the length of reading ancient books, and study over their understanding, until I extracted the science from them.
Then through experiment and study I advanced a long way.
Then I have described to you all that contains my science from experimentation and study: and besides what I have shown you through experiment, after I have shortened it for you, and released it from the occupation of extension, and shortened it by abbreviation, and shown it by abbreviation, and formed in it many forms of forms of instruments that are administered in it, with sit from the addition of declination, as I did in the two preceding chapters.
Chapter II.
In the first chapter of this book, we should mention in the prologue what has been discussed so far and what is to be considered in the future by the artist who wants to study this craft with great effort: that you, and those who are willing, may know or learn this noble art from you, and others may benefit from your teaching.
I say then that when it happens to someone that there is a fracture, or a dislocation, or a twist, or a fall: then it is necessary that you prepare first of all to bleed him and to cure him, or both at the same time: unless something prevents it, such as the weakness of vigor: or he is that young boy who has fallen ill, or an old man declining; or the time is hot, or cold very much.
Then let him be content with his food, cold herbs, and birds' flesh, and hairs; and forbid wine, and fatty meats, and anything that fills the veins with blood. Until you are secure from feverishness, and do not wait for the flow of matter to the member: then let the sick person return first to his habitude with which he has been accustomed.
But when the mouth begins to be healed and restored, then it is necessary that the sick person eat food that nourishes him much, dry, heavy, and full of blood: such as food made from wheat cooked with water, and rice, and peas, and beans, and venison fresh, and wine thick, and like things. This regimen, then, causes the clotting of a fracture to be more rapid and better.
And know that bones which are fractured, when they are in the prime of old age and declining, can never continue to heal and consolidate according to their nature forever, because of the drying out of their members: but they heal and continue somewhat limp, like those of a boy's young.
Indeed, nature joins to the broken bone from all parts a similar glue, in which there is roughness, by which it adheres and holds itself fast until they are conjoined together, and bound together, until it arrives at its strength and firmness, as it was in the first place, until it does not prevent it from its operations: and for this reason it is necessary that you should put nourishment into the sick dishes, in which there are grains, and drinks, and roughness, as we have said.
And know that the types of fractures are diverse, according to the diversity of limbs: for the fracture of the thigh is different from the fracture of the skull, and the fracture of the breast bone is different from the fracture of the spine, and likewise all the rest of the limbs differ from each other. And I came with a reminder of all the types of fractures presented in its own chapter, distinct from the other. And the species of bone fractures also differ from one another.
For it is made by its curved arc, except that which happens in it of the arrows. And when a fracture is made according to the length of the bone: and there are fractures of his legs, that is, arrows, and additions from it, as there are in the reed when cut with a knife for writing. And not from it: and there is a fracture with an arrow and dislocation in the head: and there is a fracture, a small crack.
And every species has its own invention, or its own special instrument for restoring it, according to which the reminder of it comes, distinct in its own places.
And from this it is known that the fracture of the bone is its curvature and its eminence: and its appearance to the sense, and its sound when you compress it with your hand.
So then, when it is not in place, the curvature does not appear, and its sound does not be heard when you touch it with agitation, and great pain does not find it weak: then it is not a fracture there, but possible that there is a curvature or a small crack: so then you do not need to move it with your hand and compression at all, but put it over it from the doctors, of which the reminder comes, after the moment in which it arrives in place: then tighten it lightly.
And you should know that when the place is arced and split into two, apart from what happens there in terms of sat agoe, all parts are nonetheless moved away from their comparators: then it is necessary for you to start from your own time to rectify it, equating it before it happens to her an apoplectic heat.
If, however, an apoplectic heat occurs to her, then you should leave him for a few days until he quiets down the apoplexy. Then make equal him according to whatever way he can from leniency and intelligence.
And you should know that the restoration of him and his equality are easier than the bones, in which sat agoe occurs.
Then tighten him up, according to what you remember of him.
If, however, the sat agoe is in a bone, then necessary is the extension of this broken member from two parts, if it is a hand, or a foot: or with your hand, if it is a small member: or with two strings, or with a string and a hand.
And your position should be that you place the member on a place equal to it, according to its natural figure, until when the parts of the broken member are extended: then try, by all means, to bring back those additions with skill, and according to whatever way you can in their places: and carefully, according to your strength, so that no pain occurs to the weak one through your operation, nor from laziness: and carefully, according to your strength, so that you apply one of two bones with its partner, according to the better forms.
And it is necessary in that hour, so that you try and touch him by hand. If, however, you see anything different there, then rectify the member, and make equal it by your strength.
And carefully avoid sharp extension and strong compression, as many stoics do. For many times they bring about an apoplectic heat or a contraction in a member by their operation: as we have already seen that one from their operations.
Then, when he has recovered from his exhaustion, and is settled in his bed, and his limb is set firmly, and he is at rest, and calm, and tranquil: and remind the sick man of himself. And let him be careful not to move himself in the hour of his travail, and his sleep in his revolution, and his agitation, and his vomiting, and all his movements by the last strength of his own power. And so that he may be careful, that the position of the member should not be such as to cause pain. That is, because when he feels pain in the position of the member's disposition, or injury: then it is necessary that you change him to a disposition from which he does not feel pain.
And be careful with him, so that his position is equal and straight: so that no torosity occurs in the member when he is restored.
And the quality of a broken limb is to be firm.
You should know that broken limbs differ from one another in their length and size, and in their form.
Which of them are shorter, such as the arm, and the finger, and the hoof, and others like them, then it should be that the covering cloth is smooth and soft. Which, however, are coarse, such as the hip, and the shin, it should be that the covering cloth is large and hard.
Because a wide ligament connects the large member, and tightens it by equal stricture, so that it does not enter it with a spot.
Then, after you have drained (it) from the equating, to begin putting on the ointment suitable for it, in a soft poultice over the place of the fracture. Then, begin to cover with three or four applications of the poultice over the place of the fracture, according as the limb deserves: and grasp your hand lightly with the bandage.
Then walk with him on the part above the place of the fracture, and tightener less than when you tightened the broken place, as you did. Then lengthen you with the evolution from the place of fracture somewhat, and soften the tightening gradually, until you get out of the place healthy thing great.
Then take another one away, and evolve it again over the broken place with evolutions. Then lead with the evolution to the lower part from the fracture. And let your operation be in the tightening of the evolution and its softening, according to which we said in the first evolution above.
Then put between evolutions from the splint soft, or cloth, with which it is equivalent to the curvature of the fracture, if there is a curvature: and if not, do not put anything in it.
Then evolve over the other one away. Then equal on these evolutions stars out of place immediately if there is no swelling, and no feverishness.
But if there is inflammation, or swelling: then put on it what sits that swelling, and remove the inflammation: and let go of it for a few days. Then tie on it then stars.
And let the stars be from the middle of the canes broad, rasped, shaped wisely: or from wood where cribra are made, which are from pine, or splints, namely, branches of the palm tree, or calingi: and let the width of each star be, according to this form, and this figure.
But it is necessary that the star which is put on the fracture be somewhat thicker and broader than the other stars: and the length of the star be according to what is suitable with size and shape.
Then tie on the stars with another one away, according to the first tightening. Then tie from above with fils out of place, according to which we said about the tightening: and let be your tightening on the place of fracture more: and how much more is elongated from the fracture, so is the tightening less.
It is fitting that they should be fine in length and slim in width, and made from soft linen.
For if the sutures are thick, as when the sutures of the surgeons who perform operations on the heads are made with twisted linen thread, it is a great mistake: for tightness occurs outside the quality.
And fine sutures also do not agree: for you do not achieve that which you wish with tightness when you use them.
And it should not be between a thumb and a finger in length.
That if an invalid is injured by the edges of the sutures in the places where there is tightness: then place under them from soft stuff, or red wool, until nothing is hurt from that.
When, however, there is a fracture with a bone, and there is a rupture in the skin, I return to this discussion in the second chapter with regard to its singularity.
And know that not every broken limb needs to be sutured from the very beginning. That is, because the limb is large when it is broken, you should not put stitches on top of each other, unless after five days or seven or more, according to your confidence in the absence of infection.
And this is the method of the ancient doctors who put on fractures and dislocations.
The common abbreviated method of the patch, restoring a fracture, suitable for many complexions, especially for women and children, because it is not affected by heat or cold.
And it is so that you take from the flour which is ground, and it is a sponge which hangs in the walls of the mill when it is moved by the millstone; and burnish it as it is, except for those little holes with white chalk: and place the coating not too thick, nor too thin. Then use it.
The other method of the patch, restoring a fracture and dislocation and torsional injury. Recipe almess, et laudani, et acaciae, et enulae, et mugath: et suc, omnium ana ʒ X myrrhae, et aloes amborum ana ʒ V et alethil ʒ XX terantur omnia, et cribellentur, et misceantur cum aqua alethil: aut cum albugine oui, si complexio infirmi est calefacta. Then use this ointment. For it is a good composition, quickly heals broken bones, and serves many people.
A different method of making an ointment, which also serves for fractures and twists. Mugath, and aless, and white honey, all of which are made from myrrh in amounts of 10 parts, and aloe in 5 parts, and acacia in 6 parts; bolus armeni in 20 parts; well knead all together, and strain it out with water, or with alum, and administer.
This is the method of ointment for joints, and separated bones from their sites; it calms pain from injuries, and fracture of the bone, and separation of the bone. A dampened wool is soaked in vinegar, and oil is cooked with it; and it is placed on the site.
And this ointment has no power to restore, but it is good for numbing hot blisters; and drives away its own pains.
This is the method of ointment, which restores a broken bone. Gather leaves of the fig tree and leaves of the wild papaw; then dry them all out, and make an ointment from both.
This is a short method of ointment, to be applied to the restoration of a broken bone; and when you wish to remove a hot blister. Melt together the root of aloe, and chamomile, and flowers of violet, and herb flour, all in one part; strain them all out, and make it with wine, if it is not a heated member.
If it is indeed heated, then confer that with water from coriander seeds, or with water, and use it.
A stronger method of application for this remedy, when a hard apoplexy occurs during the restoration of a limb, is to put it on with coriander seed water, or just water, and use it. Take the root of wormwood, and the seed of flax, and balsam, and mealy-nut, and sassafras, and the flowers of violet, and chamomile, all of which are to be well ground, and confect with water of willow, or sweet water, or wine. All of this should be used according to the temperature of the member, and the calmness of its heat.
Hippocrates did not say in his book that which should be put on a broken member during its restoration, unless it is made from ash and oil: nothing else: and he related that it should be of a middle nature between coarseness and fineness.
But Galen used to say that which should be put on a broken member during its restoration, in which there is a drying up of heat, such as myrrh, and aloe, and olive oil, and things like these from those which we have related.
A method of application that is used for an injury and pain. Take mugget, and chickpeas, and hairs of a man's beard, or feathers of a bird, and wormwood, and salt, equal parts: grind them, and rub them together, and make an ointment: and let it be made from this.
But the quantity, according to how much should remain of the paste, so that it remains bound together, and then is dissolved, you must consider this at that time, if it does not occur to the sick person pain, or itching, or the broken jaw moves from its place: then do not dissolve it over many days. If this occurs to him in a painful itching, or an unsettling pain, or swelling: then take care, and dissolve it at that very hour, and remove the ointment from him: and take a cloth of linen, or a marine sponge of linen, damp with water: and dip it into the water, and wash that place with it until the itching is calmed, and the pain subsides.
If this occurs to him in a painful itching, or an unsettling pain, or swelling: then take care, and dissolve it at that very hour, and remove the ointment from him: and take a cloth of linen, or a marine sponge of linen, damp with water: and dip it into the water, and wash that place with it until the itching is calmed, and the pain subsides. Then let the limb rest for an hour. Then cover the wound with wool, soaked in vinegar and oil, or oil with a little rosin; and bandage it over night, so that it is kept away from heat, and the inflammation of the member may have time to subside, and the pain to be allayed.
Then keep it moist with a thin plaster; and do not tighten it at first with your own bandages or with rough ones, but allow the wound to heal in its own way.
If you see that the swelling and redness and pain and inflammation and all other disorders are completely gone, and that the plaster and bandaging are comfortable, then apply the plaster as before with equal care.
That if any of these things do not occur in the member, then do not remove the plaster until after three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when it has been removed after twenty days, according to what you find out from the healing of the member, as we have said, until it seems that the fracture is healed and the blood clot has approximated to it: add also then to your bandaging more than you did before; and add also to the swelling of the food which is there, according to precedent.
If you see that the place of the fracture has dried up and become thin more than it should: then know that food is prevented from reaching it. Wrap it again with warm water about every second day, and leave the plaster on for all three days, and give a little relaxation to the bandage.
By this means then food runs to the member, and it heals quickly.
But the action of the dull surgeons when they do not restore it at first, according to what is required, and restore it according to its tortuosity, is an error in their work, and a great fear: and if it had been right, the ancient writers in their books would have said so, and would have worked with it.
And I did not see their trace anywhere at all in that, and it is better that it should not be.
On the making of an accident in the head.
There are various kinds of fractures, and many shapes of them; and their causes are distinct.
For from a fracture caused by impact with an instrument, the impact causes the whole bone to break until it reaches the cavity beneath the bone, which it does as it makes its way through wood; and therefore this type of fracture is called a axial fracture.
Or an instrument strikes some bone, and strikes its surface, but the incision does not penetrate to its tip; and this type of fracture is called a caloan, that is, a complete slippage.
And there is a bar between two fractures, or it is great, or small.
And one is a fracture that is crushed, or rubbed; and its cause is impact with a stone, or falling on a stone, or similar.
And this fracture also is either perforating, which is approaching a patch, which is beneath the bone: or it is on the surface of the bone; and these two fractures are a bar between them, or small, or great.
And one is a fracture that lies hidden in the bone in a hair's breadth; and it is a small split, and for this reason this type of fracture is called a capilar fracture.
And of these is a fracture that is caused by a fall, or by the impact of a stone, and similar things which make the lamina of the bone come inwards, and it is done with a jolt: as happened to the bones of the air, when they were struck, and some of them came inwards.
And many things come about from this in the heads of the moist bones, as are the heads of boys.
And all these types of fracture have separate names; but I shall remember them all together with their locations.
And we know all these kinds of fractures by inspection above them, and by inquiry about them with the aid of bands, and by removal of the corrupted flesh which is above them.
Indeed, the capillary species is recognized by being detected above the bone, and cleaned off, and placed over it with a caustic: for the fracture appears black.
In the curing of a fracture, consider first the symptoms of disease: if you see from the symptoms that it means a manifest warning about fear, such as vomiting cholera, and extension, and loss of reason, and loss of speech, and fainting fit, and acute fever, and outgoing of the eyes, and their rubor, and similar to these symptoms in many dispositions, surely he will not be cured: and if you see that the non-terrifying symptoms are there, and you hope for a cure: then begin his treatment.
What is, if he comes to you wounded first with a wound: and it is that after a half-day, then it should be, that you try to remove the bone before the fourteenth day according to all dispositions.
And if it is in the days of summer, then it should be, that you remove the bone before the seventh day, before it corrupts what is under the bone from a flap, and those accidents which we have described.
What is, if the fracture of the bone has already reached a flap touching the brain, and it is with small pieces, and pulling: then it should be, that you break off a piece crushed, and ground, according to what I tell you.
And it is, that you shave the head of the wounded person: and detect above the bone according to any possible way for you: and according to the shape of the wound, and what is lighter is above the weakness.
What is, if it happens to you in the detection of the bone of a flow of blood, or of hot pus: then oppose it with that which is necessary. And it is, that you fill the place with cloths soaked in wine, and with olive oil: and make the wound rest, until the pus sits, and are secure from a flow of blood. Then begin with the treatment of bones and the removal thereof.
And that is done in two ways.
The one mode is that you strike the bone with a sharp chisel, and this is its form.
Then take another chisel, wider by a little than the first one, and this is its form.
Then also take another chisel, wider still than the second one, and this is its form.
The second mode is that you have a number of chisels of different sizes; some are wider than others, and some are narrower than others: and let the last ones be pointed at their ends, and let them be made of steel or iron: and use one with ease in striking on the chisel, so that it does not injure the bone, but wounds it.
If, however, the bone is strong and hard: then you should pierce around it before administering the chisels with the terbiums which are called terbums that do not cut into the flesh to that bone behind it: therefore, because the terbium is a rounded end above that sharp point, like a margin, and a little circle prevents its submerging, and penetrating the thickness of the bone.
And it is fitting that you take a great number of these terbiums, each of which corresponds to the thickness of the bone, until you have had all of them for every cranium: whose acute end quantity in length and brevity is according to the thickness of its cranium.
And this is the form of the three kinds of terbiums, or trepans.
The quality of the piercing around a fractured bone is: that you place the trepan on the bone, and rotate it with your fingers, until you know that the bone has been penetrated. Then change the trepan to another place, and put whatever thickness of radius there is between all its holes.
Then cut with the incision, which is between all holes from bone: and make it finer than you can on that from the end of lightness, as we said, until you cut the bone, or by your hand, or with some other from among certain instruments, which you have prepared for him: like the nails, and fine hooks.
And it is necessary that, with all care, you do not touch the nerve, or some of the incisor from the sihap.
When you have surrounded the jaw by perforating it and separating it from the sihap, if it is continuous with it, and you extract it, it is necessary that you smooth, and equal the end of it which remains in the bone with another similar incision instrument. However, it should be thinner and finer than other incision instruments.
That if any of the small bones remain, and they are loose: then take them easily, with what is with you from instruments. Then care for the wound after that with liniment, and the ointment which we said.
And another way of the operation is simple, far from fear: which Galen said, and praised it greatly: and this is his speech. It is necessary that you first, when you begin to move the side of bone where the fracture is more severe and more apparent: until, when you have moved it, and placed under it the end of this lens-shaped incision, whose this is the form.
And the lens part, it does not cut anything: and the acute end of it in its two sides moving in length, as you see: so that the lens part be placed at the sihap, making the acute end of it touching the bone.
Then strike on the incision from one part with a small mallet, until you cut all the jaw with ease, as it is turned out: and you are safe from panic, that the accident does not happen in it, which you really fear.
If a surgeon were not more foolish than man, and less ignorant of him, and were not sleepy, then if there remained something attached to the bone from the pannicle in some places, he would strike himself with the lenticular edge of his scythe and set it free from him easily. For it is freed from him without harm, and without fear.
And if the bone fracture does not go down to the pannicle, and what is cut off from the bone is the face of it, and in him remains roughness and subtle injuries: then you should rub off this roughness, and pluck out these injuries with sharp razors that you prepared a long time ago, so that it is possible for you to administer them in every place more convenient for them, and more rectilinear, according to what the operation leads you, and the broken bone, and its shape. And it is necessary that you administer in your razors, first of all, a groove of the bone, wide of these razors. Then use after him a smaller one.
And it is necessary that you administer in your razors, first of all, a groove of the bone, wide of these razors. Then use after him a smaller one. And do not cease to make it according to the continuity, until you reach the administration of the thinnest, and the smallest of them.
In each and every one of the small cracks that remain from the thin skin, and in the subtle fracture, it is necessary that you administer care, according to what leads to its rectilinear.
And it is a thing that does not hide over everything, to which in this art is any study, and stands on what we wrote, and showed in the large fractures.
But if the pannicle is caught, when you cut off the bone: then it is necessary that you take the linen cloth, according to the quantity of wound, and submerge it in rose oil, and put it over the opening of the wound. Then take another piece of cloth, doubled or tripled, and submerge it in wine and rose oil, and put it over the first cloth: and make it so that you can do it as easily as possible, so that it does not wriggle.
Then apply the ointment above the ligament; and do not tie it up tightly, unless by a quantity sufficient to keep only the fracture in place: and let go of it after one or two days' rest from fever. Then unbind it and apply the medicines after it with which there is no need of dryness: such as the roots of lilies, and the flour of herbs, and the powder of turpentine, and of aristaolochia, and others like them; and you make a powder from these medicines, which you spread over the fracture as if dry.
And universally apply to it all the medicine of its kind which is good for cleansing and not biting. And cause the fracture in your cure to be smooth: so that the ointment is not sticky or dirty in it.
And cause the fracture in your cure to be smooth: so that the ointment is not sticky or dirty in it. And do not allow any wound to accumulate anything at all; for when a wound accumulates on the skin, it corrupts and spoils itself, and causes great illness afterwards: and has already happened in the skull-cap, when it is cleaned out by it, especially when this care is neglected, blackening on its surface.
Therefore consider then, if these accidents happen to the sick, that they are certainly deadly.
And if blackening does not happen, except by the medicine which is put on it, and there is in its virtue to cause blackening: then you must take a part of honey, a part of rose-oil, three parts of linseed oil, and with them a cloth; and bind it up. Then put the bandage on the wound: then care for the wound with the signs of cure which are suitable, until it is healed.
¶ Of the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
You should know that the two upper parts of the nose do not break together unless one of them does; for each is a bone: since the lower part is cartilage, it does not break and does not happen to it except by wear and tear, and twists, and similarity.
If one of its two parts is broken, then you should insert your little finger in the nasum foramen and with your index finger and thumb even out that break until the nose returns to its natural shape; and do this artfully and with ease. And take care not to cause that pain by your operation on the sick one.
If the break is in the upper part of the nose and does not reach that digit: then it should be evened out with the tip of the little finger where there is a small thickness.
But if the break is in two parts then make it similar to that; and take care with its restoration on the first day of the break if possible. And if not, then after seven or ten days at the latest at rest with heat.
Then insert into the tip of the nose a piece of linen cloth if the break is in one part; or two pieces of linen if the break is in two parts: and let it be so thick with such a quantity that it fills up the nasum foramen.
And some old restorers said that they fill them with butter and change them every day. That, however, does not seem to me; but it should be filled with wax that has been ground up with powder for polishing. Then remove the linen until the nose is firm and the cartilage is tough.
And sometimes a feather of a duck is inserted into the nose after the linen has been wiped off it: and that holds the break together better, and does not prevent the sick one from breathing.
That is not necessary. If you want to, then do that: and if you want to, then make the linen thicker.
But if while you are operating the nose again the patient has a fever, then fill up the nose with mint, or with oil infused with rosemary, or with a little dandelion.
But if there is no feverish blisters, then you should make a paste of himself with fine rice flour, and the powder of turpentine mixed with alum. Then put on him a layer of wood-chip, and do not bind his nose at all.
But if the nasal bones are broken or crushed, then you should cut them off, and remove the bone with the appropriate instruments. Then carry out a cure for the infection and consolidation with the appropriate paste or ointment.
But if there is a fracture between the nasal bones, then you should cure it with a liniment: and administer a lead tube until it heals.
For restoration of the lower jaw when it has been broken.
When the lower jaw is broken and not joined to the nose: examine then if the fracture is only of the bone and not broken into two parts, and treat it from within: then it is easy to recognize.
Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side of the jaw, introduce the index finger of the left hand into the mouth: likewise, if the fracture is on the left side of the jaw, then introduce the index finger of the right hand: and push it from inside with ease towards the outside with your other hand from the inside of the bone, and thus level it evenly.
But if the fracture of the jaw has already separated it into two parts, then you should administer external pressure from both sides, according to the line of fracture: until it is possible to restore its alignment.
But if the disturbance or rupture has already occurred in the teeth: then tighten them with a gold wire, or silver, or silk thread. Then put on the fractured jaw a poultice. Then put on himself a double cloth, and a long piece of skin from the sole of a horse: or a fragment of leather of equal length to the jaw.
Then bind the wound well, according to the preparation of his ligature, and the application of it agrees with him until it is destroyed; and order the sick man to use peace and quietness; and put food for his drinkings.
But if you think that a little change has occurred in the shape by some kind of motion: then approach and remove it on the third day. Then straighten out what has been disturbed from it, and patch up the wound with flour that has been ground, or with wheat flour, after you have removed the scabs: and put wool on top of the patch.
While this patch remains attached to the wound, and the arrangement of the bones does not change, let go of it, do not tear it apart, until it has healed: or tighten the fracture. This fracture is often tightened seven times.
If, however, a heat blister occurs, then administer to it what we have said many times in its sedative, until it removes that blister.
And if the fracture is with the ulna, consider. Now I have separated the small bone, or from a saw: then carefully do you in this case, so that you remove those splinters of the saw with it when it agrees with you to take them away from the instruments.
But if the opening of the wound is tight, then widen it with a phlebotome according to the quantity of your need.
Then when you have removed those splinters, and there remains none of them, then make the opening of the wound wide, if it is wide: and if not, put on top of it from the patches which agree with it and make it grow, until it has healed.
The restoration of the fork, when it breaks.
The fork is often broken in the front part from the shoulder blade, and its fracture is made according to one of three kinds.
Or it is broken and separated into two, except that they fall into it from a saw: and it is easier to restore it.
For thus happeneth in the bone that is broken; and to restore it is more difficult.
Or thus when the fracture is with the ulna.
And the operation when the fracture is without the ulna, that is, as you are doing present two ministers, one to hold the help that follows the broken furcula, and the other to extend the neck opposite the side.
Then make the equal break in your fingers until it takes on shape as is necessary: and there should not be any突出 or concavity in it.
That if you wish to extend further, then it is necessary that you place under a tickle ball of cloth or wool: and the magnitude of it should be according to the necessity of yours: and extend, and smooth the furcula, and with your hand compress the ball, until the equal break takes shape as is necessary.
That if you cannot draw the extremity of the furcula towards the outside because it reaches to the depth: then it is necessary that he lies down on his chest: and place under his shoulder in the middle a ball of wool, and press the minister of his shoulder to the inferior part, until he raises the bone of the furcula which is in the depth upwards: and then correct the break, and make it equal with your fingers.
That if you feel pain in the furcula, and it trembles: then it is necessary that you find out on it, and draw out the piece of bone with ease.
That if it is stuck in the bone, then use in the incision of it one of the incisors which you prepared for it, after you have placed under the furcula an instrument that keeps the piece: and that instrument is made of wood, or iron. And this is its form.
It is like a shell which has no eminence.
And its width is according to what you wish by the size of the bone, and the evenness of it. The length is indeed also what you need to operate.
And it has two ends, as you see: one end is wide and the other is tight.
But if the wound you cut when you extracted the bone shavings is wide and cool to touch, then join the two sides of the wound together with a stitch.
And if the wound is small, or the scar is warm: then fill the wound with cotton wool and powder according to the amount of the wound.
What if a scar is warm, then pour oil made from rose and vinegar and wine on it, and place it on the wound.
The bone is hard when it is without a wound, and without being cut, it is, as you put it on the bone plaster made from ground flour with alba (a white substance). And place a wooden brace on top of the bone. Then place a sphere under the title (a device to hold something in position), if you like it. Then take blood, which the Saracens call "hammem," which is long and wide: and make its length about the palm of your hand, or around it. Then place a doubled layer of cotton wool on top of the brace and plaster. Then take an astrolabium from a thin board, whose length is like that of three fingers, and its width similarly. Then wrap it in a cloth. Then wrap the cloth with the astrolabium in the place of alchemy which falls on the fracture and the place. Then place the alchemy on top of the fracture as a cover, and wrap it on top of his neck, and under the title of health, and under the title of sickness: and if it is not hidden from above you, and all, so that it does not move the astrolabium from above the bone fracture. And for this, you must look at the sick person every day. Whenever therefore the ligaments are softened, and you see that they have been loosened: then straighten them out, and tighten the ligaments.
Then put the poultice of nurse behind his back, and place under his side near his sleeping place in the night some fine powder, so that when he moves he may find help from it on either side. So the fracture of the femur is healed by the elevation of the shoulder.
Or bind his arm to his neck: and do not loosen the ligaments, if it is not a case of accident from scratching or being torn away, until after twelve days.
Then renew the poultice, if you see that his face turns towards it. And add to the strapping, and let him go, until he is restored and coagulated.
And the fracture of the jaw is tightened and supported according to many in twenty days: and sometimes it is done in some men with less.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the spatula.
Rarely does the spatula break, and not in its width: and it does not break from it except at its edge.
When therefore it breaks from the side, and it breaks in the middle of it, and it is not known except by touch: then, according to the shape of the fracture, prepare the treatment for it. And reduce it to its natural shape in every way that is within your power.
Then put on the place with powdery plaster made from chalk and linseed oil, and a wisp of rags, and put on the upper part a poultice made from a double cloth. Then put over it a thin plate of lead according to the quantity of the whole spatula, or somewhat larger than that.
If, however, under the plate there is an indentation at any place of the spatula, then make the indentation equal with soft lead, until the plate descends according to equality.
Then, the wound is covered with long, tight bandage and hard pad, until it does not move from its place.
And consider the ligature every day. So whenever the ligature softens, tighten it again and if it moves from its place, keep it in place with an equal pad, and let the sick lie on his healthy side.
And indeed the spatula is restored after twenty days, or after twenty-five days.
So whenever this number is completed, then loosen the ligature: and you shall be safe. For this same is made of bones whose comunion is not feared, and their loosing.
But if it proceeds from a bone-fragment, and pierces the skin: then cut over it, and remove it. And do what I said in the fracture of the fork from a sitting hot blister, if anything happens from it.
As for the restoration of the fracture of the breastbone.
The breastbone sometimes breaks in the middle of it, and that rarely happens. Its extremities, however, most frequently break, and they are broken from its accidents.
When it breaks in the middle, which inclines towards the lower part, and happens to it a severe pain, and difficulty in breathing, and possibly spitting blood, and reveals a fracture in the breastbone, and is not concealed from sensation, its restoration is that he shall lie on his back, and place under its sides the spatula.
Then squeeze his shoulders, and bring together the ribs on both sides or sides with the hands: and gently adjust its alignment, in accordance with any possible way, as it fits, until he regains his figure, according to what is required.
Then place over the patient an ointment and a pillow, and place over it on a board from thin wood, or a plank, and from those similar in lightness, after you have washed it with a cloth. Then, with a subtle tying, bind it over the broken bone so that it does not move; and sometimes, with the tie, go around the back according to its roundedness, and tighten it by tightening it gently.
Then consider the bandage at all times, and whenever it softens, tighten it; and if necessity calls for its unbinding in order to treat pruritus, or corruption that has occurred on the site, or pain, or aphesis: then approach, and loosen it, and remove the plaster, and set right what has happened with regard to the mode of its cure.
Then, if you see fit to do so, reduce the plaster, and attach the tie again until it heals.
For the restoration of ribs when they are broken.
You should know that a rib fracture does not occur unless in the regions far from the back and from the extremities of it towards the front. And they do not undergo wear and tear except for this reason, because they are cartilage. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the sense of inquiry with fingers.
And its restoration is done so that an equal fracture with fingers in the second possible mode, until it is equal in form, according to which it is necessary. Then bind with a plaster, and tighten the broken bone with an axle if he needs it.
And if the fracture of the ribs is a declivity towards the inner parts: then there occurs a painful pain to the sick person, and puncturing, like that which happens to him who has pleurisy: for the bone pricks the wound, and also there occurs to him difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and spitting up of blood: and this is a difficult cure.
And the ancient people have devised many devices in it: and from them are those who say, "Let you set fire to food which generates inflammation and ventilation, so that inflammation may be kindled in the abdomen, and it may spread, and push the fracture towards the outside.
We do not despise, so that it does not happen quickly to make an apostema hot, if it does not happen. But if it has already happened, then add it in there.
And said one of them: Let it be placed on a windy place, and then sucked with strength, and it is similar to the reasoning. But they are afraid that what is drawn by the winds will draw away to a place of weakness because of its disposition.
But said one of them: It should be that a place covered with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil: and let them put down feathers between the sides, so that it fills up: and to be a bond equal when it is rolled over by the roundness.
Then take care of the sick with poultices from food and medicine.
That if it is pulled out from under the sick man, which he does not bear, and it pokes the mouth with a piercing wound that hurts him, and we are afraid over the sick: then it should be that we break out on the spot, and we find from the side broken. Then let us put on it an instrument that holds the syringe, of which memory preceded: and let us break the mouth with ease, and let us break him himself.
Then let us gather together two lips of the wound, if it is large with a stitch: and we will take care of him with plasters, until he heals up.
That if the hot apostema happens to come on, then let it approach, and pour in feathers in rose oil, and put on the spot: and take care of the sick man with it because it is appropriate for the apostema.
In the meantime also let him lie down on the side where he sleeps, until he heals up.
Of restoring a broken spine of the back and neck.
Of bones of the neck when a fracture comes about, and rarely happens to them that they are worn out: and also for the spinebones of the back. So if it happens to someone that he is healed or not healed, then trust in God. For if you see his hands already softened, and stupefied, and dead; and cannot move them, or extend them, or contract them: and when you press them with your fingers, and prick them with a sharp instrument, he feels nothing, and does not feel pain in them: then you will know that he is not healed, and is mortal in many dispositions.
That if he moves them, and feels a constriction in them with your fingers, and a prick: then you will know that the spine of the bone is healed, and that the sick person will be healed with treatment.
That if it should become like the spine of a horse on his back, and you wish to know whether he is healed or not, then examine his feet: then if you see that they are softened, and that what happens to his hands also happens to his feet: then when he lies down on his back, he walks with a wavering walk, and does so without volition; and when he rises up on his stomach, he walks with eagerness, but cannot: then you will know that it is mortal. Do not therefore engage in the cure of him.
But if nothing at all happens to him from it, then the matter is lighter.
And the cure that happens from it is, as you know, to cool down the inflammation with hot oil: so that you put on top of a broken spine oiled rosin: or when you rub out with a towel.
Place on top of it sometimes in the day, until he becomes settled in a calm state of heat; then place on a place that is comfortable, drying, and tighten over him with a strap: and direct the sick person to use tranquility and calmness. And let him not sleep on the side where he feels pain, until he is healed.
If it happens that the bone is worn away, or something that has already been separated from it: then one should let it separate above the skin and take that away. Then join together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch. Then take care of him himself, with some ointment, until he heals.
But if the bone is finally broken at the end of the tail: then one should insert the thumb of the left hand into the anus, and with the right hand, as well as possible, and by equal division.
Then put something on top of it, and take it away: and take care of the wound with the cure that has preceded, until it heals.
For the restoration of the anus.
Chapter XI.
Bones rarely break in the anus. If they break, then the fracture is not, unless it is a tear at the ends of them: and they split along their length, and turn towards the inside: and it happens that there is pain in the place, and a prickle: and the leg that breaks goes limp.
And its restoration is such that you extend your hand over it, until you stand on top of the fracture, which is as in this figure.
If the fracture is only at the ends of it, then make the fracture equal, according to how you are prepared by equalization, until it resembles its natural figure.
But if the fracture is along its length, or has already turned towards the inside: then let the sick one lie on his belly, until its restoration is prepared for you. When you have made it equal, put a plug on top of it: then put over it a wooden or skin bar: and tightly tighten the bar so that you do not fear the move of the fracture, nor the removal of the bar.
And make the equalization of them with it so that it fills it, until it takes it by strictness according to equality: and order the sick one, so that he sleeps on his back, or on his side, healthy.
But if he has a hot swelling: then cease from the extension and restoration until the hot swelling sits down; and place over it what sits him, according to what preceded, then return again to his restoration; and bind him as is necessary.
But if in the bone it is stuck, or it has been crushed, extract it.
¶ On the restoration of a fracture, the assistant.
The assistant is that which is between the hollow and the head of the spoon.
But if it is broken, then its restoration is according to two ways.
Of which one is: that you take a flat piece of wood of middle thickness, according to this form, which follows.
And are bound with two straps at the ends.
Then let it hang from a raised place: and let the sick one sit on a seat. Then let him throw his broken arm over the wood so that it comes to rest at the tip of its curve, which is in the middle of the wood.
Then let him be suspended from above the sick one something heavy, so that he may stretch his hand down for the workman at the bottom. Then the doctor will even out the fracture with his hands together, until the fracture is set, according to what is necessary.
And the other way is that he lie down on his back on his pillow, and let his hand be suspended from his neck with a strap. Then command two workmen that they hold the one which is above the fracture with their hands: and that the other holds him below, and stretches his hand to each side.
And if you wish that the extension be stronger, then bind under the fracture with a strap, and above it with another strap: and let each of the two workmen stretch his hand to each side.
But if the fracture is near the end of the arm, then it is necessary that one strap be placed under the tip, and the other above the fracture toward the hollow.
And likewise if the fracture is near the elbow: then it should be placed, so that the ligaments are put over that place, and over the elbow itself.
Then the broken bone should be made equal with ease without labor, until it is straightened out when it should be and applied with good application: then tighten it up, if a hot swelling does not occur.
If a hot swelling does occur, then release the tightening until the seventh day. And place on top of it a woolen cloth dipped in vinegar and oil with rose water, until the swelling stops: then tighten it up: and the mode of tightening it is so that you put an ointment over the fracture.
Then put a new poultice on top of the ointment. Then grind the arm over the shoulder, and let his hand be open over his shoulder.
And put the poultice on, and tighten over the shoulder arm so that the arm stays in place with the help of the braces: if it does not prohibit you from doing anything else, nor should any other thing be placed on top of you from a broken bone.
That if you use braces, that anything be placed on top of you from a broken bone, then use the braces: and it is like, so that you put on top of the fracture an brace that is wider and stronger than the others. And place a space between each brace of about a finger's width; and the length of the braces should be according to the fracture with the addition of three fingers on all sides.
Then tighten over the braces with the tightening that I have mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And it should be, so that your own tightening is tighter on the fracture location. And the more the fracture is elongated, the looser should be the tightening.
If therefore you see a slacking of the braces and tightening, like I have said, in the hour when you restore the limb to life right away, then do it: and if you are concerned about a hot swelling, then release the tightening and the braces until the seventh day, as we have said.
Then consider the ligament for all three days so that there is no itching or swelling at the place, or to prevent food from reaching the member due to excess fluid. Correct this whole thing, according to what we have said.
But if you are really concerned that nothing will come out of it: then do not open the ligature, unless after three days or more.
And let the nurse sleep on her back, and his hands on his stomach; and place under the pillow a blanket full of wool, equal in thickness.
And consider at every hour of the night or day that the broken member does not loosen, or that the ligaments become softer. Correct this whole thing with your skill.
And provide the nurse with food according to the order we have given, so that there is a small food for the first time until her mouth begins to close; then it should be increased, so that it grows thicker.
For the habit of the assistant and the limb is to be tightened for forty days; then it should be opened, and bath taken, and treated with ointment that makes it right.
If the fracture is sore, rub it; then do not open the ligaments or the splint until fifty days, and until two months.
For the restoration of a fractured arm.
The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the two splints.
One of them is small; and that is what follows the thumb. And the other is big, and that which is placed below a little from the lower part.
Perhaps therefore the bigger splint breaks alone, or the smaller one; and perhaps both break at the same time.
When therefore the splint breaks above, then the restoration of it is easy, and its cure is easier.
And when the splint breaks below, it is a bad break, and its cure is difficult.
And it is worse when two bones break together.
But if the bone that breaks is not very strong above, then it is appropriate for the doctor to approach its restoration, so that he puts an extension with ease until it is even.
But if the bone that breaks is large and strong: then it should be, so that he puts a stronger extension quickly.
And it should be, so that he puts the shape of the hand at its restoration and a long extension over the little finger. And the thumb of the hand should be set higher than all the other fingers; and the articular joint of each finger, or whatever is left of it, and a quadratus should sit on his own self when sitting down, and the little finger in front of him, or directly before him, at an elevation, so that the infirm one does not suffer any labor.
Then he should put the extension under the arm from the lower part, or with his own hand, or with a ligament. And another minister should put the extension above in the same way.
Then the doctor should make the bone even, until he reduces it according to the best shape he can achieve.
But if there are pieces of bone in the fracture, then you should strive to restore all the fragments to their places with your power.
But if it seems to you that there is a separated piece of bone, and it pricks the skin, and you have no hope of restoring it: then find under it, and remove it according to the way that we said above in those that are preceded.
But if the fracture is with the radius, I have already done for this single capitulum, so accept its cure from it.
But if it happens that the first restoration is hot, then take a thin cloth made of linen with oil and white wax, and place the medium between its thickness and subtility: and tightly wrap the cloth around the bone, until when sitting down, the heat disappears: then remove the wax, and put on an prepared patch of powdery lint with albumen mixed. Then put on stars, and let there be a star which is placed above the fracture itself slightly wider and stronger.
And you shall know that the number of stars of the arm is six in various dispositions: whether it be a fracture in one fascicle, or in two fascicles simultaneously.
Then put on your bandage over the place of the fracture stronger and more durable, and slightly more with the bandage to the upper fracture, or to the lower one: or put on a softer bandage according to what has preceded in the memory of it at the beginning of this chapter.
And there be rags that are wrapped around the fracture, soft, moist: and not be hard, rough. And let there be a thread with which he is tied from linen itself, middle between thin and thick, as we have reported.
And consider the limb and the ligaments after some days. That if anything happens for which correction is necessary, such as itching that occurs in the limb: then one should, as the itch abates, dip the limb in hot water, until it subsides, and then remove the bandage not constricted, until it subsides, and then repeat the bandage.
That if the bandage has already softened, and the bone is slightly removed, and similar things: then repair it with your own skill, and consider again.
For if nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb, due to the excess of the bandage: then one should, as it softens a little more, remove it a little each day, until it runs with blood, and then bind it up.
If, however, nothing happens of what we have said, then one should not repair it until after twenty days, or about those.
Then hang the hand to be nursed on its collarbone. And let the collarbone be equal, and guarded with your own skill from restless movements. And let him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days, or in thirty-two days; and perhaps it is restored in fifty days. This whole thing is according to the dispositions of the complexion, and the dispositions of virtue.
On the restoration of fractures of the hand.
Know that it is rare for a fracture to occur in the palm of the hand or in the knuckles of the fingers. And it does not happen to him, except through repeated injuries.
When therefore a fracture occurs in the sole of the foot, or through repeated injuries: then he should sit on an equal seat: and before him there should be a second seat on which to rest his feet. Then put his hand on it extended.
Then the assistant shall extend the bones that are broken, and shall equalize them with the help of the physician, until they are joined together by a good joint.
Then it should be put on unguent and poultice, if there does not occur an apoplexy of heat. Then place the plaster above him according to the quantity of the wound's depth: and you have already wrapped it in linen cloth.
But if the fracture is around the lower part of the foot near the sole: then make a spherical shape out of linen cloth: and order the sick person to put it on with his own foot that is broken: and then tie it up with long linen cloth.
And he should sit on a wooden stool on which there is a smooth layer, so that it is applied to the body of the foot with the skin: and tie it up, according to what needs to be done.
But if the fracture is on the outside: then it should be put on a wooden stool above him, and another below it in the sole: and he should sit with his hand open and straight. Then put a bandage on, as it is stretched out from the hand: and extend it between the fingers with a band.
If a fracture occurs in one of the knuckles of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, equalize it according to what needs to be done. Then tie it with a strap: and if you love, put there a straight splint, of pine: that the fracture may be held fast, and not move.
If the fracture is in the little finger, or middle finger, or index finger, or ring finger, then it should be reduced and tied to the finger next to it: or all should be tied according to the order of their length, and that is better. Or put a splint over it, as we said before, for the thumb.
And consider, when you are healing, and after it the application of hot plasters: and oppose to it what is necessary, when something happens from that, according to which its story returns.
On the restoration of a fractured hip.
The hip bone often breaks and is felt: because it turns towards the inner and back parts.
And its restoration is so that a strap is tied above the fracture, and another strap is tied below the fracture. And the sick one extends his hand on his face.
Then let him stretch out all his ligaments to the side according to equality: and this, when there is a fracture in the middle of the bone.
If the fracture is near the root of the hip, then let there be a strap on one side, so that it drops down towards the top: and another strap below the fracture.
And in the same way, if there is a fracture near the knee, then let there be a strap near the knee, so that it drops down towards the bottom.
Then the doctor will make both hands equal in length, until he reduces it according to the natural figure: and the bones are joined together with a good joint.
Then let there be applied plaster and binding, if something does not happen from that member. If something has happened to it: then let him stay at home for a few days, until the heat of the apथम begins to subside: and then return to your healing.
The incision should be made thus. You should cut through the skin over the fracture, that is to say, lather it up: and make it twice or three times: and leave a surplus on it. Then incise the flesh, until you reach the bone at its root.
And insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg close to the knee from below, and bring the ends of the thread from the upper part of the two parts. Then cut off the excess flesh on the skin and bone.
Then place above the thigh, in the place of the fracture, stars from it, and place one star above the bone of the leg.
Then fill with poultices between the flesh and the thigh with soft cloths, to make the incision even.
Then begin with a strong hand from the middle of the place of the fracture, three incisions, or four. And as you make it longer with a rope from the place of the fracture, your incision will be smaller and softer, and gentler.
Then extend to both ends of the thread, which you have inserted between the thigh and the leg. Bind together with a knot each of the three stars that are above. Then extend to the two ends of the thread to below, until you reach the heel of the foot. And also tighten and bind the ends of the stars from the other side: so that the ligament does not move away from its place.
Then remove the incision while it is still there, so that the member does not corrode, nor swell, nor become puffy, and similar things to it. If anything of this should happen. Then bring it near to the solution of it, and make straight that which has happened from there entirely, as we have said many times.
If however a piece of bone has come out of the bone and stings: then it should be made even, if it is possible for you to do so. If not, find above it, and move it: and cure with it that memory which preceded it, until it is healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the hip joint is stretched, besides that strels are added to it, as we have said in the aidiorium and brachiis.
However, in restoring this fracture in such a way that does not happen an abnormal walking with lameness. And if it is restored alone, besides that another leg is applied to it, then it is necessary, so that this one who has it always walks with a limp.
And you should know that the hip joint is stretched in fifty days, or added a little, or tightened a little: all this is according to the difference of complexions and the remaining dispositions.
Regarding the restoration of the fracture of the knee rotula of the genii.
You should know that the fracture of the knee rotula of the genii rarely happens, but it often happens to him because of friction.
If this fracture has really happened to him, then there is either a crack or a hole in his parts. And it is that way with a bone that has been broken, and without a bone. And stands above it all with thought.
And the restoration of it is so that what has been broken from its parts with fingers, comes together, and joins according to what is possible out of équation and ease, and by making.
Then put on an emplastre of flour Sisami, or to be ground, with white of egg: and put on top of it a round Astella, if you can bear that: and tighten very tightly the fitting onto it.
Then consider all the dispositions which we have told you about in the other fractures: such as the aposteme that is warm, and its like: so that you oppose every accident with it, until it is healed.
Regarding the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Know that there are two bones of the leg, one thick and called the tibia, the other thin and called the fibula.
And it happens to both species of fracture that occurs in the two bones of the arm: and because of this, the restoration is made equal as the restoration of the arm, and the operation is one.
That if both bones break at the same time, the leg becomes turned into all parts.
And if the thin bone breaks, the leg turns towards the front part.
And if the thick bone breaks, it injures the lower part: and it is from these that do not hide your leg.
Then administer the extension, and the equitation, and the binding of the joints according to that which is equal.
However, it must be, if the fracture of the leg is a bad fracture, having many complications: so that there is a smaller extension, and less relief to your pain.
And in the leg itself there is some operation on the arm: and it is, as when you make the joints equal and complete all your operation, then take two strips of pine wood, which are used in the making of hinges that are placed under tables: and they are made from palm leaves: and choose from them those that have a small thickness, and there are none of the small ones: and let their length be according to the length of the leg from the knee to below.
Then wrap it around one piece of cloth on two occasions, according to its length. And place one side of the leg from one side and the other from the other side: and let them be from the knee to below the foot.
Then bind the two strips in three places from both ends and from the middle. Since when constriction is prevented, the leg turns to the right and to the left, and remains on good support.
And there are also given a stick made of wood according to the length of the leg, and placed in it, so that it may keep it from moving.
It is indeed necessary that you do this for a fracture when it is a true avulsion.
Then consider the bone every day, and study with it the last attention from apoplexy, or swelling, or other. But if anything happens to any of these, then oppose it with him as is necessary until he recovers, if God wills.
Of the fracture of the bones of the foot and fingers.
A heel fracture has not occurred within.
But among the bones of the foot a fracture has happened when and a little too among the fingers a fracture has happened; and it has not happened to them except by a sprain in many situations.
That if a fracture has happened among the bones of the foot, and you see those bones sliding one over another; then let the sick man put his足下土，如行路者。
Then stand you, and put your足下土，如行路者。Then press, or trample on it: and make it even, until it returns to its place.
Then put plaster above it: and set it down; and place under the足下土，如行路者。then put a thin board, which have two flat heads.
Then tighten it with the foot by stretching it, after you have wrapped it up with rags, and other things that it needs.
When then pass over them three days, or four; then loosen the ligaments. For you will find bones that are even; or if any are broken, or dislocated. Then the operation is in them, as you see it.
But if any of the fingers are broken, then restore them, and make even among themselves according to that you told me about restoring fingers of a hand. Then put your finger on a splint according to the length of the finger, and make it somewhat wider; then place under the足下土，如行路者。then tighten it with the foot by stretching it.
If it is two or three or more bones that are broken, then place a splint of his size over all the fingers, folded into a cloth; and bind the table firmly in the lower foot: and stand on one head of the board outside the navel of the foot to hold it with good retention.
And it is fitting for you that you not forget, but that you consider all that I have said to you regarding the other fractures from the accidents which we mentioned: and resist every accident with him as is necessary.
Regarding the fracture of a woman's leg, and of the ribs and the man's testicles.
When a woman's leg is broken, then let her sit square. Then lean her slightly toward the back of her own side, and support her from behind.
Then the midwife should fill the woman' s crotch, until she is filled: and let her stand in the woman from that like a sphere.
Then the woman should be shaken, and raised slowly on her back. For that crotch moves away from the woman' s face like a sphere, and the broken bone returns to its place.
Then place a pillow on her back. When she therefore wishes to urinate, move the crotch with ease, and then let her urinate: and reduce it according to the manner in which you inserted it at first: and then let her return to her pillow first.
Let that be done for seven days, or about that, because the bone itself is restored.
And if you wish, take a black worm, and bind it tightly over its orifice with an awl, and insert the whole worm into the woman' s crotch. Then blow into the cannula with force, until the worm bends inside the woman' s navel, for the fracture returns.
Then let it be filled with the crotch, and stand for a few days, according to which we have spoken, until it is healed.
And when the jawbone of a man or woman is broken, then administer to it restoration and its vyrovaning as we have said concerning the bone of Ancha.
And the rectum is not hidden in those who are close to breaking, which happens very little, especially in someone who has some study or use.
And understand my book very well, because the fracture itself indicates to you many ways of restoring its rectitude and strictness: therefore understand.
But when the jawbone of a man is broken, take the throat of a goose: and insert the jaw into it. Then put on top of it a bandage from a cloth, and wrap it up, and leave it for three days or so, and if God wills, he will heal.
Of the restoration of broken bones, when it is with an injury.
It belongs to him who has suffered a fracture with an injury, especially if it is large, such as the hipbone or auxiliaries, or similar to it, according to your judgment, and immediately stop up: if you attest phlebothy conditions, as we have said.
If the wound is spitting blood, then you should, according to your judgment, cut off as much of it as possible so that it crushes on top of the bone: if you do not have anything else present.
Then begin to restore the fracture in the same day: and do not delay it, unless there is a swelling.
But if a swelling should become hot, then leave off the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the swelling subsides. And do not approach him on the third and fourth days at all, for you would make it happen that bad accidents occur to him.
But if the broken bone is prominent above the skin detected: then you should, so that you reduce it and make it even with your hands with ease and a small extension.
If, however, it is not prepared for extension and its alignment with your hands: then reduce it with this instrument. And this is an instrument which is made of iron, the length of which is the quantity of seven fingers, or eight; and its breadth is according to the quantity of the wound. And because of this, it is necessary for the surgeon to take three or four according to the quantity he needs for healing any kind of fracture.
And it should be round: and it should have little thickness so that it does not break under pressure on top of it during the operation: and it should have an acute extremity, having a rim at its extremities. And let it be above it to thickness from its half up to its lower part.
This is its form.
It is necessary for this operation, that the extremity of it be curved on top of the prominent extremity of the bone: and push it with a single blow, until such time as the bone returns and is made level by some alignment.
Therefore take care to align the ends of the fracture in opposite directions.
That if the ends of it are fragile and do not accept it well with the instrument, then you should, in order to strike the extremity of its bone, until the instrument can have power over it.
If, however, you cannot reduce them with this instrument at all, then strike it with one of the knives which we have mentioned: or clamp it down with a single clamp in whatever way is possible for you.
Then sharpen that which remains in the bone from roughness and small bark.
When, however, the bone is reduced and finds after its reduction a very painful sore-like pain, then know that the bone has not returned to its own place.
Do this then. For you confer a great strength of infirmity when your restoration is completed which does not restore the bone.
Then dip the cloth in black stypic wine. It is proper if it is in summer. And do not place the wound on a bony protrusion, nor apply any oil to it; lest it cause decay and corruption in itself.
Then administer the medicine at the hour of the body's restoration from bone injury. And release the wound that has been caught: so that you will strike with a hook in the second solution according to the quantity of the wound.
And take every precaution, do not tighten the wound with a fracture. For many times this has been done by the obstinate physicians: and they have caused to happen on their patients or death or corruption or putrefaction, or rotting, that is, disease. And your closure be soft, gentle, varied in the closures of broken fractures remaining.
That if the wound is bad, or is a large wound, and you wait for some bad accident that we have described, and suspend pain in the place: then it is not fitting that you should place stars on the wound. And make them solutions out of tough cloths at the site of the stars, and tighten the wound with them.
When however it is after a day, or two days, and you see the wound beginning to generate pus, then take away from above it the cloth that you placed on the wound with vinegar. Then administer leech and oil with which it is according to our custom to heal the wounds: such as the oil of the four-part compound, and similar to it.
And it is fitting for you, so that you release the ligaments. And consider the wound every day, morning and evening, until it has healed, and is cured.
And it is fitting that the limb be prepared so that pus can flow out of it with ease to the lower parts.
That if the days of the wounds are many and they have not healed, and there is no pus flowing out from them: then you know that there are small bone knots in them. Quare oportet, ut inquiras uulnus cum tenta. Quare oportet, ut inquiras uulnus cum tenta. Et si aliquid ex illis alsatagie est, qui non separatum est, et pugnatuum memebrum, et facit accidere dolorem, curi sit accidens, et ab illo aufertur, quanti possit, uti tibi possit.
Et si aliquid ex illis alsatagie est, qui non separatum est a membris, et pugnatuum memebrum, et facit accidere dolorem, curi sit accidens, et ab illo aufertur, quanti possit, uti tibi possit.
Et si aliquid ex illis alsatagie est, qui non separatum est a membris, et pugnatuum memebrum, et facit accidere dolorem, curi sit accidens, et ab illo aufertur, quanti possit, uti tibi possit.
Et si aliquid ex illis alsatagie est, qui non separatum est a membris, et pugnatuum memebrum, et facit accidere dolorem
Et si aliquid ex illis alsatagie est, qui non separatum est a membris, et pugnatuum memebrum, et facit accidere dolorem: tunc ergo cura uulnus,
Si tu enim es uuleris qui sedes te habes cum iusto, et deorum cultus, et bonarum artium, et si in tua
Et si aliquid ex illis alsatagie est, qui non separatum est a membris, et pugnatuum memebrum, et facit accidere dolorem: tunc ergo cura Deinde curi sit accidens, et si aliquid est, cuius forma facit accidere dolorem, aut cuius forma pugnatuum memebrum est, curi sit, et aufertur ab illa forma Et si aliquid ex illis alsatagie est, qui non separatum est a membris, et pugnatuum memebrum,
Et si aliquid ex illis alsatagie est, qui non separatum est a membris, et pugnatuum memebrum, et facit accidere dolorem: tunc ergo curi sit accidens, et si aliquid est, cuius forma facit accidere dolorem, aut cuius forma pugnatuum memebrum est, curi sit, et aufertur ab illa forma.
So that you take these some, or all of them: and bind them with wine of the astringent, or with albumen [egg white], or with vinegar: and place them upon nodulation in the pot, and tighten them above the good constriction.
And discharge the constriction, and do not remove it for many days. Then discharge it, and again bind another, until the nodulation moves away.
Or tighten above the same lead strip slightly askew. For lead is a property that removes whatever frightens from the body.
But if the nodulation is already turned toward the rock and is tight, and necessity expeditiously calls for its removal: then find above it from its upper part, and strike off the protuberance: or else cut it with some scalpel, until it moves away: and be careful of it, until it heals.
As for the cure, when it is restored, and remains a member after that, not according to its nature.
When a bone fracture is restored, and remains a member after that, feeble: then it is not made for no reason. Of which one is that a multitude of the solution of the ligament and its binding are not according to what should be: or because of the excess of the constriction, until it is forbidden for food to run to the member: or because of the multitude of emblications in the wrong time: or because of the scarcity of blood in the body, and the weakness of it.
And its cure is, to feed the sick, and make the body strong, until the blood increases within it. And administer a bath. And introduce joy and happiness to him.
Then place a pinch on the member: so that it attracts the pinch toward itself for much food. And diligently apply its emblication with tepid water, until it runs as food, and returns to its natural form.
On the cure for broken bones when they are healing in a twisted manner.
When a limb which has been restored after healing exhibits tortuosity or an突出 of the bone, or a droop; and when it is suitable to make this limb conform to its natural form, but not to prevent operation upon it: then you should not accept his story that he should break the limb again.
And there have been many stupid doctors and healers who have done this in our country.
This operation is extremely dangerous, leading to death, or at least to a great fear of death.
But if the swelling and droopiness are recent: then it should be dipped in warm water, in which herbs have been boiled that soften it, such as the leaves of the oak, its root, and mallow, and similar things. And let there be made for him a plaster with a softening plaster, like that made from dyachil, carefully prepared.
Or let there be used the mucus of the root of the oak, and let it be mixed with the fat of a hen, or with oil of sesamum; and let it be applied with this.
Or let there be taken fig trees which are large, and let them be ground up with columba's clay, and similar things which are named by the doctors as those that soften consolidation.
And when the droopiness has been alleviated by frequent dry friction, which is ancient and soft, which is done with moist hands. And let the limb be moved in all directions.
But if the tortuosity has already preceded and is strong, and has become fixed in a stone, and there is a need to treat it with an iron: then let the upper part of it be cut off, and let the bone continue intact, and let what exceeds be removed with very fine incisions: and let ease be given to it with care and effort.
On dislocation.
Dislocation is the exit of a joint from its normal position. Why it is prevented by its own motion, and the figure of the limb is damaged. And causes pain on an injured person, and severe injuries.
So when a dislocation occurs, then one should hurry to restore it: he should not delay it at all.
For if it is delayed, the joint will be stiffened, and perhaps with that the reduction of the dislocation.
Therefore, it should not be moved, nor be stretched out at the time of its stiffening. For it often causes a spasm, and painful injuries.
But when this happens, then you should go to have blood let from the injured person. Then it is dismissed, until it rests the stiffening.
Then the limb is rubbed with warm water and oil. Then reduce it with ease.
And care for all limbs, so that each one stays in its own place.
I have already arranged the chapters on dislocations, also according to what precedes, from the upper part of the body down to its lower part.
Chapter on the care of the lower jaw.
The two jaws rarely dislocate.
And the dislocation of the ears happens according to one of two ways. Or they are removed from their places by a small distance, and become slightly softer. Or they dislocate with an intact, complete dislocation, until they soften toward the chest, until they flow out a saliva of milk, and cannot hold it, nor can close their mouth, and hang their tongue out with speech.
But when the dislocation of it is small, then it returns to many positions by itself with a little bit of movement.
If indeed there is complete dislocation, whole: then it should be given to him to reduce it quickly, and not be late: and it is that he hold the head of the nurse: and he enters his doctor's thumb of his hand on the root of the dislocation between his tooth, if the dislocation is from one part. Or he should enter two thumbs at the same time, if the dislocation is from two parts. And the other fingers of his hand are outside, which equates it.
And tell the sick one that he clean his teeth and allows them to eat everything. And the doctor cleans the jaw, and pushes it back, until he returns to its place.
That if it is difficult to reduce him, especially if both are dislocated at the same time: then he should administer vapor with warm water and oil until the reduction becomes easy: and do not delay the reduction of the two at all, as we have said.
When they are reduced and made whole, and the mouth of the nurse is closed, and do not relax: then put over them some soft blankets, with a cloth that has been made from wax: and oil of roses.
Then it is bound easily with soft ligaments.
And let the nurse sleep on his back: and let his head be between two blankets so that he does not move to the right or left: and he should not be forced to chew anything: but it is given to him to eat something soft, until he feels no pain, and the jaw moves: then he can eat whatever he wants, and administer it easily.
He should not work on the operation of his mouth during digestion and drinking, and speaking, until he feels no pain, and his jaw heals.
That if it is difficult to reduce the two jaws when they are dislocated at a time, and do not return to their places: then many times fever occurs from it, and frequent sizzling: and perhaps the stomach of the nurse is emptied, and perhaps pure cholera escapes.
So then you see that: then you know that it is a loss, and he often dies who has experienced that in ten days.
§ On the Reduction of a Dislocation of the Foil and Extremity of the Humerus.
The foil [i.e., the clavicle] does not dislocate from the internal side due to its continuation with the chest. And it sometimes dislocates on the external side; and this is obvious to the sense.
And its restoration is such that he lies injured on his back, and extends his arms. Then bind the place with your palm firmly, for it will return of itself. For it will come back.
Then put a plaster over it, and wool, and tighten it.
The extremities, however, which follow the bed and continue with it, do not dislocate, except rarely. If it dislocates on one day: then let it be reduced and made even as we have said, and let you be prepared.
Then put a plaster over it, and wool, and tighten it. And instruct the injured person to adhere to rest and quietude until he has healed.
And with this same cure the extremity of the Humerus is reduced, when it also separates from its place.
§ On the Reduction of a Dislocation of the Humerus.
You know that the Humerus does not dislocate unless by three ways.
Of which one is, so that it dislocates to the tickling side toward the lower part. The second is, so that it dislocates to the side of the chest. And perhaps it dislocates to the upper part of the Humerus; and this happens rarely.
And it does not dislocate toward the rear due to the spatula. And it does not dislocate toward the front due to the nerves.
It dislocates and moves downward on the tickling side; above all, those who have little flesh. For he who hastens to go out, must also haste to come in again.
But as for those of whose flesh there is much, it is the contrary to him, that is to say, because he goes out with difficulty, and enters in with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some men that they are struck or fallen, and the shoulder is dislocated by heat, and it is thought on account of this, because it is already dislocated.
Therefore, so that you may try this out, until you are sure about its effect, and then proceed to treat it.
And the dislocation is recognized when it is towards the lower part against the tip; and you distinguish between a dislocated shoulder and a healthy one. For you will find a manifest difference between them; and the injury in the head of the arm, and under the tip at the touch, seems to be itself; and the sick cannot bring his hand to his ear, nor move it in all its motions.
And also, if it is dislocated towards the breast or upwards; then there is a manifest touch, and it is not hidden.
And of this dislocation easy reduction is made when it is recent, or when the boy is weak.
And its reduction is, as he raises his own hand towards the upper part. Then put your fingers under its tip, and bring the joint with force upwards to its place; and the boy will raise his own hand, and extend it upwards. Then let him put it down again, for himself he returns quickly.
But if he does not return by the means that we have said, and many days pass from the time of the dislocation: then it is necessary that the sick man should bathe in warm water, and receive an ointment which softens and soothes, such as if they were boiled herbs of aloes, and fenugreek, and melilot in water, and be applied.
Then the sick person is laid on his back: and let a sphere and wool be placed under him, which is equal between softness and hardness.
Then the doctor places his heel on the sphere, and lifts up the shoulder with force, and draws the nurse's hand towards him from below.
And if you wish, reduce him according to this method: and he is, so that you may make the sick man present, and stand on one side, and introduce his shoulder under the nurse's grip: and lift up the nurse's grip upward until the sick man hangs suspended in the air. And another minister should take the patient's hand from below the leg. But if the sick man is light: then it should be suspended with something else, so that he does not return to his previous state: for dislocation returns immediately.
And he is also reduced according to another method: and it is, so that it is fixed in the ground a long wooden limb, whose head is a round shape: like a mortar's sleeve: which is neither thick nor thin. Then let it be placed under the sick person, after you have placed it on the head of the limb; and let the sick man stand in line with the length of the limb.
Then let him extend his hand from below on one side, and extend his body from the other side with force: for the joint returns to its place with velocity.
That if it is difficult to reduce his limb by all the means which we have mentioned, then use this treatment: and it is, so that you take a limb whose length is equal to the length of two arms, and whose width is equal to the width of four fingers, and whose thickness is equal to the thickness of two fingers; and whose head is round, so as to ease his entrance into the deep hole, according to this form.
Then soft cloths are tied tightly around the head so that the weak wood does not hurt.
Then care is taken to keep the hands and arms extended so that the wood does not touch the head from below; and the wood is tied on either side to the aid-arm, and to the extreme tips of the hand.
Then the arms are placed on either side of the steps, and the hands are extended towards the bottom, and the rest of the body is suspended from the other side. The sutures should be tied immediately.
Once the entrance is complete in any way that is possible, then you should place a sphere of equal size made from wool under the scalp. Then put on a prepared plaster made from ground clay mixed with olive oil and white powder, as it is rolled up from above.
Then tie it tightly under the scalp with a string that is being pulled down: and secure the ligature on top of the plaster; and connect his hands to his neck, and let go, and do not move his hands for seven days.
And it is necessary to provide food that is weak on the sick member, because he will recover faster.
Then after seven or five days, let him take a larger meal, and let him exercise with movement. If then it remains firm and does not soften, then he is now healed.
If then the wound opens repeatedly because of moisture that has occurred with it, or because of some other cause: then you should administer cauterization to it with three holes, as it is described in the chapter on cauterization.
If all of this has been done, and the wound heals without opening, and the ligature does not stand firm, and the plaster and tightness on top are relaxed a little, and he cannot raise his arm up: then you should know that the nerves going to his shoulder are cut or extended or softened: and you should know that the wound never heals in its place.
The dislocations which occur opposite the chest and nipple, or those which occur towards the rear and are reduced with the help of the hands by pushing and extending them until they have returned, and are given remaining constriction and treatment until they have healed.
If however a slight weakness occurs in the limb after recovery, and there is delay in its movement, then the convalescent should often bathe in hot water until that weakness has become easier, and return to his normal state at first.
The treatment of dislocation of the elbow.
Know that the dislocation of the cubitus occurs with difficulty, and in the same way returns with difficulty as well; and it itself is dislocated to all parts, especially to the front or rear.
And its dislocation does not hide from you; for it is falling under the eye, and under the touch, according to whatever figure it is dislocated. And when you join a dislocated cubitus with a sound one, that [dislocation] is manifestly declared to you. For the dislocation becomes tight, and it cannot double the arm, nor touch with it its shoulder.
And you must do so that you repair, and reduce the dislocation immediately, before the cold apoplexy happens to it.
For if it has happened to him that the cold apoplexy has occurred, its reduction is difficult; and it may well not be healed completely, especially when it is to the rear. For it is worse to all species of dislocation, and more painful pain to them; and often it falls with her death.
And the restoration of her is when it has come out of them what can be reduced, as he extends his hand with both hands: and his arm is spread out, and his fingers are placed above the cubitus and under it, and he pushes the dislocation with his thumbs of his hands simultaneously, or with the root of his palm, until he returns to his place.
Or rather the dislocation is to the front; then it returns so that it doubles the hand with its hand, until it hits the root of its palm against the cubitus that is dislocated.
Which if it does not obey the reduction, then administer a painful extension, a strong one: and it is like two ministers who extend his arm: and they hold him too, so that he does not move during the extension.
Then the arm turns back to all parts after it has spun over its hand a long folded cloth, or a wide ligament.
And when the doctor touches with his hand the suture, he should anoint it with oil: so that it may be out of the air that adds to the lubrication of the suture with ease. Then he should remove the stitch with a sudden thrust, until it comes off.
And after the reduction, it should be placed on it an ointment, in which sits the cicatrization, and drying with alumen: and tighten the constriction while it is coming down. And hang up the arm from the neck of the nurse: and let go after a few days.
Then let it be unbound. If then the stitch stays fast in its place, then undo the ligature from it, and let go of it.
And if you see that the stitch is not tightly bound, then repeat the ointment, and the ligature, and let go of it for a few days until it is tightly bound. Then unbind it.
If then it happens that he has gained weight after the reduction of the stitch, and the place is in motion: then administer humidity in balneation, and slight friction, and compression, until it gets better, or put on the stitch an ilium, that is, a drop of sheep's fat. Then bind it up, and let go of it on top of her day and night. Then take it off, and introduce the patient into a bath. When then she sweats, then unbind the stitch with slight friction. Then repeat on top of her three times, with one between each entry into the bath, until it softens.
And if the patient is cold, put on top of her dung, humid, warmed with butter, and tightly bind over it.
Make it a few times. She herself is getting better, and returns to her own place.
The cure for the dislocation of Almahass.
Mahassem's hand often dislocates, that is, the stitch between the arm and the hand.
The reduction of dislocation is easy. Oppositely, the joints remain intact. However, it is necessary that the speed be in the reduction of his dislocation at the time when he is dislocated, before the measurement of the place: or happens in that apostema heat.
And the reduction of dislocation is in him, as you put Mahassem's hand weak on a board, and extends his hand Minister hand: and put the doctor his palm on the eminence of the joint, and push it, until it returns.
However, it is necessary to consider, if the palm has already moved to the stomach of the hand: then put the injured back of his hand on a board in extension and reduction: and if dislocation is going to the back of the hand, then the position of the hand is inside the board, that is, the inner part of the hand of him is placed on the board, so that the doctor's palm falls on that eminence of the joint.
If he comes back immediately, it is good: and if not, then tie him with a plaster while the apostema stands: and let go of him, do not return to it.
For if he does not tolerate it, and you cannot reduce him after his time, then the joint remains according to its tortuosity: and does not harm the weak person unless the hand is softened, and he cannot grasp anything: then know that the nerves are cut off, or rubbed.
Therefore there is no skill in it, except to tie him with a plaster near his danger. And perhaps does not offer anything.
Since Albucasis does not return to Mahessem, then put on him the plaster which we have described. Then tie him up, and let go after five days: then open it and let go, and exercise his hand.
But if the movement is restricted, and happens in it something of lightness: then make it soft with warm water, and with a little friction, until it softens.
On the treatment of finger dislocations.
If a finger becomes dislocated at any part, or if one of the fingers comes to rest on the back of the palm, or in the hollow of the hand; then extend that finger and push the thumb into its socket until it is back in place.
Then support the end of the finger, and hang it towards the side where it is dislocated, and leave it alone for two days.
Then hang it up, and extend it, until it is straight again on its own day.
When the time comes that he must be used, bind him according to the above description; and do not cease to put him into use during the day; and exercise him with movement; and bind him at night.
Make it for a few days, until it is tight.
And also do the same if it becomes dislocated towards the side of the hand; and bind it to the side, and perform your first operation on it, until it is healed.
And also do the same with him when he becomes dislocated towards any other part.
On the treatment of dislocations of the spine of the back.
If it happens to anyone that there is a complete dislocation of the spine, or if many vertebrae are lost from their places: then there is no treatment for this, because death is close at hand for the sick.
And the sign of this is that he walks with a limp and does not do it willingly; nor can he hold himself up: or sometimes one of his limbs becomes weak, or two of them on either side, or two of his arms, or one of them; or if one of the vertebrae is lost from its place.
Indeed it often happens that it becomes dislocated again, for it often comes loose on all four sides.
That which is dislocated towards the back is called gibbosity.
But the treatment of this is that you should consider at that time, if gibbosity happens to occur from infancy: then there is no cure for it, and there is no healing from it at all.
But regarding what happens due to an accident, or a blow, or something similar, the old scholars have already explained in a lengthy speech the ways of treating such things. Who does not return with profit.
But I have already shortened it from that, which does not excuse him from much of his profusion out of nearness to my intention: and my exposition of it as I expounded it, and I formed an instrument of it in various ways from him by whom they showed it, and they presented it.
I say then, that the hunchback which happened from the front part is not a talent, nor a cure out of it.
And also in that which happened on both sides.
And let not be cured out of them, except that which happened in the back own, with what I am telling: and it is, so that he extends the sick person on his face over a level platform next to the wall: and it spreads out under him a damp cloth, so that his chest does not get hurt.
Then a straight wooden beam is to be placed in the ground in the end of the foot, around the head of it: and another wooden beam around his feet in the other end of the foot: and the servant is to hold the beam, and not to stand fast in the ground. And a servant is to hold the other one.
Then an nurse is to turn over the head of it, and under its chin with a piece of lint, fast: and spread out the end of the ligament on the wood which is at his head: and bind him in it.
Then a servant is to tighten another ligament above the armpits of it, and above its knees, and at the wrists of it: Then he is to gather all the ligaments together, and bind them in the other wood which is at his feet.
Then the servant is to extend all of the ligaments out to the side of the wood, and not remove the two woods from their places in which they are fixed: but they are not fixed, as I said.
Let the doctor place his palm on the spine with strength, until he stops: or let him place a board over it. Then he should connect his feet to the board with strength, until he stops:
But if he does not stop by this cure, then take a board whose length is about three arms. And make a hole in the wall that we mentioned earlier, which is near the sick person, at the place where the edge of the board enters. Then put the middle of the board on the spine. And let the doctor place his feet at the other edge. And tighten it well, until the spine is pulled in, and return to its place.
Then if you want, operate with a turning tool that is rotated with your hand: and it is like this that you fix the two logs on the ground near the head of the sick person at the end of the foot two logs whose length is a single arm: and near the head of those two logs.
And let the length between all the logs be one palm: and now it is done everywhere, a hole where the turning tool runs: and all the logs are tightened on the ground very much, so that they do not move at all.
And insert the round wood: and it is a turning tool where the ligament turns in two holes of two logs.
And at the end of it is a hole, in which the wood is fixed, whose length is a palm with that by which it turns: and in the other two logs is similar to that.
Then tighten the ligaments that you have tightened in the chest of the sick person with a turning tool that is at his head: and the ligaments that you have tightened in his legs with a turning tool that is at his feet.
Then stand by every tool that tightens the hand with a turning motion, with which it turns: and the doctor adjusts the spine, according to what we have said.
This is the form of the turning tool:
Then when the spine returns and the position is even, then you should put on a dried plaster with albumen. Then put a collyry. Then put a plate over the plaster which is three fingers wide or about that. And its length so much as to take up the space of the girth and over the sound side.
Then bind with a bandage which we have spoken of. And let the sick one be fed with subtle food until he is healed.
That if anything remains of the eminence in the place at the end of the cure: then it is necessary that such medicines which soften and relax be given with the tablet which we have described at regular intervals. And now let medicine be given in that leaden plate.
And when anything of eminence comes about at the back of the spine: and it is considered by that dislocation, and that is the joint which has already begun to move out. Why it should not be supposed that he will get better with this medicine: for perhaps it may cause death.
On the treatment of dislocated shoulders.
You should know that the dislocation of the shoulder and the dislocation of the arm do not occur unless there is a total dislocation; and it does not occur to them what happens to other joints due to a slight distance or tightness.
And the dislocation of the shoulder joint occurs according to four sides. Because it is dislocated forward and backward.
And indeed it is often dislocated inwardly; and a little dislocated forward and backward.
And the treatment of its dislocation inwardly is this: because when you join a sound thigh to an infirm person, it is longer; and his hip bone which protrudes more than a sound one, cannot double the person's leg where the thigh follows the bent hip with a hot spot, that is, because the head of the hip has already come there.
And the sign of him in whom dislocation has occurred is external, which are his opposite accidents to these accidents.
And the sign of him in whom dislocation has occurred to the front is, because it expands the healthy limb according to the complement: however, it does not duplicate itself without pain which is in the leg: and if it attempts to walk, it cannot go over that to the front: and it holds back its urine, and takes a step with its toes, and when walking goes on tiptoe.
And the sign of him in whom dislocation has occurred to the back is, that he does not expand his leg, and cannot duplicate himself without duplicating his thigh: and his limb is also shorter on the other side: and his thigh is softened, and the head of the hip is at the place.
The reduction of this dislocation of the joints is that you consider then, if dislocation is fresh, which has been set in motion with the one who has it. Then if you administer the reduction of it, and remains according to its position: then is not in it at all treatment. Therefore it is not necessary that a pronouncement be made to him inside.
In that however whose dislocation is recent, and is from one of the four joints of dislocation: then approach to this, that you move the joint, and extend it to the inside and outside, and make it move on the right and left: perhaps it will return, and does not need another treatment.
But if this does not return in this way, then you should prepare a strong instrument, and extend the limb of him from the lower part: or with its hands, or with a ligament that is tied above the limb of him: and another instrument extends his hand from above, so that it enters its hands under its toes. Then tighten with a soft ligament on the root of the hip, and hold the end of the other ligament.
And the position of him should be extended or from the front part of the groin to the side of the thigh, or from the back to the side of the spine.
And let it be an extension of all these in one way, until the sick man with his body rises from the ground and remains hanging.
For this is indeed the kind of extension that is a general kind of four kinds of species.
If then the dislocation returns with it that which I said is good: and if not, then to all species that which I say about its own cure is necessary.
In reductione indeed of his own when the dislocation is towards the inside, it is necessary that the sick person should lie on his healthy side. Then let him put a bandage over the root of the hip, in that which is between the head of the hip, and the place which is under the groin. Then extend the ligament on high from the part of the groin to the higher part of the body, to the part of the shoulder-blade.
Then another strong minister shall take his both arms, and shall make less the large place of the weak hip, and shall extend to the outside with a violent extension. For he has already returned to his own place.
And this kind is easier than the rest of the kinds of cure, that this limb is reduced in this way.
If however he excuses himself from you, and does not obey to your approach at all with this kind of cure: then it is necessary that two nurses should bind strongly, soft, over the two heels, and over the two knees: and let the length of each one from its own compare be of the quantity of four fingers: and let the leg of the sick person be extended in length of two fingers more than that.
Then let the sick person be hung up on the head of the wood, which is in the house: and let the length of him from the ground be the quantity of two arms.
Then order a strong young man to support the head of the hip: and let another hang with the sick person's back: and let another push forward the hip with strength, for the join returns to its own place with speed.
When reducing his own dislocation to the outside, it is necessary that the sick person lie on a bed, as we have said when having a gibbus. And tighten the ligaments over his own leg and over his chest.
Then two beams are placed, one at his feet and another at his head. Then a wooden beam is placed in the middle of the foot, well fixed: over it wet cloths are laid so as not to hurt the sick; and let the beam rest between his thighs so that it does not draw towards the bottom during extension.
Then all the assistants extend themselves on their side, and the doctor reduces with his own hand.
If he obeys to the reduction, it is good.
And if not, place over it the board and press it as we said for the gibbus, equally. However, it is necessary that the sick person lie on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is to the front, then it is necessary that the leg be extended quickly by the assistant; and it is as we have narrated about the bed; and the doctor places his right hand palm on the sick person's thigh. Then he pulls him with the other hand, and with this pull he puts him extended towards the bottom of the leg.
And if the dislocation is to the back: then it is not necessary that the sick person be extended towards the bottom, and that he be made to lie on the ground; but he should be placed on a hard thing, as we said also when we talked about his lying on two broad beams; and he should be on his face, and with stretched ligaments, as we have just said.
And it is necessary that the compression be administered with the board also to the place from which the joint exits, when the reduction is complete, as is necessary.
And the sign of his reduction should not be hidden from you: and it is when the two legs are extended by the assistant; and when you see them equal, and the sick person tightens his own leg and opens himself without any excuse; then you know that the member has been reduced, as is necessary; then join the two hips, and put a board under them, and tighten with thorns, that is to say, rotate them: so that they do not move the broad part to any side; and let the sick person be quiet for three days, or four.
Then dissolve the ligaments, and apply the plaster, and compare the legs with each other; then if you see them equal in position, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed: so permit the patient to walk.
And if you see any softening: then come again and plaster it, and bind it according to your first stricture: and let go of it also after three days.
Then dissolve that one and make the person walk a little on each side for several days, until he is well comforted.
The Dislocation of the Knee.
The knee may be dislocated in three ways. By the outside, by the inside, and by the lower part, that is to say, by the rear.
And it does not dislocate in front.
And the sign of its dislocation is, as you order the sick person to apply his leg to his hip. But if he does not join it with the hip: then you know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all kinds of dislocation is so that you may make the sick sit upright, so that he may stretch his leg out in front of him and join it with his hip, and place his foot between your feet.
Then adhere to the knee of the sick person with your palms, and make them straight between your fingers above the knee. Then apply your two hands firmly on the sides of the sick person's knee. And another minister should stretch out his foot, until he returns the knee to its place.
And the sign of restoration is, that the leg joins the hip with ease, not with effort.
Then plaster the sick person, and adhere to the leg with the hip. Then bind them together at the same time for three or four days. Then dissolve them.
And do not let the sick person walk a little in several days, until he is healed.
If, however, you refuse to let him be reduced, then administer a strong extension with the ligaments, of which the precedent was told in the cure of ankylosis, until he recovers.
On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Calcaneus.
Calcaneus sometimes is dislocated with a small displacement, and sometimes is dislocated with a second displacement. And this displacement of the Calcaneus takes place, either towards the inside, or towards the outside.
And the sign of this displacement is that you see the Calcaneus swollen, protruding towards the side to which it is displaced.
The treatment for this displacement, however, is easy reduction: and it is done by extending it with ease with the hands, and making it stable, until it recovers.
In the treatment of this when it is displaced with a second displacement, it is necessary that you make the sick one sit upright: and hold him firmly from behind his back, in the middle of his back itself.
Then hold with your right hand his foot from the upper part of it, and with your left hand from the lower part of the foot at the position of the claw.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand. Then with two fingers of your left hand.
Then extend it with the left, and push the chest of the foot with the right towards the leg without effort.
Do this twice, as we have described.
Then push the chest of the foot towards the leg in a third force, and you pull the claw.
If then he returns in a single force, or in two forces according to this method, and you see the foot even, it is good: and if not, then repeat the operation over him: because he will return again.
If, however, you refuse to let him be reduced with the method we have described: then let the sick one lie on his back on the ground, and fasten a blanket firmly to the ground so that it does not move under him: and you can now easily bend over him without hurting him.
Then let the attendant take his staff; then afterward let the other foot be extended, or with his hands, or with a strap that binds above the neck of the foot. Then let all the attendants stand opposite to the extension of their own body; and let the nurse stand between the two thighs holding him back so that his body is not drawn down toward the lower part during the extension.
Then let the physician adjust his hands with respect to the dislocation and let the other attendant hold the leg below. For the dislocation returns with velocity.
When therefore the dislocation returns, and you are told that the recovery is good: then place the poultice and the bandage, and tighten it with ligaments firmly, and bind the foot with a strap to the leg.
And it is necessary that you should beware or be afraid of the nerves which are above the heel, so that the ligament does not press upon them and they are injured.
Then let him go free for two days, or three. If the ligament softens, tighten him up; then solve him after one third or fourth day, and prohibit the sick from walking for forty days. But if there is an attempt to walk before that space, it does not bring about security unless the dislocation is dissolved above him, and it corrupts, and does not receive after that cure.
If there is a swelling of the foot which is warm: then let him be administered in a sedative which he has in which our narration before in another place concerning the cure, and a poultice, until it has decreased.
Concerning dislocations of the toes of the foot, and cure.
It is necessary that the one who is dislocated should be extended a little without work; and this is not difficult, on the contrary, it is easy.
But if the dislocation is in certain nodes of the back of the foot: then let him sit with his sick foot on an equal place of the ground, or on a board; and he stands as one who walks.
Then sit down, and put your foot on that which protrudes from them with the bandage. Then with your foot firmly place that which protrudes from them with the bandage until it is returned to its proper place and no longer appears out of place.
Then place under his foot a board that catches the entire sole, which has two ends. Then tie him up with ten strings to be used for lowering, for ten days. Then loosen him and let him rest from walking for many days, until he is loosed and made secure from the process of reduction.
The species of dislocation with a sprained or broken bone.
When any of these things happen, and he takes a long time to recover or restore himself, often death follows: and for this reason it is not proper that he should be too confident about his own recovery, which is of this nature, unless he is prudent in the art of using medicines for sitting down, merciful, gentle, tardy, not daring, and modest; and that he should use medicines which sit idly, and dismiss the sick with divine judgment. Unless you expect salvation from destruction with mildness of disease, and in which there seems to be some hope. Consider then that the reduction should take place at once at the beginning of the illness, before a hot poultice has occurred.
If then the member returns, according to our wish, then administer the regime that sits down with a poultice: and take care of the sprain with it as it suits him from an ointment of dried herbs.
If the dislocation is with a fracture, and they have occurred to the bones of the limbs that separate, then consider their removal, and do in him what we have said in simple illnesses from that which preceded in those places.
And do according to your own strength, and guard yourself from the entrance into a state of fear: according to my previous statement to you.
It is better for you to be with your Creator, and remain firm for your glory, and keep your body safe from them at that time.
