After I have completed to you, O sons, this book, which is the last of science in medicine with its supplement, and having finished it with its expositions and declarations, it has seemed right to me that I complete it for you with this treatise, which is a part of surgery, namely, with the hand.
Since operation with the hand is laid down in our region and in our time exclusively: until perhaps knowledge of it has perished, and its trail has been lost: and there remain of it, only a few descriptions in ancient books, which hands have changed: and error and uncertainty occurred to them, until their intentions were closed, and his intention was prolonged. It seemed right to me that I should clarify it with this arrangement of this treatise according to two things, that is, by exposition and declaration, and abbreviation: and that I bring it closer with the forms of tools Cautery, and other instruments of work: for it is necessary to add a declaration, and to distinguish it, because there remains.
The reason why there is no good craftsman of this hand in our time: for the art of medicine is long, and it is necessary that the author of it should exercise himself before it in the science of anatomy, which Galen narrated, until he knows the functions of the limbs, and their forms, and their connection, and separation, and has knowledge of the bones, and nerves, and ligaments, and the number of them, and their course, and their pulsations, and quiet, and places of exit:
And because of that Hippocrates said, since a name is much with a name, and little with an operation, especially in the art of the hand.
We have already said about it at the beginning of this book.
Since he who is not knowing that we have said about anatomy will fall into error, to which human beings are subject: as I saw many of them form about this science, and boast themselves of it without knowledge, and without experiment.
That is because I saw a doctor cut an aposteme scar on the neck of a woman, and he struck some arteries in her neck. Why did the blood flow from the woman's body until she died between his hands?
And I saw another doctor who assumed that he would extract a large stone from the bladder of a man who had been suffering for a long time, and the stone was big. So he approached him and removed it with a twig. Why did the man die on the third day?
And I had already been called to extract it; and I saw from the great size of the stone and the care of the nurse that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who was taking a fee from the Duke of our land for medicine; and there happened to be a black eunuch near him, who broke his thigh bone near the heel: and the doctor continued in his ignorance, and he bound the fracture tightly with strong threads, and did not leave the wound's discharge undischarged.
Then he discharged him according to his desires. Then he discharged him after a few days, and he ordered that the ligatures not be removed: and so he stood until his leg and foot were withered away, and came to destruction.
So I was called up to him; and I set out to loosen the ligatures; and the result was calmness, and he was free of his pains.
However, the corruption had already become established in the member; and I could not restrain it.
Then the corruption stopped walking in the member until it perished.
And I saw another doctor who pierced an aposteme cancerosa; and it was ulcered after a few days until the maliciousness of it increased with his lord.
That is because when it is cancer pure from melancholic humor, then one should not approach it at all with iron unless it sits in a member that can bear it so that the whole of it may be cut off.
And for this reason, my sons, you need to know that surgery is divided into two parts: one in which health is associated with the operation and another in which there is danger in many dispositions.
And I have already aroused it in all places of this book, where the operation comes, in which there is fear and dread.
Why do you need to be afraid of that, and to diminish it: so that the blind may not get accustomed to speaking and being dishonorable.
Therefore take a measure with care and protection, and bring the sick among you with ease and firmness, and use a better way that leads to grace by the mercy of God for salvation and a worthy succession: and remove the terrible diseases from among you, which make you afraid, so that hesitation may come upon you in your faith and your confidence.
For there remains more for our glory, and higher in the world, and lastly to the quantities of us.
For Galenus has already said in some of his advice. Do not cure a disease with medicine: do not call yourself a doctor.
I have already divided this treatise into three chapters.
Chapter one.
Chapter one. On cauterizing with fire, and on cauterizing with sharp medicine, on the form of instruments, and on tools for cauterizing: and on everything necessary for the operation.
Chapter two.
Chapter two. On cutting and piercing, phlebotomy and tourniquets, and wounds: and on extracting arrows, and similar things: and all the chapter, divided into forms of instruments.
Chapter three.On bandaging, and on plasters, and on poult
On restoration, and dislocation, and cure of twist, and similar things: the whole chapter, divided from the head to the feet, and in forms of instruments.
But before I speak about the qualities of the cautery and the contraindications, it is necessary to describe the types of skin lesions that are suitable for it.
I therefore say that the speech about the quality of cautery and its contraindications is a long, subtle, scientific, and secret speech.
A multitude of wise men also spoke in it, and they disagreed with each other; but for me, a little of their speech is enough, fearing extension.
I say that cautery is suitable for all types of skin, whether with or without substance; excepting two types of skin, which are warm and dry without substance, and dry and cold without substance.
But in the case of warm and dry skin with substance, they disagreed. Some said that cautery is suitable for such skin. But others said the opposite, namely that cautery is not suitable for an illness that is both hot and dry, because fire's nature is hot, and it does not suit to heal a hot and dry disease with hot and dry means.
And he who says the opposite said this: "But with cautery, an illness that is hot and dry can be cured in any part of the body, because when you compare the human body to the fire's moisture, you will find that the human body is colder.
And I myself say through my own experience: because through experiment I have often found this to be true.
But it is not necessary to add anything to that, unless one has already tested and exercised in the exercise of the last chapter on cautery, and has recognized the diversity of human skin types, and the nature of illnesses within them, and the causes of those illnesses, and the accidents associated with them, and the time period of their occurrence.
Do not fear either to use the ointments left over: and above all when you are dealing with patients who are cold and wet. For all doctors have come together on them: and they have not disagreed in the treatment with the use of ointment.
And know, sons, that the secret of cure by cautery with fire, and its goodness above cautery with medicine burned together, is because fire is simple, whose action does not reach, unless to the limb that is cauterized: and it does not hurt another member joined with it, except with little harm.
But the action of medicine that is burned comes to that which is prolonged from limbs: and perhaps it causes a difficult cure to heal, and perhaps it kills.
But fire, because of its slightness and goodness of its substance, does not do that, unless it runs short.
But this has already become known to us by experimentation, because of the length of use and study with art, and stability on the truth of things: and for this reason I excuse myself from the length of speech.
And if it is not allowed, because it is not fitting for my book, I would take away from you the secret hidden thing of fire, and the quality of its action in bodies by its expulsion, which expels diseases with philosophical speech that is demonstrated by the minds of your scholars, which has been acquired.
And know, sons, that they disagree in time when cauterization is to be made, and set a better time for the wound.
And I say that cauterization is to be made at all times: because the harm that happens by time is hidden in the treatment, which is drawn with cautery. And especially if cauterization is because of the pains from necessary pains, firm, festivals, which do not tolerate tardiness: because they are afraid of them, that evil may happen, which is greater than a little harm that does not pass by time.
And let not the son of that woman fall in the minds of you all, if he does not take care, unless the people and those who are dull-witted, namely that it is not always a return to health for him when his illness which is cured by cauterization: and they put it down as a consequence, and it is not like what they think; therefore because cauterization is not, except in the place of medicine, which changes the complexion and dries up the humidities that are the causes, why these pains occur.
But cauterization is superfluous on medicine by its velocity of health, and the merit of its operation, and the severity of its lordship: and it is possible that he returns to health at some time of time according to the complexion of sickness, and the location of his illness, and the merit of it; and that he was prepared in his body from the accumulation of superfluity in him: and that it has come to itself in acquisition from food, and similar things from causes, unless there is an illness, in which cauterization is administered.
But a slight illness in a small member is superfluous of the excess of moisture, like cauterization of a tooth, for pain, and similar to it; it is possible that he does not return to health in him: that pain. But this happens in few things.
But the words of the people again, that cauterization is the last medicine, are right words: not to what they mean in it: for they believe that there is no cure which confers with medicine, and neither with any other after the occasion of cautery.
But the thing is opposite to what they say, and the intention, that cauterization is the last medicine, is not, except when we administer ways of cure in some illnesses, and they do not confer with medicines: then we administer at the end of things cauterization, and it confers; then from this it falls, that cauterization is the last medicine, not according to what they understand the people and many dull-witted doctors.
Antiqui autem dixerunt, quod cauterium cum auro est melius, quam cauterium cum ferro: et non dixerunt illud, nisi propter aequalitatem auri, et sublimitatem substantiae suae: et dixerunt, quod non facit pus locus cauterii. Yet the old people said that it is better to apply a burn with gold than with iron; and they did not say this except because of the equality of the gold and the poverty of its substance; and they said that there is no place for a burn. But this is not true, for I have tested this and found that it does not work in some bodies without others.
And the cautery with itself is good, and better than that with iron, as they said. But when you apply the fire cautery in the fire from gold, it does not manifest to you, when you set it on fire according to the quantity that you want, because of the redness of gold: and when it comes to its own heat, and if you add ignition to it, it melts in the fire and turns into sheets.
Why does the craftsman fall from that one to work: and because of that it is more expedient and closer for us to make a cautery with iron, out of straightness to the work.
And I too have already arranged this Chapter on the cautery, according to chapters; and I have arranged it from the head down to the feet; that the seeker may find what he wants out of it.
Chapter II.
Here let the cauterization be to the lordship of moisture and coldness on the brain; which two things are the cause of the salt, and of the multitude of flow of humors out of the head to the eyes and ears, and of the multiplicity of sleep, and of the pain of teeth, and of the pain of throat: and universally all sickness that happens from coldness, such as paralysis, and salt, and convulsions, and fainting fits, and those like them from those illnesses.
The method of cauterization is so that you may instruct the sick person: to wash his head with soluable medicine three times a night, or four times, according as the strength of the patient and his age and custom require it.
Then command him to wash his head with cold water. Then make him sit between your hands so that he has already placed his hands on his chest.
Then place the root of your hand over the root of his nose between his eyes. So whichever finger of your middle hand touches the place where the nose joins the face, mark it with a burn.
Then light a cautery with olive oil: whose this is the form.
Then place the person himself on the marked spot with the burn, so that your hand constricts him little by little, and you release him. Then quickly release your hand, and look at the spot.
If you see already a quantity of hair falling out from the bone, or a quantity of herbs, then quickly release your hand. And if not, repeat the ironing of the same with another one when it is frigidized: until you see the bones that I told you.
Then take some salt, and dissolve it in water, and steep it in the liquid, and place it on the spot: and release him for three days.
Then place over the soaked cloth in butter, and release him on the spot until the fire scar is destroyed. Then care for that with the four-part ointment, until it is healed.
They have already said that since the wound remains open for so long, it emits pus: why is this better and more beneficial.
And some of them said, Let the skin be cauterized all the way down to the bone: and hold the cautery, until a certain thickness of bone is burned.
Then burn after that what is burnt out from the bone, then treat with ointment.
It is said that when the caesarian section is performed to the end, until it impresses the impression on the mouth for a long time, so that the mouth falls down, which is like the shape of kirat: or the instrument that women put in the infusion of letters, and they estimate that from this place the vapours of the head are exhaled, and the opened wound is closed at the right time.
Then let the wound be treated until it has healed.
But these two kinds of cautery do not seem to me to exist at all unless they are used by some people out of fear the second time.
And let it be removed; for me, it is better to remove it when the patient is healthy.
For the head weakens from the continence of its own nature: as we have witnessed in the other members: and especially when the head is weak from sickness; and the species of cautery first are more salutary and better for me, and I use them: therefore let us perform it when healthy.
Head 3.
When chronic pain occurs throughout the whole head: and is prolonged in an invalid, and uses soap, and baths, and poultices, and oils, and applications. And above all if it has already been cauterized with one kind of cautery which we have described, and does not give any benefit from it: then consider. For if the head is weak from the strength of nature, and is not weak, and there is a cold feeling: then cauterize with another kind of cautery slightly under it. Then cauterize it itself on all the corners of the head with its own cautery, and let the skin not be disturbed, and a quantity be taken from the bone which we have described. And let it be cauterized with one kind of cautery in the back of the head in the place which is called the air: and this is a place where the wind blows: and wash your hair in this way, and do not discover the mouth. This is critical: he became sick because of that painful symptom, and very much relieved from the pain of all other headaches.
And I will say this about the cautery in its place: and it is necessary that there be a cautery to cauterize the horns of the head, and the back of the skull be slightly cauterized, where the middle of the head is cauterized.
**Chapter IV. On the treatment of headache.
**When there is pain on one side of the head and soda, or the pain extends as far as the eye, and the head is cleansed with cleaning medicines, and the rest of the treatment is administered, which I have described in the divisions of illnesses, and does not provide all of this: then cauterization in it is according to two methods: either cauterization while burning medicine: or with iron.**
**But when cauterization is made while burning medicine, it is, as you take one tooth of the other, and scrape it, and cut off its extremities from both sides.** **Then cut the place of pain at a time with the phlebotomator on one side, until it becomes in it a place under the skin, where the bone is captured.**
**Then insert it into that place under the skin, until it is concealed:** then bind it with a constrictive string that descends, and let go of it in quantity of fifteen hours then dissolve it, and remove the other, and let it be for two days, or three: then put a cloth over it soaked in butter, until that place makes pus: then care for the pus with ointment until it heals.**
**And if you want to make that place with some medicines that burn, which I have written in the twelfth chapter of The Medications That Burn.**
**But cauterization with iron is according to this method:** The fire cautery, whose form is this.
And it is called the "clavis" (key): because the form of his head is like the form of a key, in which there is something like a knot, and in the middle of it there is a small eminence.
Then put the iron itself on the spot, and hold your hand: and you shall turn the iron slowly with speed: and let the quantity that is burned from the thickness of the skin be like its half. And draw your hand away, so that the artery which is below does not burn, and do not let the blood flow.
Then dip the cloth in salt water and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days: then dip the cloth with butter: afterwards treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you want, cauterize this headache with the second cautery of the blade. And do not cut the artery in this headache, but cut it with your own hand.
The mode of cauterizing in a headaches.
When you cure a headache, with the fact that we have said before in the preceding cure, and which we have said in the division of diseases, and does not be cured: and you shall see from sickness, that it is not enough to him what we have said from the first cautery with medicine, or with cautery with fire, then it is necessary that you should put the fire cautery with a blade, until the white turns after putting the signs on the spot of pain with a line, whose length is half a finger, or nearly so: and set your hand by the edge, and squeeze it until you touch the artery, and reach it up to the mouth.
However, you must, in order to cauterize the jaw bone, which moves when it grinds, so that it does not burn on the side, or nerve which moves it, from which comes a spasm.
And this over the protection and care against the flow of blood from the artery, which has been cut off. For in the dissection there is fear, and above all things he who does not know that which he does, and is not studious nor expert: and he ceases the operation with him at first.
And I come with remembrance of the management of the flow of blood from an artery in a second way, and in its place in this book.
That if you see from illness that this cautery is not sufficient to him, and you see the body enduring cautery in the middle of the head, as we have narrated, take care of the wound, until it is healed.
And if you want to, administer Cautery, which we have said in the chapter of the extraction of the artery with cautery having two scissor-like tools. For cauterization is better and gives more benefit in this way.
Regarding the method of cauterizing for ear pain.
When it happens in the ear pain from cold, and is cured with solutions, and remaining cure as we have said in the division, and does not remove the pain, then the fire cautery: and that is what is called a dot, whose shape is this.
Then the dots with it after its burning in the circumference of the whole ear, like a re-growth: or in the circumference of either one, if at the same time pain is in both. And make it long with cautery from the root of the ear slightly, after you have marked places with wax: and let be the amount of cautery ten points in all the ear, and almost those same.
Then take care of the place, until they are healed.
Regarding the method of cauterizing for torture:
Chapter VII.
The torture which is cured with cautery, is not except from things that happen from the phlegm, according to what we have said in divisions of illnesses.
And he abstained from cauterizing the wound, which occurred because of dehydration and muscle spasm.
When you treat this wound of torture with hervium, and headpurifications, and gargarisms, and your cure does not help, then you should cauterize the sick with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and a second little below its place, and a third at the junction of the two lips.
And put your cautery on the opposite side of the weak part. For softening does not occur unless in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of the cautery is so that it cauterizes itself directly at the extreme tip of the upper ear next to the corner of the head a little bit: and with another one in time: whose length is according to the length of the thumb. And place your hand with the cautery, until a quantity of half the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and its kind is from a scalpel, whose form is as follows: verily it is not thinner than you see: and it is necessary that the scalpel be a little bit longer than that.
Then care for the place with what preceded it: until it heals.
The way of cauterizing in ancient apoplexia.
WHEN a person has an ancient apoplexia, and you treat it with what we have said, and your cure does not help, and the sick person is without fever, then cauterize him with four cauterizations all over his head, and with a middle-head cautery, as we have said, and a cautery in the back of the head according to what preceded it: and the mode of the cautery is according to what preceded it.
Also cauterize with the cautery above the mouth of the stomach: and this is the last.
Then care for it with what preceded it.
Chapter IX. On cauterization in a wound.
It is necessary that, in the first place, the patient be put into the great hypolepidion and the pills which heal the brain be given him.
Then cut off his whole head and place it on his occipital with a wax plaque described in the book of plaques: and sometimes put some on him.
This is the method of cauterization: and do it according to the order which I have said there.
But if he is healed by it, it is good. But if he does not [recover]: then do three cauterizations on the posterior part of his head, which descend from the upper part of the head down to the lower part of the eye: and put between every cauterization a thickness of finger.
Then take care of the cauterizations, with regard to what preceded them.
But if you wish to add anything, and the patient is able to endure it: then do a cauterization in the middle. If you wish to add: then cauterize him over two horns.
Then take care of the patient until he is healed: and let the cauterization be oiled according to the form which has been said before.
The way to cauterize in paralysis and мягкотелость.
Chapter X. On cauterization in paralysis and softness.
It is necessary that you proceed with the head in the process of healing with the herbs, and with regard to what I have said.
Then cut off the head and give it to the nurse: then cauterize him with a middle head cauterization, and a cauterization over each horn of the head, and three over the posterior part of his head, and two over the spine of the neck.
But if the disease of the body is due to softness, and the patient is able to endure it, and the disease is strong: then cauterize him with four cauterizations over the spine of the back, and the last one with a cauterization while burning away much of his skin, and wipe away his hand. Then care for him, until he is healed; and thus cauterize with olive oil.
§ On the mode of cauterization in epilepsy.
§ Do not cauterize epilepsy unless it is in one who has a feverish condition.
Then let the patient's brain ulcers be cured first with honey, and all the other treatment as we have said in the division: when the patient is very ill or tolerates medicinal treatments badly.
If, however, he is a boy who does not tolerate medicinal treatments, then let him have a gargle and brain-cleansing chewing-gums, before many days of improvement in his diet.
Then wash his head; afterwards cauterize him with one cautery in the middle of his head, according to the order given above: and with another cautery at the back of his head, and on all the horns of his head. If, however, he is a strong man and tolerant, then cauterize him with the cauteries I have described in those who are paralyzed, and in the softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck, and the spine at the back: and let the cautery be olive oil according to the mode that has been described.
But if the boy is ill, then place a fine cautery, according to this mode:
§ On the mode of cauterization in melancholy.
§ But do not cauterize when the cause of melancholy is corrupt humors and thick phlegm; then cauterize him with the cauteries I have described in those who are paralyzed.
And if the cause of melancholy is a surplusive closure to melancholy, and the body is damp, then give him a drink that will cleanse his brain, according to what has been said in the division: afterwards wash his head, and then make a wisp of linen into a loop, and twist it round like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the head; and the patient should sit with his back held straight from all sides.
Then present the ointment. And is worthy of being applied with old butter. And heat the ointment over a moderate fire, as much as a finger can tolerate when it is dipped into the ointment. Then wash the patient's head in the center with a circle, and let him sit until he is chilled.
Perform this treatment on the sick person once a week, along with the rest of his treatment, until he recovers.
Or if you wish, you can burn small spots on the patient's skin with a bit of caustic: however, hold it so that the burn is not too deep.
This kind of burning moisten the brain with moisture.
Then place a cloth soaked in butter, or chicken fat, on top of the ointment.
This way, the patient' can look up at the sky while being cauterized.
Chapter XIII.
When you notice the signs that I mentioned in the division, then begin to drink from the cup and wash the sick person's head, so that it may be cleansed.
And keep the patient away from all moisture, and let him sit in a bath, on a fast for several days.
Then tell him to comb his hair, and cauterize the patient' head in the center of his hair. Then cauterize the patient' two temples with two burns, if the water is going into both eyes at the same time: or from one side, if the water is entering just one eye: and cut off all the hair with the cautery: and let the cautery be long in width between the temples: and stop any bleeding of blood.
If you see anything of that, then cut it off right away with whatever medicine is possible: and I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and their cutting, and taking care to stop any bleeding.
And when cauterization is done on the skin, between two bones, with two fire-brands at the end.
De modo cauterizandi in lacrymibus antiquis.
When the lachrymae (tears) of the eyes are ancient and frequent and are upon the skin, and the arteries which are manifest upon the outside of the head: it is known that this is from cold and phlegmatic humors; then cauterize with fire the same way as I have spoken at the beginning of the water descending, with fire in the middle of the head, and two fire-brands upon two temples, and two fire-brands in the skin between two bones. And if there is a need for an addition, then cauterize it on both sides of the eye, at the end of the brow with a small fire-brand.
De modo cauterizandi in foeto nasae.
When you treat this, as we have said in the division, and the medicine is not effective: then approach it, and give three nights of milk with honey: afterwards shave its head, and cauterize it with middle cautery, with olive oil cautery. Then cauterize it with two cauteries, one above each eyebrow, a little below the hair.
And guard against the artery, lest you strike it.
And this is the form of cautery with claws.
The mode of cauterizing in softening the eyelids.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by sickness or moisture: then cauterize the eyelid with one cautery, with this lunar cautery.
And if there is a lump, cauterize it above the two eyelids with two cauteries throughout: and let them be extended from both sides: and let the length of each cautery be according to the length of the lid: and do not put your hand on the cautery at all, except for the third eyelid.
The mode of cauterizing the eyelid when the hair are directed inward and stinging the eye.
The cautery is in two ways, either with fire: or the cautery with burning medicine.
In the cautery, however, with fire, direct the patient away from it, so that he does not shed his hair, if he is of those who clean them, until they have grown out and are even. But if it stings him near its origin: then squeeze the eyes with vitriolosy, so that they do not move, until they have healed.
When they have healed and are even, then put the head in your lap: and then mark the eyelids of his eyes with encaustic, a mark that is according to the shape of the leaf of myrrh: and let the beginning of the mark be near the hair.
Then put on the wound, either soaked in albumen or in the mucus of the ox's eye.
Then put on fire the cautery whose form is this one.
Then cauterize on the figure, which you have marked slowly on many wounds, until it is burned through the skin's surface, which appears like a laurel leaf, all by itself.
And the sign of your work's health is: if you squeeze the eyelids of the eye and shave the hair near the eye's punctum.
So bless your hand then: and release him after three days.
Then put on the wound, with butter, until the scar is removed. Then care for the wound with ointment, until it heals.
That if any hair should fall out after an hour, and the eyelid becomes soft: then once again apply the cautery to that place, as you did at first.
But if the hair is on the lower side: then cauterize that, until it moves to its own place: and make sure that the eye' hair does not sting.
Is as you teach the sick person, that he should shave off his hair, until it is prolonged and even. Make in the shape of a laurel leaf.
Then take from the well-known soap, and from the non-imbibed clay of either weight an ounce or almost like that: then dry it all at once with good friction, and make it with haste, so that it does not freeze. Then from the same from, stretch it on the chartum which you made like a laurel leaf, and put that on one or both eyelids. And place under the eye the wound soaked in albumen, and have the nurse in your lap.
And place your finger on the medicine, and press the wound slightly. And thou shalt move him when he feels weak from the medicine's bite: for his bite is like fire.
While yet it continued to seek out what he himself had found, then dismiss the medicine and touch him with your own finger. When the bite has quieted, then dismiss the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And then consider if you see the eyelid raised up, like it is raised up during burning or cutting: this is good. And if not, then repeat over the same place from the medicine, where it does not impress and does not harm, until your operation has made it well, and it closes up.
Then put on top of him Cothum with butter, until the skin that is rough to the touch is eradicated. Then care for him with diaphanous ointment, or some other one, until he is healed.
And it is necessary for you, when you are doing the operation, to keep the last watch, lest anything of the medicine falls into his eye.
That if the eyelid becomes soft after a few days, and fights with some hair in the eye, then repeat the medicine over that place which has become soft from the eyelid of itself, as you did before. Then care for him, until he is healed.
And this is the form of the ointment of myrtle.
And you should know that human eyes differ in size and shape. Therefore, according to this, your consideration: And may it not be hidden from the straightness of his sight, which is the study concerning this art.
Regarding the mode of cauterizing in the lacrimal fistula.
When you are treating the fistula, in accordance with what we have said regarding the diversions of illnesses, and your treatment does not bring about healing: then you should cauterize it according to this manner.
Prescribe to the sick person that he puts his head in your lap, and holds it between his hands so that it does not move or shake with his head.
Then put on cotton wadding, or on slimy mucilage over his eye; then the fire cautery, whose shape is this.
Then set the cauldron, like the shape of a feather quill from one end, so that it becomes cauterium; and if you set the cauldron to reach to the other end, and if you set the cauldron to rise up thus.
However, this cauldron is better for your work.
Then put on a pipe, if it is open, and remove the pus from it, and dry it up; and if it is not open, then open it, and remove the pus.
Then put on the cautery then over it, which becomes brightly burning.
And hold with it your hand somewhat near the cautery from the eye, towards the nose part, so that your hand does not err, or shake: and put on the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrode it.
If then you cut off in the beginning of your cautery to the mouth, it will be good. And if not: then repeat the cautery once, or twice, if you can bear it: and dismiss it after three days.
Then put on cotton with butter, and care for the wound with a drying ointment, until it heals.
That if they have passed forty days and are not healed: then put on the wound an acute corrosive medicine, until you see the mouth: and wash it after what has come out in its own chapter.
And there is another way of cautery with a pipe, which some first said. Intend to the place of the pipe, and find it: then put in it a small hole, that is, a fine funnel, whose shape is this. And pour in it a quantity of liquid lead, and hold your hand with the funnel firmly, so that the patient does not move at all, so that he does not run away, or let the liquid lead get to his eye.
It is necessary to put on the eye, an infusion of cotton impregnated with albumin, or water.
Plumbum because it burns the site of the fistula and heals it with a miracle cure.
If the fistula is healed, along with what we said from the Cauterium and Remedy, then it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to open the nasal cavity, and bring the fistula back to the course of the nose, according to which it will go to its own place.
The mode of cauterizing in wounds of the lips.
Often a crack occurs in the lip, which is called a pilus, and especially in the lips of boys.
When you are dealing with these cracks, along with what we said in the division of diseases, and if the cure is not effective, then a small fire of the cautery knife, according to this form:
And let it be pressed down with the sharpness of the knife.
Then place the ignited piece quickly on the cracks, until the cautery reaches the depth of the cracks.
Then cure it with oil, until it heals.
The mode of cauterizing in wounds of the mouth.
When it occurs in the root of the gums, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth: then pus is produced, and it breaks: then it dries up, and pus runs, and a fistula forms: then deal with it, and there is no effect from the cure, then you must set fire to the cautery according to the quantity, which enters the fistula. Then introduce the ignited piece into the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand, until the iron is ignited to its depth, and the last part: do it once, or twice.
Then cure it after that, up to the point where we have said that it will be healed.
If then a wound has been incised and healed, it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to remove the place, and take away the corrupted bone according to what comes to its head.
De the mode of cauterizing in gingival diseases, and molified teeth.
When the gum is softened by moisture, and the teeth move, and does not improve with medicine, then place the head of the patient in your lap.
Then, as the shape of the wand comes after these things, so that you put on a cane over the tooth: and insert the lit cautery quickly into it: and hold your hand a little, until the sick one feels the heat of fire already reaching to the root of the tooth.
And dry your hand: then repeat the cautery several times, according to what you want.
Then the sick one should fill his mouth with salt water, and hold it for an hour: and spit it out.
For the tooth is made firm by movement, and the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupt moisture is dried up.
The mode of cauterizing in dental pain:
When the pain of the tooth is because of coldness, or the cold itself is painful, or there is a sore feeling, and the medicine does not improve with drugs: then the cautery must be made in two ways: or with butter-cauterization: or with fire-cauterization.
But the cautery of this is made by butter, as you take butter and heat it up, and pour it into an ear-trumpet or a pair of shears. Then take a wand, and rub it on the tip of the tongue. Then submerge the patient's tongue in heated butter: and place the patient's tongue quickly on a painful tooth, and hold it until it is chilled: then repeat the operation several times, until the strength of fire reaches to the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, dip the thread, or wrap it in cold butter, and place it on the tooth that hurts; and place hot iron upon it, until the fire penetrates deeply into the decayed part of the tooth.
But cauterization with fire, so that you direct it towards the tube of air, or the tube of iron. And let there be some moisture in his body, so that the sharpness of the fire does not penetrate to the back of the throat.
Then take the fire-cauterizer, whose shape you have prepared; and place it on the tooth; and hold your hand, until the cauterizer cools down.
Do this sometimes, for the pain will be relieved, or do it on the same day, or on another day.
And it should be impressed into his bad breath so that it fills the sick mouth with good broth, and he should hold it for an hour: then spit it out.
This is the form of the cauterizer.
Cauterize with either hand as well as you can: and this is the form of the tube.
The mode of cauterizing in strofuli.
When the strofuli are deep-seated in phlegm, and from cold humidities, and do not submit to digestion by medicines, and wish to digest them quickly: then take a narrow-tipped fire-cauterizer, whose shape is as follows.
It has two open ends, so that smoke can emerge from the fire-cauterizer's one end; and place the hot iron on the apothecary once, and second time, if you can endure it, until the fire penetrates deeply into the apothecary.
Which if the apothecary is small: then place the cauterizer according to the quantity of the apothecary.
Then let it be left for three days; and place cold butter on the tooth, so that the fire that burned away is removed.
Then care for the tooth with dental ointment, until it heals up in the form of a tube.
To cauterize a sore throat and a constricted windpipe.
When there is an excess of moisture on the windpipe, and especially when it is accompanied by a cold complexion, then the sick person should be evacuated first with water-based medicines.
Then cauterize the throat itself with a warm substance in the region of the tonsils in the lower part: and be careful, so that you do not burn with the cautery into the throat or skin, unless there is something on it.
Then cauterize the throat itself with another cautery at the joint of the neck at the last of the spine of it last: and let the cautery be a clove, according to what preceded.
Then take care of the person with what preceded, until he is healed.
The way to cauterize a disease of the lungs and cough.
When the cough and lung disease are caused by cold humidities, and the sick person does not have a fever or phthisis, and an old disease: then cauterize the throat with two cauters above the jawbone in depressed places, gently and smoothly. And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts: and let the cautery be a tube, according to what preceded.
And if you want your cauterization to be effective by puncturing with the cautery, which is called a Puntum, of the same shape as that which preceded in the puncturing of the pain of the ears: and let there be punctures from twenty to almost thirty.
Then take care of the person with what preceded, until he is healed.
And now let there be a cautery with three branches: according to this form. Why the allaying of the pain when you make with the cauterization a single one of three cauteries?
Caput XXVII.
When the head of the assistant is dislocated, the cause of moistness and not being restored to its original place at the time of its dislocation until it gets used to the return, then dislocates with a little movement, which we have already proven that it happens, then it should be reduced the dislocation in first. Then he is laid back on his back or on his side. Then with the index of your left hand, rub the skin inside the titillus at the top and if the dislocation is inside.
Then take two fire-whips. Whose shape is this:
Then burn the skin until it penetrates to another side, and the figure of the cauterization is obtained with four cauteries.
And when it is cauterized with a fire-whip having three whips, why does the figure of the cauterization then become six smaller cauteries; and the whips are according to the subtlety of the touch.
And this is the shape of the whip-maker having three whips.
And when one is added to this mode, why are there eight cauteries; and they are according to the number eight.
Then place on the cauterization crushed pores with salt. Then make adhere to the calmness of the member so that it does not move at all, until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is above and rarely happens, then burn it with a whip on the shoulder or with many points of cautery.
For the joint is secured, and the moisture is removed; and the patient is healed.
The method of cauterizing the Stomach:
When cold and much moisture occur in the stomach, until they extract it from its skin, and multiply the catarrhs to it, and the frequent methods of healing, and does not confer: then the sick person should be laid back on his back, and he should extend his legs, and his hands. Then he cauterized with three cauterizations, a cauterization under the cochleary chest to the size of a finger with a cauterization of the claw, and two cauterizations lower than the two sides of a cauterization of one, until the figure of the cauterizations becomes triangular. And lengthen between each other so that they do not join together when it comes to pus.
And let the depth of cauterization be the quantity of two thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And let the figure of the cauterization be second to this form without addition: and if you want to cauterize with a large cauterization in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and let the cauterization, which is made in this way, be one according to the form of the circle according to this form.
And let the stomach be cauterized by piercing it with that which shivers at this cauterization: and it is, in order to mark the point on the stomach according to the quantity, which you want to use with caustics: then cauterize that same point with a cauterization: then care for that same point with the cure, which preceded, until it heals.
The way of cauterizing with fire.
When it happens in the liver that there is pain from cold and humidity, or from coarse winds, until it emerges from its natural exit with excess fluid, and the sick person is cared for with what we have said, and does not benefit in him: then it should lie down on a wadded pillow on his back, and sign with caustics three cauterizations according to this form, and this quantity of the same caustic on thespar below the hypochondrius where it reaches the bed of man: and let there be space that is between each cauterization according to the thickness of a finger: and let the cauterization be second to the length of the body straight: and do not compress your hand with the caustic much.
And let the quantity that is burned be from the thickness of the skin, half of that not added: and let the sick person stand on his feet.
But if he is not standing, then let him lie down, for he has already stretched out his legs and raised his arms.
This is the method of the surgery.
And you too can perform this surgery with a knife as your cautery tool, when skill and caution are needed in the craft.
And be careful not to move forward too quickly in the cauterization process, and remember that the skin is fragile; you don’t want it to get damaged because if it does, the whole body will suffer from the damage and the internal organs will be affected: for the skin there is a risk of damage.
The method for cauterizing the liver.
When a liver abscess occurs and you need to know whether it is located in the liver itself or in its capsule, then if it is in the liver, you will see a painful ache, and there is little pain: but if it is in the capsule of the liver, then you will feel sharp pain; and you will see that the treatment of this hurts doctors.
It is necessary so that the sick person rests on their bed. Then, the shape of the location of the abscess with the caustic: then, the fire of the cautery so that it is absorbed by radiation. And this is its form. And cauterize it with one cautery tool until the skin is completely burned and reaches the nipple, then, take care of the cure for the healed abscesses, until they are healed.
And it is not necessary for this cautery tool to appear in a certain way unless the study of medicine is prolonged: and because of this experience, sometimes some diseases can be treated with great care; then, let one dare to perform such an operation.
But, I prefer to send it away.
The method for cauterizing in pleurisy.
The ancient ones said that the cautery of pleurisy was made with roots of aristaochia, according to this method. And take from the dry stems of aristaochia a long root, which is found in it, and make it be like the thickness of the finger. Then immerse it in oil and set fire to it. Then cauterize with one cauldron between the continuation of the fork with the neck, and two small caldrons little declined on the part that is under the beard.
And two caldrons also in it, that is between the fifth and sixth ribs little declined on the back: and a cauldron other in the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach. And three caldrons behind: one in it that is between two spatulas: and two caldrons on the sides of the chest, lower cauldron that is between two spatulas.
And do not need to squeeze your hand with the cauldron, but let it be in the open skin smelling.
And some ancient people said that who use a cauldron of iron similar in radius: and light it up, and put it inside him that is between the ribs until it reaches with it to the apostema, and comes out pus: as we have said in the apostema of the liver.
But in this piercing with the cauldron is out of fear that either dies weak immediately, or happens in place fistula, which there is no cure.
The mode of cauterizing The Spleen Head IIII.
When you cure the disease of the spleen, with him that we have said in dividing diseases, and your cure does not bring forth, then cauterize it is in it according to three modes, which are all straight.
Of which one is, that you make three caldrons or four linear according to the length of the spleen according to the figure of cauterization of the liver, whose preceded the figure.
And let there be between every cauldron quantity of thickness of the finger, or less.
And let there be a certain mode of the cautery, which we have spoken of in the surgery of the liver equally.
And do not compress your hand with the cautery; and let the sick one lie on his back.
And another mode of cauterization is: that the cautery has two ends, which we have spoken of in the chapter on shoulder dislocations: and wipe the skin, which is straight in front of the spine, where it reaches the bed on the left side; and let your elevation be as you wipe the skin according to the width of the body, so that the cauteries fall according to the length of the body.
Then introduce the two hot ends until you penetrate them into the skin from the other part; then remove the cautery: so there are four cauteries.
And if you want to cauterize with a cautery that has three ends.
Then care for the cautery after you have removed it, as it emits pus over many days: because it is more effective if the remaining parts that have preceded in the cure are removed.
The mode of cauterization in Hydropsis.
The cautery does not fall in Hydropsis, unless it is properly raised.
When you treat Hydropsis with the modes of cure which we have spoken of in the division, and there is no effect from the cure, then you should cauterize four times around the navel, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back between the vertebrae, and one directly on the chest, and one directly on the stomach: and let the depth of the cautery be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then remove the cautery open, so that it emits pus over a long period of time.
And do not wet the sick one after cauterization with that, for two intentions need to be added to it; and will hasten to recover by the help of God.
Indeed the shape of the cautery with which the stomach is cauterized, should be closed; because the shape preceded it; and with respect to its shape, when the back is cauterized, it should be oliwary.
Regarding the method of cauterizing the feet and legs:
When they are laid in the hypospasm and become filled with yellow water: you should cauterize over the back of the foot in the nocrati, which is between the auricular and the ring: and wash your hand with the cautery, and do not twist it: then wash your hand: and do not repeat it at all.
For the yellow water, the shape of the cautery should be as follows.
Then make two cauteries on both legs, and the shape of the blade of the cautery should be at the end of a knife-edge cautery: and the shape of the cautery according to the length of the leg, one below the knee, and the other lower than that, about in the middle of the leg: and two cauteries on all the loins: and do not close the cauterium for a long time: so that it returns from it some water: then care for it with the rest as we have said.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in the solution of the abdomen:
Chapter XXV. regarding the head.
When the solution of the abdomen is weakened by cold and moist things that are retained in the stomach and intestines: and treat it with a method of cauterization, and does not heal: and you will see that it tolerates the cautery with great vigor, then cauterize it with a large cautery over its stomach, according to the order preceding in cauterizing the stomach with a circular cautery and four small cauteries around the navel, with a thin knife-edge cautery: and a large cautery on the alcatine above the loins, or two large cauteries.
And if you see abundant moistness and the disorder tolerates it, then cauterize it over the pelvis and over all the loins: and perhaps you should add two small cauteries next to the large one on the stomach.
For the cure is perfect in those for whom it is not a mistake.
As for the method of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Head 36.
When the hemorrhoids are ancient and many, or one, and they are of gross humors, cold, or corrupt moistures, and they are treated with that which we have said in the division, and the cure does not occur: then cauterize three cauterizations on the lower spine of the back under an amulet a little triangular, and cauterization under the navel almost two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is cold and his food is not digested, and you see that his face is pale, then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cautery, according to what preceded: and cauterize on his epigastrium, and another on his spleen, with another on his clavicle: and leave the cautery open for some time: then cure him himself, until he is healed.
Head 37.
When you cut off the atheloma, then light the cautery that is absorbed with a rayon. Then introduce the lit cautery into the atheloma that has been cut off: and last, with your hand, until the cautery reaches the orifice of the gut, from which blood flows: do it once, or twice.
If then there are many athelomas, then cauterize each one with a cautery, according to what we have said. Then cure them, with the unguent that is given to them, until they are healed.
And if you cauterize him with a large cautery on the alcatine, it is more final in the treatment.
As for the method of cauterizing the fistula in the anus.
Head 38.
When the sick person does not submit to the section and the work we have described in its place, and trembles because of it, perhaps he will be healed with a cautery.
So then when a fistula occurs in someone and it is old, pus runs out of it, and corrupted moisture. Dignified indeed is it that one should test it with subtle attempts when a wound has occurred. Then later know the depth of its extent when you attempt it.
Then later use a cautery fire that is like a ray. Then later insert yourself with the ignited thing into the fistula and the quantity in which it enters, seal it up.
And repeatedly pass the cautery over it until all those corrupt bodies are burned up, once, or twice, or three times, according to the extent of your need.
And guard yourself against any dry heat, if there is one there, or great blisters: or if the fistula opens into a part of the body of the uterus, or of the intestines, then guard yourself from all such places.
And do not make this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place: and think, for it does not pierce.
Then take care of the place until it heals.
But if the place is sealed and the materials are cut away from it, and it remains so for a long time: then you shall know that it has now been completely healed.
And if the materials are not cut away from it, then you shall know that it is piercing, or there is a corrupt opening within it, or almost like those things: of whose remembrance the place itself will be a sign.
The way to cauterize Renes.
When pain occurs in the kidneys from cold, or from a thick wind, and it keeps because of that urinary fever, then one should cauterize himself above the loins on both sides over the kidneys, cauterizing each kidney with a cautery clauius, whose predecessor was remembrance.
And perhaps we have cauterized it again in that same place. Why are there three stripes? So then shall be the last ones in the binding.
The way to cauterize the vesica.
When there is weakness and softening in the bladder from cold and moisture, until it does not retain urine, then cauterize the body below the suprapubian skin on the bladder where the hairs grow between them, and the cautery on the right side below the pubic bone, and another on the left side; and let the length of the cautery on the back be according to the quantity of the knuckle of the thumb: and cauterize it with two cauteries if you can bear it. And let the nail clipper be used for cauterizing.
The way to cauterize the matri
When there is cold and moisture in the uterus, and it is prevented from becoming impregnated, and her menstruation corrupts and her inducement is delayed, and pain occurs when she is with her husband, then three cauteries should be applied around the umbilical region as we have said for the cauterizing of the bladder, and one cautery below the back on the alcach, or two; and let the nail clipper be used for cauterizing.
The way to cauterize the anus in a dislocation.
When the mucous membrane of the anus flows out with moisture and causes the exit of waste from its place: and the sign of this is that the flesh prolongs over one side when they are facing each other; and the location of the dislocation is found to be empty.
Then let the sick person be cauterized over the anus with a similar circle of the same cautery: after you have found the signs with the caustice around the anus, as it recedes: and so that it falls on the middle of the circle.
If this cautery is not present with you, then cauterize it with three cauteries, with a large olive oil cautery; and let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the skin of all.
Afterwards, care for yourself, until you are healed.
The way to cauterize the sciatic nerve.
When pain occurs in the ankle joint, and there is a cause for this pain, cold and moisture: care for the sick with it, since we have said in the division, and there is no cure, and it becomes stale: then it is necessary that you separate the sick from thick humors with foul pills, or with artificial pills, and others. Then cauterize it.
And the method of cauterization in her is according to two ways: either with cauterizing medicines applied, or with fire.
The cauterizing with fire, is according to many ways.
Of which one is that, as it cauterizes on top of the ankle joint, three triangular cauldron-shaped. And make them a good depth, or bad. And there should be a space which is between each cauterization the quantity of the size of a thumb: and let the cauldron be oiled.
When, however, it is necessary to make the cauterizing in the middle on top of the ankle joint itself. Why are there four cauldron-shaped things?
And if you want to cauterize with a circle, whose predecessor is the form of the dislocation of the ankle joint, one: so that it includes the whole ankle.
And burn the thickness of the skin of all.
This is the method of cauterization in the sciatic nerve, when the pain adheres to the ankle itself, and does not extend up to the hip and the leg.
But if it extends up to the hip and the leg, then cauterize it on both sides of the hip, on the spot where the pain is felt, and cauterize it with your knife a little bit on the shin bone, four fingers wide: and let the cauldron be sharp.
And make the depth of the cauterizing according to the depth of the thickness of the skin.
If the sick one complains that the pain extends to near the toes, then cauterize him at that place with a point, three, four, or more, if he needs it.
And if he complains of pain under the knee towards the thigh, then cauterize him at that place with a single knife.
And so that you may not finish with the cauterization and burn the flesh, or a large artery, and attract trouble for yourself through it on the sick person's body, or contraction.
And I have already seen one and the other who cauterized above the knee and finished with the cauterization, and the leg swelled until it reached the foot, and it was completely corroded, and then the water of the wound resolved, and death followed afterwards.
That if the pain is in two parts at the same time, cauterize each one according to this method.
And some wise men have said in the cauterization of the anus, whose cauterization is this mode. Make a similar model from iron, whose diameter is half the size of the palm: and place it at the opening according to the thickness of the nail, or less than that: and within that third piece, another third.
And place between each finger according to the quantity of the nail's knot: and let there be openings on both sides: and make their height almost like a knot, or two knots: and let them make the handle from iron bent unevenly in the fingers.
Then let it be burned in fire until it turns red, and let sparks be thrown off: then let it be placed on a tray of mud at the sick person' side lying on the sound side. Then cauterize him with three round cauterizations in a line.
Then let go of him after three days. Then bind it with butter: and let the wound remain open for many days. Then treat yourself with ointment until healed.
Albucasius says, with this kind of burn, we use a little because of the appearance of fear: and therefore, because there are few who wait on him.
However, it is good for him who suffers from this, and he finds his place with him.
But the cautery when you are burning, so that you make two strong loops, in which the rod of his door descends from brass or iron, its length being on the sides: their two knots, or almost like himself.
And there is a space between the two, which is the length of the finger's thickness, and are open below and above: and that they contain themselves in this form.
Then put it on a plate of salt, the sick man lying on his healthy side. And compress your hand very much over the salt plate. Then pour between the two circles of warm water, which is a little heated with fire, and hold it for an hour: and let the sick person feel a tingling on him, and his own burning, for he finds the tingling like fire, until he sleeps.
Then wipe your hand with an instrument and wash it completely with sweet water: then let go of it for three days.
And put on the butter until the blackness of burning is removed: and let go of it for a few days, and wash out the pus. It is finally in healing.
Then treat that with ointment until healed.
If the pain extends to the hip or wound: let him have a standing position in it that holds water, according to what you did in the wide one.
And this is the way of warm water: and I have already written about it in the book on the correction of medicines. Take the alkali and raw calcin, both of which are on one side: pour them both out, and put them in a new bowl, whose lower part is pierced with a small hole, according to the quantity that is added into it, radii: and put under the bottom of the bowl another one poured. And throw over the alkali and raw calcin with sweet water, so that they are submerged by one finger: then you squeeze them with your hand good compression: and let go of the bowl, until the sharp water comes out at the lower part of the bowl uitreatam.
Then join together the whole water and throw it on another stone: and scratch, until it heals over again.
For she will then be very strong and keen, which is used in many surgical procedures and also in the cauterization of the remaining limbs. For it will perform the operation of fire itself.
And from the medicines, with which they cauterize the broad, also like theriac, and honey of acorns, and lime mixed with soap, so that both are mixed together.
And Galen himself related, telling of a man from ancient times who was cured of pain in the ankle and sciatic nerve: and he magnified that it was very effective. And he said, "I do not know of another cure," and that he was cured from one joint, until he told, "Perhaps I entered the warm bath, and came out already healed.
And it is taken from the joint of the thumb: and if it is not found in the thumb, it is taken so, freshly cut: and placed on the ankle, where the pain is, or in the hip, or tied up and left for a time, three hours, or as much as the sick person feels a sedative pain. Then introduce it into the bath.
When therefore his body is wet with the water, introduce him into the saucer. For the pain has subsided, and he is healed.
And you should know that it is not necessary to use any kind of treatment with these medicines, unless after the body has been evacuated.
And Dioscorides who said, that when straw is mixed with him, when it is used to cauterize the sciatic nerve, it serves as a cautery: and becomes a cautery in this way. Take wool, and dip it in old oil, and place it on the deep place, which is between the thumb of the foot, and between the toe, and it is closer to the fire.
Then take goat dung mixed with earth and heat it in fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then put the mixture on wool and leave it there until it is extinguished. Then repeat this. So do not cease to perform this, until the sense has returned in the middle by way of length, and let the pain rest.
This mode of treatment is called vaccineum.
§ On the treatment for back pain.
When pain occurs in the back for various reasons, or from accident, or from impact, or from excessive evacuation, and similar cases, with cold and moist material: and cauterization does not fall unless it is done alone in this manner only, which is done with an infusion of cold material.
It is necessary therefore after the evacuation to apply nurses with bitter pills and similar things so as to make them stand on the back where there is pain, three lines according to its width, after the marks have been made by the causticum on each line: five cauterizations, or more according to the quantity which comes from the patient's tolerance of the nurse's virtue: and let cauterization be made with a cauterization needle.
And if you wish, cauterize with three cauterizations, or four, with the middle closed, in this form.
§ On the method of cauterizing in gibbus.
This malady often occurs in small children.
And the sign of the onset of this disease in children is that which occurs on him a stricture in swallowing during elevation and movement: and an inflammation in the last spondylum of the back and its nods, which has already begun to emerge above the other spondyles.
So when you see this and wish to do something about it, then cauterize the affected area with a needle which is a circle in the following form.
And he took cautery over all parts of the spine equally: and if you cauterize the spine with cautery two or three lines: and let the points be close to each other.
Then care for the place, until it heals with it what I have said.
And do not administer cautery to the hunchback, which is made in a spasm of nerve.
The mode of cauterizing in podagra and painful joints.
When the pains of joint-aches are caused by cold dampnesses which spread to any part of the body, and when they occur in the feet, it is usual for doctors to call this podagra.
How then should podagra be cured which is caused by cold, with methods of cure, and if the pains are not removed, then let them be removed by cautery.
And it is as if he were cauterized after evacuation around the joint of the feet with many cautery: and let the cautery be Oülar.
And if you can bear it that the points are on the face of the foot, then do so with a single-point cautery. That if the pains ascend to the knees, or other joints, and often occur, then cauterize himself over all the knee with three or four cautery's, each from a different side, with this same cautery of Cloyl.
But if you need many of these cauteries, then cauterize himself. And do not submerge your hand with the cautery, but rather let there be a thin layer of skin around it.
But if the pains ascend to the knees and back: then administer what I have said about cautery in my book.
That if the pains are only in the hands, then points around a fire, as two lines rotate.
But if any of the pains remain in the fingers, then do so, each point over all the knuckle: and on the palm of the hand.
If, however, the pains rise after a few days to the shoulders, or to the arms, then cauterize both sides.
And do not let the sick person's disease improve with good regimen, or with the reception of medicines. For if the regimen is made good, and the phlegm is expelled, it will be healed by the help of God with this cauterization.
§ On the mode of cauterizing in ruptures.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, and the intestine goes down, or the spermatic cord comes close to the testicle, then you should instruct the sick person to discontinue his food in his own day. And let him use laxatives, so that the manure may come out of his bowels.
Then make him sit between your hands on his back; and instruct him to hold his breath until he stands up, or appears in the groin, or moves the intestine.
Then reduce him with your fingers, and mark with the caustic under the rupture on the top of the spine, with a mark whose extreme is equal to half of a circle towards the upper part of the body.
Then take the caustic fire, which has this form, until it becomes white, and let it throw off sparks. Then reduce the intestine, or the spermatic cord to its concavity. Then let the minister put his hand on the place so that he does not expel the intestine; and you have already opened between the legs of the sick person, and placed under him a pillow, and one turning with his hands, and another holding up his chest, who holds his hands.
Then place the caustic fire on the spot, with your hand holding the caustic standing straight. And hold him, until you succeed with him to the teeth: or repeat with him another motion, if you do not succeed with him in the first attempt up to the teeth.
And carefully observe at the exit of the intestine in the hour of your cauterization, so that you do not burn yourself, and let it go through that into the sick person or death, or great malignity.
And know that when you do not achieve with the cautery the opening of the mouth, your operation does not bring about.
It is necessary that the cautery of infants be subtle, according to their measure.
Then take care with the other ointments, until it has healed.
And let the sick person lie down on his back for forty days, until the wound has closed.
And it is necessary that you put food for him in the length of his curing time, which softens his stomach: so that he does not excrete from strangeness and stool.
Then when he wants to get up after forty days, then administer a loose ligament that has been made differently, and let him hold for another forty days.
And let him rest from work, and be filled with food and drink, and with loud sounds.
For when he uses this regimen, so does he heal with whole health.
I will speak about the cure of ruptures with incisions in their own chapter.
When, however, ruptures happen in the rest of the body, and are incipient, and do not add to each other, then cauterize the rupture of his own with a round cautery according to its quantity: and let it be as it heals from then on like the third one. Then take care of him, with what I have said: and do not add anything.
And certain ones of the first said: that ruptures be cauterized with a triangular cautery, according to this form.
Afterwards sigil it with encaustic, and let a line be put which is across the width in the back of the rupture, and another line down below. And place your hand in the middle with a clauius cautery.
But the first cautery is easier and better.
Về cách thức khử trùng để chữa bệnh do đau đớn hoặc va chạm gây ra.
Chapter XLVIII.
When it happens in some member from a fall or a blow: and that pain persists for a long time, and does not bring about an operation with medicines: then it is necessary that it be cauterized with a Puncta cautery.
And let there be cautery for all members according to the size of it and its goodness and weakness and its strength and the place of twist and pain from it.
But if he is healed by the first cauterization, it is good. If not: then repeat the cauterization over him again.
Because of the custom of these pains, so that they change from one member to that which approaches it. Why should those who follow be taken away with cauterization until the sick person is healed.
Regarding the method of cauterizing for lepra.
But lepers should be cauterized by a strong fire. And especially the species of lepra which is made because of putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy: so that when you cauterize it, consider the wound carefully.
If, however, lepra is resistant and you have treated it with the care we mentioned in the division and it has not fallen off, but the corruption encompasses all its skin: then cauterize it over its head with five cauterizations: one at the top of the head at its middle, and a second lower than that towards its forehead at the end of its hair, and two behind each ear, and one behind the earlobe.
And lastly with your hand a little bit of fire, so that it impresses on the throat a deep impression, and the membranes are torn from it: so that the exhaling of thick vapors from it is relieved, and cauterize with fire also over its spleen, following the above.
But if lepra has spread over the sick person and appears clearly: then it is necessary to cauterize with these cauterizations which we mentioned in the head, and a cauterization on the tip of the nose, and two cauterizations on each cheek, and two cauterizations on either side of the neck, and six on the back, and one large on the achilles tendons at the heels and one above him, in the middle. And two on the ankles: that is, on each ankle bone one, and two on the shoulders, and two on the elbows, and two on the breasts of his chest: and cauterize over all his joints with fire, starting from the fingers of his hands and feet, and cauterize over all his toes, and over all the bones of his feet, and over the heart of his chest, and over the ribs of his back: and cauterize also over all his joints with fire.
And because you have nerves that are above the heel, so that they do not burn them.
And when the cautery is applied to the skin with a caustic substance, and with another above the chest bone, and with another above the stomach, and with another above the liver.
And know that the more you add the caustic substance, the more it is a remedy, and the more it helps.
And know that a sick person does not feel pain in the cautery, as he feels it when he is healthy: therefore, because his body is already stunned.
And let the caustic substances be of the right size, and with a sharp edge that cuts the flesh, according to the members and joints: and after this, as regards the order of the tools.
Then take care to add the caustic substances made from herbs and honey, and with other cures, until he is healed.
The way of applying the cautery to stupor.
When one of the limbs is stupor and is treated with medicines, oils, plasters, and is not healed, then apply the caustic substances to that limb which has stupor, according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let your caustic substance remain in the thickness of the skin a little. Then take care to cure that with ointment, until it is healed.
And when the caustic is applied to a certain stupor which occurs in the hand or foot at the exit of nerves that move that limb: and the stupor disappears.
But this does not happen to him, except for one who is wise in anatomy of the limbs, and knows the exit of nerves that move the body.
Head.
When Albucasis is applied to a deep place and does not bring any remedy to it: then apply the caustic substance on top of it a little, according to the thickness of the skin, until the skin is blistered and its color changes.
Then the care of him with wheat flour, and lentil with olive oil, and leaves of arnoglossa, and pigeon's blood, and hyland's blood: from each one there is a part; all these are mixed together, and laid on a cloth, and adhere to the place until healed.
The way of cauterizing in cancer.
When cancer is beginning, and you stop the flow of blood to it: then cauterize it with a circular cauterizer around its circumference, as though it were turning.
But the wise have said that it should be cauterized with a last cautery in the middle.
But I do not trust that one: for I am afraid that it will ulcerate: and I have seen it sometimes.
And it is better to cauterize it around its circumference with a circle, as we have said: or with many cautery's.
The way of cauterizing in adebelta (leprosy).
When someone has an ablation, and it is delayed in healing, or because of its excess, or because of old age, when it is decrepitous with little blood, or because of time, and the wound rushes into healing, then cauterize around it with small cautery puncturing. Then, let go of her. For she herself will hurry with the healing process.
But if you pierce her with a cautery, then take this kind of fire cautery, which has this shape.
And place it in the middle of the ablation, until it penetrates the skin: and let the cautery be from it that follows, so that the course of the pure may be relieved.
Then take care of it until it heals.
The way to cauterize with fire in a corruption.
Chapter LIIII.
A corruption is not unless it corrupts a member that walks, and corrupts the member itself: like fire that cooks dry wood.
But if you see a corruption in a place that accepts the cautery with fire, then take many cautery fires, small tools and big, according to what suits him in the place where the corruption is.
Then cauterize the member from all parts until you eradicate the entire corruption, and nothing remains of it inside.
Then let go of the member for three days, and put sulfur powder with oil on the cauterized places, until all the eschar are eradicated, and all corruption.
Then take care of the member with ointments that generate flesh.
But if you see that after three days the flesh is born healthy, and there is no corruption, it is good.
But if not: then repeat the cautery on what remains of the corrupted places.
And the corruption is healed sometimes with sharp medicine. For she herself rises up in place of the cauterized.
But the cautery with fire is faster to work: and I have already said that the cauterizing is done with sharp medicine in division: so take it there when you are ready for it.
To cauterize in the claws and warts.
Chapter L.
Often this disease appears on the lower parts of the feet; and it is a gross disorder, which is produced by filth, and afflicts the foot.
And there are two ways of applying the caustic to them: with fire, and with hot water.
As for how it is to be applied with fire, so as to resemble the feathers of a pluckers knife; that is to be made of iron, and in such a way that the claw may not be at all hurt; and let there be a slight margin.
Then put the burned thing on the claw. Then, with the caustic in your hand, turn it round about the claw, until the caustic reaches the depth of the claw; and leave it three days, until the pus begins to come out. Then bind the thing with silk thread, crushed up with salt: and leave the bandage on the thing during the night. For it will be根除根除
Then care for the place with a ointment made of flesh, until it is healed.
If they are not turned, and often happen on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet; then apply to them a caustic with warm water; and it is like to take a tube made of brass, or iron, or a feather from a pluckers knife; and put it on the claw, or let it flow over it. Then throw into the tube a little quantity of warm water: hold your hand so that the edge of the tube is just pressed into the root of the claw, and let the warm water go down to the root; and wait a while on tiptoe after the tickling of the water.
Then leave it, for the claw will be根除根除
So do with one after another, until you have got rid of all from the body.
Then take care of them after they are cut off, as long as they generate flesh from the ointment.
The way to cauterize during tremor.
When someone happens to be shaken by cold in a nerve, or by fever, or otherwise: then it is necessary to cauterize the same four cauterizations, or five on the back of the spine, and between each rib cauterization, and in the chest itself cauterization, and on the stomach cauterization.
For tremor ceases with the olive oil cauterization, and health of disease of cold speeds up.
The way to cauterize according to Albatar.
Chapter LVII. On the Treatment of Wounds Caused by Fire
When any kind of pus is expelled from the body according to Albatar, that is, pustules which arise from coarse corrupted material.
Then it is necessary first when they appear, that they are cauterized over the whole head of the pustule with a fine cautery of myrrh, whose tip is lit up with fire. Or when a long root of aristolochia. Or with a lenticular cautery.
And when they are cauterized with the juice, at first in this way after their expulsion: and do not increase; and breaks up the superfluity by doing so, and heals from them.
However, it is necessary for that to be done after evacuation with phlebotomy.
The way to cauterize during a flow of blood from the artery in the ulnar.
Often a flow of blood comes from an artery which has been cut at the elbow, or at a cut in the skin, or during a member's cauterization, and so on: and it is difficult to remove him.
Then when it has happened to someone of this, then bring your own hand to the orifice of the artery, and place the tip of your finger on it: and hold it tightly until the blood is exhausted under your finger, and does not come out of it.
Then put in fire small oileous cauterizes and many in great number: and blow on them, till they are well burned.
Then take out of them one, or small, or great, according to the thickness of the bone and the place where the artery is broken, and put the cautery on it, then, quickly remove your finger: and hold the cautery, till the blood be stopped.
That if you shall drive away your finger from the opening of the artery with a dry bandage, and put out the fire, then take another fire quickly from those that are prepared in the fire;
So therefore cease not to do it one after another, till the blood be stopped.
And take care, lest you burn up the nerves which are there, and bring on some other mischief to the sick person.
And know, that when blood flows from an artery, it is then impossible to stop it; especially if the artery be large, except with a four-fold bandage. Or with fire, as we have said. Or with extraction, when it is not extracted. For when it is extracted, the ends of it are drawn out, and the blood is stopped. Or bindeth with a strong ligature. Or put on the part with medicine of its property, which is to stop the flow of blood, and bind it with a compressive ligature.
Whoever administers the cutting of it with a ligature, and the compression with a cloth, or the placing of burning things and like things thereupon, does not give him relief, except rarely.
But if this thing should happen to anyone, and there be no present doctor, nor medicine: then let the finger of the index begin to be placed on the opening of the vein as we have related, and the compression thereof with great force, till the blood which is above the wound be stopped from flowing into it, and over the artery. And the finger should not be moved, above it with cold water always, until the blood has congealed, and thickens, and is cut off.
And meanwhile he should consider whether it is injured by the cautery or by the medicine.
On incision, perforation, and bloodletting on wounds and similar things.
We have already spoken in the first chapter of all diseases where there is a need for fire to be used as a cautery and medicine combined with burning, and of the causes of these, the causes themselves, their instruments, and the shapes of cauterization.
And I placed those chapters from the top to the bottom.
And I will proceed in this chapter in the same way: that is, to answer the question of the inquiry.
And before I begin that, it is necessary that you should learn from the son, that is, that terror which is in the first chapter about cauterization.
And for that, it is necessary that there be greater caution in it, since in the operation which is in this chapter, frequently the blood flows out with the sweat, when dealing with a wound, or an incision on a bruise, or an opening of an exit, or curing a wound, or extracting an arrow, or an incision on a stone, and those similar: from all of which tremor and fear arises, and death falls in many of them.
And I warn you, do not allow that to happen to you which is hesitation, for sometimes men of this art fall into your hands with their many weaknesses. For out of them is one who becomes angry with his own illness, and is light-hearted before him because of the severity of his illness and the length of his suffering. And when the illness is from fear, which signifies death.
And from these, he who gives you his hand, and says to you, hoping for health, but his illness is pernicious.
So it is not necessary that you should agree to him who comes to you from these, whose way is such. And let there be more care in your wisdom than your greed and your avarice. And do not presume about anyone from that, unless after certain knowledge that confirms with you that it comes to what a worthy succession.
And so that you may heal all your sick patients, by prognosis and indication of that to which healing is suitable.
In that, indeed, is an aid for you in acquiring fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you, O sons, with his understanding, and may he not remove from you his guidance and inspiration: for that is in his hands.
And I have ordered this Chapter distinguishing it into Chapters, following that which preceded in the Chapter of Cautery from the forehead down to the feet: that you may be relieved in what you ask for from it, and what you need.
Of the Cure of Water that is gathered on the heads of boys.
Chapter I.
You should know that this disease often occurs in boys at birth: or when the midwife tightens the boy's head without lightness.
And whenever it also happens for an unknown reason which is not known.
And I have not seen this disease in any other but in boys; and I would see all of them who suffer from it die: therefore, for that reason, I have dismissed the use of surgery in it.
And I have seen a boy from among those whose head was filled with water, and whose head became magnificent every day, until he could not sit on himself alone, because of the size of his head; and the moisture increased until he died.
And this moisture, or it تجمع between the skin and bone: or it تجمع under the bone above the siffac.
And the operation in that, if there is moisture between the skin and bone, and the swelling is small, then you should find a crack in the middle of the skull in width: and the length of the crack is almost two knots, until the moisture runs out.
And this is the shape of a blade.
So if the moisture is more increased, and the swelling is larger, then you should place them two cracks, following this form.
And if the moisture is under the bone, and the sign of it is that you see the skull openings from all sides: and when you squeeze it with your hand towards the inside, and it does not hide from you: then you should find three cracks in the middle of the skull, following this way.
And after making an incision remove all the moisture. Then tightly close the cracks with rags and dust. Then dip it in wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then loosen the ligaments, and care for the tendon with tar and wool.
And do not stop tightening the head with equality. And feed the sick with dry and scarce-humor food until their member is comforted and healed.
Another way of incision is to consider where the swelling appears, and the collection of water.
Because when it is more in the back, or in the forehead, or on the right, or on the left.
So go up with the incision where you see the swelling and the filling: and cut it following what is possible for you.
And observe, so that you do not hit the artery, and an accident of blood flow, and the sick person dies from that flow with the evacuation of moisture.
Regarding the incisions of arteries which are behind the ears.
Head.
When any catarrh happens to the eyes, or to the chest, and it is old, and there is no cure for it with medicines: then the last cure is in that, to cut those two arteries.
Therefore, when you are going to cut these eyes, let the sick person remove his head. Then clean the place with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear. Then the sick person should tie his neck with any of his own cloths. Then look where the pulse is throbbing. And the places are those which are behind the ears: and they rarely hide except in some people.
Then mark with caustic on both: and cut one with a sharp knife, while looking towards the mouth: and let it be made through the whole thickness of the head.
And if you are cutting the eye, insert the sharp instrument under the artery, and cut it towards the top with an incision.
And make the length of the incision almost like two fingers joined together.
For when the eye is cut, blood flows out with the pulse, which rises to the inside at a frequent jump.
If the artery does not appear to the touch, then you must measure the space from the ear to the amount of three fingers. Then mark with caustic and find all the way to the mouth.
And what should be emitted from the blood, is six minutes, and perhaps you emit more or less of it. All this depends on the amount that appears to you from the eye and the filling of the artery.
Then look at the eyeball. If there remains in the mouth any siffar [I assume this is a word related to scent or taste], then cut it so that it does not happen that a hot taste remains: and tighten the eyeball with linen threads from a cloth.
Then take care of the person with ointment, until he is healed.
The extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Chapter III.
When a man has an old headache, or acute catarrh through acrid humors and heat in the sinuses, or old soda, bitter, and like things: and is treated with the methods of medical treatment, and does not give it up: then we are skilled in these diseases in extracting the arteries from the sinuses, or cauterizing them, as we have told.
And the method of operation in extracting them is, that the sick man should shave the hair which is in the sinus, and direct it towards the apparent artery in the sinus. This itself shows you from its pulse, and rarely hides unless in a few men, or when there is bitter cold.
That if it hides from you, then the sick man should tighten his head with whatever cloth he has: and then he should cover the place with a rough cloth. Or he should heat the place with warm water until it appears to you in a manifest form. Then take a spoonful of the liquid, which little before I made. Then scrape with it the skin easily until you reach the artery. Then throw in it a hook, and extract it upward, until you extract it from the skin, and make it bleed from the clothes which are under it from all parts.
If, however, the artery is thin: then turn around the hook with its end. Then cut from it that side according to the length of its ends, and press them together, and do not allow a flow of blood. For if it is not cut, and does not descend, the blood will not go deep.
Then make bleed from it six ounces of blood up to three times a day.
If, however, the artery is large: then it should be tied to it in two places with a double thread, strong, and silk: or from a cow's stomach, so that it does not tend towards putrefaction before consolidation of the wound, and allow a flow of blood.
Then cut away the surplus, which is between the two ligaments. Do this at that time, or after another hour.
And if you want, cauterize it with a cauldron until the nose, with a knife-bladed cauldron: until the ends of it are cut, and it remains in place of that work.
And it is better work if he has a fever, or is a caldred body. For the cauldron is from those that remain to finish the moistures. Therefore it is better to bandage.
And it should be after the extraction of the arteries, that the place may be filled with old cooking: and let be put on the top a poultice made in disorderly fashion.
And after the solution of the medicine with dry medicines, which make grow flesh, and with leech-blood, until it heals.
That if meanwhile while you are doing the work a flow of blood comes out from an artery, then approach to cut it off with a cauldron, or to fill the place with a poultice: and grasp your hand, until the blood is cut off. That if you have nothing present to you, then place on the place your finger, until the blood hardens. And dip the place in water of cold water, until the sharpness quiets, and grasp it according to what is necessary.
And from that which is lighter and easier to extraction of the artery, it is, so that the sharpness of two knives is like an almond: However, there is much less sharpness than the two knives. For if they are sharp, like the two knives, it is necessary that each one have coldness: and they do not cut flesh with speed. So when there is a little roughness in them, it is kept in them heat of fire, and flesh is cut off quickly: so this work then is better for all work, lighter, and easier.
And this is the form of the caustic.
And make a space that is the width of a finger between the two scissors as much as the thickness of a finger, after you have marked two places with the caustics: and place both on fire well, until they come to the mouth, and fall in two places; so that what is between their extremities may be elongated. For with this caustic they do not consolidate deeply.
Chapter IV.
§ Of the treatment of acute, sharp, and burning tears from the eyes.
When the tears are persistent, and there is a course of tears from the veins that run along the outside of the head's skull: and they do not provide any curative benefit when applied with medicines, and the eyes make the face red, and feel a shivering in the forehead, as though it were shivering like ants: and their eyelids are heated by the acuteness of the tears: then the ancients found cure for them with this operation, and called it the Ense treatment.
And it is, that you shave off the hair from his forehead. Then cut in the forehead three slits equidistant according to the length of the forehead: and make the length of the slit nearly as long as two fingers, and the one slit equidistant in length according to the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of half a nostril, and the third from the other: and take care not to cut the arteries that are on either side: and extend your hand from the continuation of the two jawbones, and make the space between each incision as much as the width of three joined fingers: and have a prepared sponge fragment, or many dry cloths, with which to wipe away the blood.
Then introduce a pair of sharp scissors at the ends of the slits, and whose following form is: From the incision which is from the temporal side, up to the second incision: and scrape off with it all the skin that is between the two incisions, with the caustic, which is on the bone. Then also make that from the middle incision to the second incision. Then also remove this with a chisel, and insert into the first incision again another tool called an acute clement, soft on one side, not acute on the other. And this is its form.
And place his acute side opposite the flesh joined with the skin, and his soft side opposite the bone: and push him in until it reaches the middle crack: and cut off everything with him that hangs down from the head to the eyes: except that which continues the incision up to that which appears from the skin.
Then also make that in the middle crack up to another crack.
And when an equal quantity of blood has run out, drain the places from the clotted blood.
Then also put into every crack a chisel of dried blood, and put on top of them wads dipped in wine, or oil, or vinegar. And be careful so that there is no blistering from the heat.
And on the third day resolve the ligaments, and give a strong infusion with warm water. Then take care of that with basilicon ointment, and of the others which are treated with ointments: until it heals.
Head
Of the cure for acute tears and cataracts to the eyes from inside the head.
When there occur to anyone acute, sharp, persistent: and the eyes of him appear weak, pale, and already weakened is their aspect: and his eyelids are ulcerated, and hairs fall out from them, and in the depths of the head there is an acute pain, stinging, and subsequent sneezing: then do you away with these accidents, that those materials, and cataracts do not come, unless from many sources.
And the best cure for them is this. And it is, that you scrape off the sick person his forehead. Then also cut in that crack one in the middle of the forehead, or another somewhat across the width, and begin with the crack from the left ear to the right: and extend the incision until it reaches the mouth: and dry up all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate between the two lips of the wound with dried old cloth, or with linen liniments. Then tighten from above with dust: and immerse the dust in wine and oil, so that a hot fever does not occur.
And when you loosen this, and you see that a hot fever is about to break out: then it is necessary that the surgeon's tools be ready, until a new birth begins in it.
Then the care of the patient with the drying regime that it makes the birth of flesh: as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony: and prepare an ointment from it, and administer it to the birth of flesh in these wounds.
Chapter VI.
The care that falls on gold.
All that falls on gold is of four species: either a mineral rock, or a similar stone, such as iron, and rust: or it is from a plant, such as wheat, and beans: or it is a liquid substance, such as water, and vinegar, and things like them: or some kind of creature.
When therefore it falls on gold a rock or kind of stone that does not contribute to the growth of gold, expose Gold to the sun alone: but if you see a stone, then distill into Gold some of the oil of spices, or sesame seed. Then administer the extraction of it, and cause it to be sneezed out with condiments, and sprinkle the nose with dust near the arrival of the sneeze, after you have placed in the circumambulation of the auricle rolls of cloth, or wool, and spread the ear towards the upper part.
For this treatment is often repeated.
But if it does not go out, then administer the extraction of it with a gesticulatory motion, that is, with subtle hand gestures: whose form is this.
But if it goes out with a gesture, it is good.
Then administer the extraction of it with an invisible little hook: a few times.
If therefore he does not come out by that means, then make a tube of brass, and insert the extreme end of the tube into the foramen of the ear much, and the dust that is in the circumference of the tube with the brass softened with oil so that there is no way of wind except the tube: then remove it with your breath with strong attraction.
For very often he comes out with him when we tell him to do so. But if he does not come out by this means, then take from the honeycomb, or from the water, that is, the gluten prepared, with which they are caught birds, a little thing: and put it at the end of the radius after you have dried up the ear from the humidity. Then insert it into the foramen of the ear with ease, after you have removed the wax from the ear
But if he does not come out with all that we have told you, then approach to cut off, before the hot apoplexy or spasm happens.
And the way of the wound is so that the phlebotome cuts off the sick first in the head: and remove from him the blood according to the measure of his strength. Then make the sick sit between your hands, and turn his ear up to the top, and find a small hole in the base of his ear where there is fat on it: and let the hole be round in shape, until you reach the stone: then remove it with him, as far as you are able with the instruments.
Then close the wound from your side with speed, and take care of it, until it heals.
That if the thing falling into the ear is of one grain, which grows and swells up: then administer the extraction of it.
But if it does not obey you in coming out, then take a small, thin, knife, according to this form.
And administer with him the cutting off of that kind of grain from the ear, which falls and is not caused to come out when you think that it has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear, until you put on it many blows: then remove it with a hook, or with a gentle movement, or with suction, as we have said, for the extraction of it eases.
For the water which is added to the ear, it is necessary that it should be used by the sick person with sternutation at first; and already he has filled his ear with some boiled old water; and he lies on it, in which water is there. If then he goes out through that, it is good.
And if not: then take many stones, according to the length of a finger, thin, soft, and heat them slightly with fire, and let the sick one put one of them into the hollow of his ear: and let him spit on his foot from that part, and strike it with the stone which is in the ear. Therefore he shall not cease to do this with stones and pebbles, until he has gone out all water.
And already he has gone out water so that you take from the straw, or from one branch, and put the end of it in the ear; and light the end with fire, until it is burned thoroughly. Then take another branch and do this many times, until he has gone out all water; and draw it out with a straw according to what has been said above in the stone.
In extraction also of an animal which enters into it, if it is a small body, like a flea, and similar to it, care for it as I said in division.
But if it is a body which appears to the sense: then administer its extraction with gestures and with a hook; and its affair is easier for all those who hold it in the ear.
But in the extraction of a dog which is born in the ear, when you have cared for it with that which we said in division, and in the treatise on distillation, and your cure does not benefit him: then it is necessary that you should look at the ear in the sun. But if there appears anything there from dogs, then extract it with gestures, or with a subtle hook.
But if there appears nothing there, then take the straw which has this shape, strict below, wide above; and put the end into the ear of the sick person with a strong suction; and then suck with it. He repeatedly cut it until all the veins had come out.
But if they do not obey you at the exit, then bind the cannula around with a cord, as I said in the stone.
That if they do not go out with him that we have spoken: then administer the distillations which the ancients have experienced in the infection of veins: and you will find it in the book on distillation.
And be your pouring so that you pour oil and medicines into the ear with this instrument, whose form is depicted here. As you see make it out of silver, or brass, below tightly packed, in which sits a small hole, wide at the top.
Then it is that it pushes out what is in the constriction of the cannula, sit from brass made unevenly. And if you want, take the radium, and rub it on the end of it with a gentle rubbing: then pour oil, or broth, or what you want from these medicines into the cannula: and let it sit in brass: then throw in the radium with the cotton dropped down, and squeeze it out with your hand moderately, until it pushes out the oil into the constriction of the ear, and feels hot inside: and let that which is infused into the ear be already warmed a little with fire: and let not be what is distilled into it cold: for medicines do not tolerate it.
Head VII.
Of the treatment of an accidental auricular wound.
When certain children come out of their mothers' wombs not pierced through.
And it has also happened to some men that an auricular wound is caused by a nail, or flesh born in it.
And this wound when it happens to be in the deep cavity of the ear, which does not respond to warm: and when it happens to be a little outside the cavity, and it responds to warm.
That which has happened in the deep ear, and which does not comprehend vision, is in many dispositions difficult to heal.
And in that which follows the application of the bandage, it is necessary that you place the gold nurse on the sun and look at it: then if you see the operation apparent, open it with a thin spatula whose form is this which follows, let the end of it be in that which there is some little width, and whose part is acute: and the rest of the spatula be soft of both sides: so that it does not hurt the gold.
If then the operation is from flesh born on the meatus of the ear: then hold it with a little hook, and cut it with ease, until all the flesh is taken away.
That if the operation is in the deep of the ear: then take a little ray, soft, and heat it slightly: then put it on the meatus of the ear.
If then you feel the operation with that which is with it, that it is weak with the weight of hearing, try to make the opening of it with ease: and carefully, so as not to hurt the nerves of the ear.
Then put in the ear the silver according to the quantity of the width of the hole, which you have opened with Egyptian ointment: make it for a few days, until you are sure of the healing of the wound.
Or take the silver and pour it into water that has been made pink: and dust it on it, and use it.
That if you see the ear already peeling off: then it is necessary that you take out the silver, and let it with the silver of another, which you have opened in a green made with pink oil, until it stops being hot: and then take care of the ear until it heals.
If then happens a flow of blood: then dip a sponge, or rags in cold water, and put it on the ear: and use the remaining cure, which stops the predicted flow of blood in the book of distillation.
Of the care of the eyelids of Althel.
Head VIII.
Of all the things that happen to the eyelids of the eye, when they are wet and when they are dry.
Therefore, you should hold them with tweezers: or with a hook, and strike them with a chisel from their roots. Then place on the affected areas three times crushed.
If, however, blood flows from them, then you should cauterize them with a thin lens cautery.
And cauterize them, it is better after the incision. For many times they return when something remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
In the care of the eyelids of the eye:
Head 9.
For many times something happens to the eyelids which hardens and becomes tough, and for that reason it is called Grandum: and it is an accumulation of moist grossness on the upper eyelid, and the lower eyelid.
Operation then in them is, so that you consider at the time, if it is Grandum proceeding in it, which appears from the eyelid, and move all around, and its essence is easy.
Then find on it a slit across the width. Then remove that skin from all parts with ease until it sheds. Then hang it on with a hook and cut it off.
If, however, you are not prepared to cut off that thing unless after you have made a slight incision on the eyelid, then it will hurt the weak.
That if the slit is large: then gather it together with a stitch: and care for it, until it heals.
And if it is small, will not harm you from it. The ointments restore that, and incrust it.
And if the Grandum is a decliuis towards the interior of the ear towards the inside surface towards the outside, then upside down the eyelid and hang the Grandum on with a hook: except that you make an incision and press it from all parts.
If the eyelid is extended by an incision, it does not hurt in any way.
Then wash the eye after the incision with cold water, and take care of the place where it has become inflamed until the wound heals.
Cauterize the eyelids.
Chapter 10.
The axernath is a fat that is found in the eyelids; and it often happens that children have this fat, which affects their eyes, causing cataracts, so that they cannot see the light of day, because the tears flow towards them, and for that very reason do they lie with their faces down, and sleep on their backs, and their eyelids are always wet and swollen, having become inflamed; and the eminence of axernath is clearly visible to the eye, and when you press the spot with your fingers, you feel the axernath between them.
And its mode of action is such that he may place the sick head in your lap.
Then take a piece of linen cloth and prepare it with loops, and make from it a circle according to the amount that contains the axernath on all sides. Then put him on top of it and press him with your fingers from all sides so that the axernath is pressed together in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle of that wetness with the spatel a crack from top to bottom, and there is no larger crack than that which is made in phlebotomy in the deep.
Or you should find all the skin, until you reach the axernath; for the axernath often proceeds from a crack according to the form of white-head:
Take it out with the cloth that you have immersed between your fingers to the outside: and you should move your hand to the right and left until it disperses; and be careful not to add it to the spatel so that you don't reach the eye, and let it go down.
If you do not see the axilla at the beginning of the incision, you shall add a little to the incision with ease until the axilla appears. Then you shall extract it, as we have said.
Then you shall dip the cloth in vinegar and water, and place them on the spot, and tighten it with flour.
And there are some who grind salt, and put it in the incision, so that what remains of the moisture is liquified.
Then you shall take care of it until it heals.
If, however, a hot blister occurs in the place, then you shall take care of it with soaked plasters, until it heals.
In terms of the Atashmir eyes, that is, when the eyelid becomes soft to the eye, so that it rubs as it should not.
Chapter XI.
When hair grows out of the eyelids of the eye in addition to the usual course under the natural hairs, and becomes larger: then they hurt the eye, and cause the following diseases: such as persistent tears, softening of the eyelids, and crusting, until it causes the destruction of the eye.
And the Atashmir eyes are treated according to four methods. Or with a caustic, using fire. Or with acute medicine, as specified in the chapter on cauterization. Or treated by Atashmir with an incision and suture. Or with a knife, as I say it.
It is necessary that you place the head of the patient in your lap. Then take the eye lid with your left hand.
If it is turned, it is good. And if not: insert a needle into it, where lies the hair from the lower part of the eyelid, and let it penetrate with a needle from above, and let it sit next to the hairs themselves, that is, next to the edge of the eyelid, where the hairs grow out: and pull the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn it around.
Then find the inner part of the eyelids below the pilus added with the spatula incident from the greater tear to the smaller tear.
Then remove the fillet, and place a fine feather from a fowl or cloth underneath the eyelid: then mark the eyelid with the caustic substance so that it looks like the figure of a fern leaf.
However, it should be noted that the shape depends on the quantity and elevation of the eyelid: for this varies widely among individuals.
From these is one who needs to be incised from the eyelid a great deal, according to the quantity which softens from the eyelid.
Then, with the spatula, find the two lines you marked and begin at the larger tear to the smaller tear, and let there be a single crease near the natural hairline, as is the thickness of the radius.
Then insert the hook into one of two angles of the skin. Then scrape it all out. Then gather together with sutures the two lips, with a sharp needle and fine thread: and wipe away the blood, and let adhere whatever excess comes from the roots of the two eyebrows, with certain things that shine, if you wish to do so: and if not, then it does not matter.
Then remove the stitch and thread up to three or four days: then take care of that.
And if you wish, remove the hook without a stitch, and take care of it with it, so that it dries up and tightens. For the eyelid is lifted at the seal of the wound and aggregation thereof: but for the future is better.
In this way, Ataxmir taught the ancient method of curing.
However, there is a concern about the weak spot, and it is from a good surgery, and there is no fear in that.
And another method is also with Ataxmir: and it is, as to mark on the eyelid a figure, which looks like the figure of a fern leaf, as we have described.
Then wipe the eyelids with three separate or gathered hooklets, according to this form which follows, and then cut what is superfluous with small scissors, according to this form, with equal incision.
But if you cannot hold the hook and it does not fit: then take the spike where the filament is, and insert it into the middle of the figure: and insert another filament near the larger tear, and a third near the smaller tear: and bring the filaments together between your fingers with equal tension.
Then wipe your hand with equal wiping: and wipe the skin above where the knot is marked, as we have said.
Then bring together the two lips of the wound with a stitch: and take care of it until it heals.
But if a bruise happens to be on your incision or a crack: but that bruise with calamine, and these alike, from an ointment sitting.
And when the eyelids also turn in so that his hair comes out.
It is therefore necessary that you use on it what we have said in the incision: but the stitch on both sides is more artificial. Of the care of Ataxmir with the dogs.
AND It is, to turn the eyelid and split the crack which is inside, according to what we have said. Then by art make two needles, or two thin sticks: their length be according to the length of the eyelid, and their breadth be less than the width of a toothpick: and you have already incised at the ends on both sides where you hold the threads.
Then bring together each with care above that which is superfluous from the eyelid of the eye, and tightly tighten the two needles on both sides with a strong tightening, and leave it for a few days. For the skin is stiff and will die, and will become brown, and will rot, until it falls away by itself.
But if it is slow to fall off, then cut it with scissors. Then take care of it until it heals.
When therefore it is healed up, let the eyelid be taken off: and let not the hair be pricked.
And this is the form of two cannas, which you shall make according to this figure, and their quantity in length and breadth.
Head XII.
For the eleution of the hair pricking in the eye with an aiguille.
The operation in that is, that you take an aiguille fine, and put a thread of silk fine therein, and put it. Then bind the ends thereof to each other with a fine knot very well: and let the length of the threads be one palm.
Then put another thread of silk fine underneath that, and bind the ends thereof together, if thou wilt: and knott the extremities of it, if thou wilt.
Then put the sick head in your bosom, and let it be nigh the sun, that the operation may be declared: for this operation is delicate, or minute.
Then put the aiguille with the Alinxotati in the root of the eyelid, and let it penetrate into the eyelid quickly, until it draw out the natural hair thereof.
Then draw the hair up to above the Alinxotati: and put that hair into the Alinxotati: if it is one, or two, or three, not more.
Then draw your hand with him, until he goeth out: and let the hair go out with the Alinxotati in the eyelid with the natural hair.
If however the Alinxotati should be drawn out, and the hair not go out with it: then draw the Alinxotati downward, with a thread that you have composed therein, until the Alinxotati goeth out of the upper opening, and covereth the eye with it: then take both out, and close the eye: and let him go closed two days, or three, until the hair be rooted in his place, and grow upon the top thereof.
If the hair is short, then either attach a long hair from natural hairs, and remove it with it; or leave it until it grows longer after space, and then remove it.
Chapter XIII: Head.
When it occurs to the eye, this is called Leporina.
And this Alxatrati is either natural or accidental.
Accidental therefore happens from the consolidation of an injury, or a cut, or cauterization, and similar things.
And the mode of operation in it is, that you find that consolidation, and that you separate its lips, and place in it what is between them from linen, and binds it, until it heals.
And it is not necessary, that you use in its treatment things which dry and constrict: for if you do so, Alxatrati will return worse than it was: but rather use in it things which soften, such as fenugreek; and dip it in water, in which althaea has been boiled, flax seed: and spread the ointment dyaquilon, which is liquid with some of the oils: and wrap it up with linen, and treat it with it.
And your treasure for treatment is, that you should guard against all devices, so that it does not consolidate, according to the form which it had in the beginning.
And this operation which we have described is no other than a certain correction of Alxatrati, so that it does not return to the form of the place from which it was entirely removed.
On the treatment of a condition in the lower eyelid, and is wrinkling or tightening up upwards towards the right and left.
Chapter XVIII: Head.
This Alxatrati which happens below is what is called Alxatrati. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental happens from a wound, or a rift, or cauterization, and similar things.
And when you come to the operation, so that you take hold of it now, where there is a double thread, and wet it with flesh, and let it penetrate from the left tear duct to the right until the thread reaches the two ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh towards the top with a sharp instrument, and cut it with a chisel on the side. If therefore the shape of the eyelid returns according to what is necessary, it is good.
And if not, take a thread, and put it in the groove, and turn it with it; and find the two grooves on the inner side of the eyelid, and the ends of the two grooves are from two cutting angles, until they meet and form this shape, and is a Greek letter.
Then take away that flesh according to the quantity, which is the sharp lower side of it, from there because it follows the eyelid. Then bring together the separated parts: sew them with a sheep's wool thread.
Then take care of them with that which I have said, about medicinal herbs, and bindings, until they are healed.
And if a sutural or caustic has occurred from the groove, and stitching: then you must find a flat groove under the eyelids, also according to what came before. Then separate the two lips with a binding, according to what we have said.
And the whole speech about the care of a sutural, when it is on top, or below, it is that it runs in that operation, according to what is prepared from the form of a sutural.
For it is of many different forms: and the prudent craftsman prepares his mind with whatever way is possible for him, until he returns the form to a natural one, or close to it, and himself, because it suits him, from the operation and the instruments in many dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid of the eye with the conjunctiva, or the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in many people so that the upper eyelid is consolidated with the whiteness of the eye, and prevents itself from its natural operations.
It is necessary that you introduce the extreme of the radius under the eyelid, and lift it up: or that you extend it with a hook: then you cut the adhesion with a fine chisel that it is not with the keenness of the incision of the chisels, but rather it is slightly blunt: so that the sick person does not disturb at the operation, and moves the chisel, and hurts his eye with his keenness: and your incision is almost like you remove this adhesion with ease, until when the eyelid returns to its natural form, and heals all the adhesion.
Then pour at that time in the eye water from salt, with water wash it: or distill in it from a sieved substance, from dissolved zinc with water.
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a line of thread: and put over the eye wool infused with white of egg: and after three days use the sieved, and with solid things, until it heals.
Regarding the incision of the nail and eminence of the flesh of tears.
Chapter XVI.
You know that the nail is according to two ways. Or it is nervous: and it is similar to syphac hard wood, fine. Or it is not nervous, similar to frozen moisture of white: which when it touches iron, or conaries it with a hook, is cut off, and does not form an incision in it.
And both species do not begin, unless from the greater tear, until it is gradually revealed, so that it forms a little by little, and prevents light and eye movement.
And the way of doing this incision is: so that the sick person puts his head in your lap. Then open his eyes, and raise his eyelids with your hand. Then take the toenail with a little hook and extend it towards the top. Then take the toenail, and insert a pin from the horse's hair, or a twig: and make the thread strong, and double its end slightly, and fasten it in the middle of the nail: then pierce it with a needle, and bind it with a thread to the nail, and extend it towards the top: and scour the skin on the side of the nail which follows the pupil, as if you were holding it with a pin all the way up to its base.
Then cut away the residue at the base of the tear with a fine spatula or small forceps: and let go of the natural tear tissue so that it does not stop the flow of tears.
And when the nail is extended with just an hook: or with a thread, as we have said. Then scour it with a soft spatula, which has this shape.
And be careful so that the spatula does not touch the horny tunic, and do not cause a tear, and do not pierce the pupil.
Then after the cutting, pour into the eye some crushed salt, or made from a paste of zinc: and let it rest until the next day. Then take care of the eye with whatever is necessary until it heals.
If the nail is not nerve-laden, and you cannot get a hook into it, and there is no holding it with an uncinus: then often treat this kind of nail with medicines, and heal it like narrh (a certain plant) in its distribution.
If you want to cut it, then open the eye for nursing, and take a fine spatula, mild of sharpness, in this shape. And carefully scrape the nail from top down with subtlety. If you see that the eye itself is getting thinner and narrower, and impressing it into the nail: then pour into the eye at your own hour from a paste made of zinc, or red ochre, or ground salt: and coat the eye until the next day.
Then he continued to operate on it, until he had completely removed it. Unless you have a red hot poultice in your eye: then indeed let go of it, and take care of the pustule until it heals.
Then he continued to operate on it with a razor, until it healed.
Except the glory of the flesh of the eye, if it hurts much in the eye, let it be suspended with an anchor, and cut from that part of it; and do not make the last incision, lest the course of tears run away.
Then add a drop of red rub to the tear, or make it with a lead pen, until it heals.
Regarding the incision of Algordano and the flesh born in the eye.
Chapter XVII.
Is sometimes born in the eyes of some men with a red flesh, either placed above or combined with it until it covers the pupil, or approaches or tightens on the eyelids, and perhaps turns them outward: and is absorbed into the rosy balastine.
And the operation on it also is, that he shall put his sick head in your bosom. Then open her eyes, and take all that flesh with an anchor suitable to it: and hold it with one clamp, or gesturing.
Then cut the flesh first, until you have completely finished cutting it with a knife. And cause her to leave the eye, lest you wound it during the operation: and let your incision be wherever you cut it, or with a small chisel, which we have spoken of in the incision of the nail: or with little hooks, with which Asbel is collected, according to which it shall be after this chapter.
When your incision is completed and all the Algordano has been removed, then fill her eye with dissolved salt: or distill into it red powder, and similar drugs from the coroner's corrode: and put on her eye a cottage with alume, that she may be secure from the hot poultice.
If anything remains of the socket, and hot blood flows to you, and the swelling is warm: then let go of the eye, and take care of the socket itself while it sleeps.
Then bandage again over the eye with the operation, until it heals.
And do likewise for the flesh added which has happened in the eye from this kind.
However, it is necessary that you refrain from any cure for a weak eye that comes from natural causes, or from accidental causes, with the iron; and do not insert your hand into any of these operations, until you are certain, that that member is able to endure that operation.
On the collection of sebaceous matter from the eye.
Chapter XVIII.
These are small red worms that grow on the eye, and prevent the sight; and weaken the eye with the passage of time.
Therefore it is necessary that you should first consider, if the eye in which Sebel is, is strong, and has no other disease besides Sebel: then gather Sebel from it.
And is, as you command the sick person, to put his head in your lap.
Then hang those worms with a single hook, or two according to your discretion: and let the hook be thin, according to this form, or let there be two hooks placed at a distance in the body, according to this form.
Then with subtle hook-like instruments gather those worms with subtlety, and wipe away the blood hour by hour, until the worms come out from under the eye, and dissolve: and do not leave the eye with the tips of spatulums.
And let your operation be in the middle of the day before the sun, and be firm in your operation greatly: so that you do not fall but on those worms.
And when you have drained (it), then distil into the eye strong cider, or red wine: so that its acridity may corrode what remains of Sebel.
But if you are not able to collect that whole thing in that hour, then bind the eye with that, which sits [the eye] comfortably: and dismiss him for a few days, until his pain is satisfied; and secure him from the heat of an apoplexy: and then repeat over it again in the same way, until he is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps.
The reduction of a torn nostril to the nose.
Chapter XIX.
The doctors name the nostril-fistula, which they treat with a caustic or with an acute medicine, according to what went before in his narrative.
And if he is not healed, then there is no skill in it: unless you find out on an apoplexy near his birth, and drain all the moisture that is in him and the pus, until the opening is discovered.
When therefore the opening is discovered, and you see in it corruption or blackening, then cut it out with an instrument, the form of which is as follows.
And it is called the asperity of the head.
Let it be made of iron bar and let the head be round like a ball, that it may be punctured with a file or with fine chisel-notching: and place the piece on the site of the corruption of the bone.
Then turn the piece between your fingers and press your hand upon it slightly, until you know that that corruption is now rasped: and do so often.
Then restore the place with acute medicine of stiptic.
If therefore the place is consolidated, and a bone grows up in it, and the wound heals over: and remains for forty days, and does not renew, and does not open again, you shall know that he is now healed.
And if not, then there is no skill in it, except to reduce the fistula into the nostril, according to this form.
And it is, so that you can detect the bone with iron, or with acute medicine: and when the bone has been detected, then take a chisel according to this form, its end being a triangle: and let the wood of it be extended towards the end like a pyramid: as you see.
Then place that above his own skull. And let it be near the lacrimal bone. And extend your hand from the eye a little way. Then turn your hand with the knuckles toward the skull, so that it penetrates the bone and feels weak. Through this he will see that vapor is emerging from him when he holds his hand over his nose.
Therefore then restore the position with the syringes that dry out, as I have taught you.
When then the flesh is born and the place hardens. Then the matter that flowed outward returns to the nose. So it is lighter above the weak one.
On the reduction of the prominence of the eye.
Chapter 20: On reducing the prominence of the eye
When the eye emanates with its entirety, and does not happen to damage the vision or diminish it: then you should remove the weak one: then you should bleed him: then you should place the cooling agents on the skin without scarring, but with suction.
Then put over the eye a liniment that is made from oak-galls, and aloe, and myrrh, and white-olibanum, and chalk-lime. Then tighten the eye slightly above the plaster with a mixture of many powders.
And the mode of the powders is: that you take soft cloths, many, and double all the cloths out of them, four by four: make from them many: then put them one on top of the other, second by quantity what the eye needs: then tighten them over themselves with a hard cloth, strong tightening.
And again place the cooling agents without scarring, but with suction.
Then remove the cooling agents and release the eye, tightening it slightly during the day and night.
If however the ligature softens again, then you should tighten it a lot: then remove the ligature after day and night, as we have said.
If then the eyes of the eye are already red with new ligatures, it is good: and if not, then again the plasters, and the tightening, and the cooling agents, until they heal.
Regarding the incisions, there are two types of tunica.
Chapter 21. On the incision.
When a rupture occurs in the Vein of King Henry, then it is cut and moved outside the eyelids like a grain of King Henry's seed, and its shape is made into that of a human being so that it can be incised: then the operation on it is this, according to what the surgeon says: and it is, so that you insert the sharp instrument into the root of King Henry from below to above.
Then introduce another sharp instrument where there is a double filament from the lacrimal part, and let it penetrate: then let go of the first one according to its position.
Then incision is made on the place of the double filament, and the King Henry's Vein part with it is tied around the acu-tip: and tighten it very much.
Then extract it now, and place on the eye a woolen thread soaked in white of egg: and let go of it until the filament falls with King Henry' Vein.
Then take care of the eye with it, which comforts it, until the wound heals.
And when King Henry' Vein is tightened from all sides with a circle of cloth so that the eye protrudes greatly.
Then it is pierced with a thin spatula that reaches to the depth of the eye, and the tearful white fluid comes out, and the eye goes down, and is immediately inserted: then tighten it, until it heals.
The Cure of Alcomat.
Chapter 22. On the cure of Alcomat
This ailment called Alcomat, is not anything else but a kind of mucus gathered in the eye, similar to flowing water, and it is not itself.
And the way to operate on it is this, that you make the sick person sit on a prepared seat, or directly facing upwards.
Then take his head in your hands from the two parts, and move it so that the mucus reaches to the lower eyes. Then tighten it, so that it does not fall, and the light is kept in its place: and let the sick person see things as they are: and if it does not go down below, you shall know that it is water.
But if he does not prepare the descent of the wound with him as we have said, then make the sick person sit between your hands. Then take a thin spittle and find with him above the corneal membrane a little at the place of the intersection with the corneal envelope on the crown, until it is discharged.
When it is discharged, then dilute in the eye a hot water in which you have mixed honey: or water in which you have already boiled millet and honey: then let it be cared for with the rest of the cure, until it heals.
As for the care of water that has entered the eye, or a waterfall.
Chapter XXIII
We have already spoken about the kind of water, and what is appropriate for piercing with a revealing and explaining speech, then take that same thing according to health.
Then it is necessary that you make the sick person sit between your hands square, opposite to the light, near the sun: and bandage the healthy eye, and tighten it firmly: then with your hand close to the healthy eye, and with your left hand if the eye in which the water is is on the right: or with your left hand, if the eye is on the left.
Then take with your hand on the right an almond, if the eye is on the left: or with your left hand, if the eye is on the right.
Then put the tip of the almond close to the crown by the thickness of the radius in the same white of the eye apparent tear of a little one: then push the almond with force: and you roll it with your hand, until it penetrates into the membrane of the eye: and you feel that the almond has already reached the watery part.
And it is necessary so that the distance of the almond to the bottom is a measure of space which is from the pupil until the end of blackness: and this is the crown of the eye. You will see it in the same pupil with an eye-watery vision, because of the clarity of the corneal envelope.
Then put the alмагest until the place where is water. Then press the lower part with a single lever after another.
If then water has descended at once, then the sick person will see that which opens his own viscus at once, and the almagest in its eye.
Then you rest a little. If then water has descended, then put it down again, except that the almagest should come out.
When then does it form, and does not rise up: then pull out the almagest with ease: and you relax your hand little by little.
Then dissolve in water a little of the clear salt from the gem: and wash with it the inner eye. Then put outside all the crust, or wool dipped in oil rosined, and wax: and binds with it the healthy eye.
But we, and those who are of our time, put on him crushed cumin mixed with wheat flour.
That if the almagest does not obey you at the entrance to the eye because of its hardness, since it is from men, and whose eye is very hard: then you should take a staff, which is called an alberid, whose this is the form.
Then open it with him alone the connection only, and not the end of your hand in the hole: and is there only to make a way for the almagest's place soft.
Then introduce the almagest, according to what we have said.
And near the end of your work, prepare for the sick person a dark room in which to sleep on his back in a house that is dark: and prohibit from all movements, and coughing: and do not let him move his head to the right, or at all.
And sit fast by his side according to its position until the third day.
Then dissolve it in that dark house, and test his viscus: and let him see things. Then reduce the ligaments until the seventh day.
And it is not fit that he should make that operation at the hour of cure, nor yet immediately after the incision: but rather, let him wait until another day: because the water riseth soon through the rough skin.
But if it happens that the swelling is hot: then it is fit that thou shalt open his eye before the seventh day: and rectify that which is wrong with him, when he doth lie down, until that the swelling hath been healed: then thou shalt let go his water, and put it on his mouth where it goeth under him for some days, while he dwelleth in that dark house.
Then let him go out of the house little by little, and let him turn round in his bed.
And knowest thou not that the student is exempt from sight sometimes for a few days? Then let him dare to speak about the operation.
And now it is come to our ears that a certain one from Al-Rajah has said, "It hath been done in Al-Rajah by means of a piercing, whereby the water is drawn.
But truly I have not seen anyone in the land of the Arabs do such a thing; nor have I found it in any of the old books: but it is possible that it may be new.
And these are the forms of the wounds from the piercing, that they stand above them who know not.
Let them be made of pure brass; and let their ends be of this same triangular sutilty, and the point sharp.
Chapter XXIII.
On the care for the flesh that is born in the nose.
When and what kinds of flesh are added to the flesh that is born in the nose, from which something is made that assimilates the scorpion of many feet: and from this is the flesh of cancer, the lapia, of a pale color; and from this is the meat that is soft, not of a pale color.
In that which is of the said meats soft and not deceitful, nor cancerous, it is fit that thou shouldest cause him to sit between thine hands opposite to the sun, and open his nostrils, and put in a sharp hook on the side: then draw them towards the exterior, and cut what thou hast taken from them with a sharp and subtle chisel: then shalt thou know that all the flesh is now removed.
If anything remains that cannot be cut off: then carefully remove it with a fine instrument until nothing is left. If, however, blood is in control of you, or an injury occurs that is warm and swollen: then oppose it with what is necessary; or if it is a malignant apoplexy, then approach cauterizing it, until the blood is cut off, and all flesh is removed.
Then let it be applied to the nose after cutting with vinegar, and water, or wine. If, however, the nose is opened, and moisture proceeds from it all the way to the palate, then you shall know that he is already well.
If, however, the moisture does not penetrate, as it should, then you shall know that within the upper bones of the nose there is a birthmark which the knife cannot reach.
Then it is necessary that you insert a thread of linen which has some grossness, and many nodules in it: and place between each nodule the length of your finger, or less: and let him sneeze, so that he sends one end of the thread into his nose with a ray, or with whatever is possible for him to do after he has done this himself; and let him sniff, until it reaches his throat, and then let him spit it out.
And many times indeed do these boys make this atom similar in schools; and it is a easy thing for him who wants to do it.
Then place the two ends of the thread, one which goes out over the nose, and the other which remains in the nose. Then tie a knot in the thread with the nodules that are in the thread. Make it tight so that you shall know that the flesh is already with the nodules in the thread.
Then pull out the thread: and put into the nose after the removal of blood the liquid that you have imbibed in Egyptian ointment: make it three days, or more, until the ointment has eaten away all that remained of the flesh.
Then place at the end of the thing a cannula of lead in the nose for several days until it heals.
If it does not heal with the cure that dries up, then use that one.
For the cure for nosebleeds, when they are distilled with oil and other medicines into the nose, make it of silver or brass: that it be similar to a small lantern, opened like a shell: and its passage also.
And if you want to make a closed cannula, like a reed.
And the shell of the instrument for the cure of nosebleeds should be full, and well-sealed: whose handle is at the end of it, which you hold when you heat oil in it, or what you want to pour into it, and fluid things.
Chapter 25. On the Cure of Nosebleeds
Nosebleeds often arise at the end of the nose and become more severe and greater with the passing of days until they appear like a wound.
And for this, when it first appears, you should cut it all out. Then place over the spot, or a caustic, or burning medicine that stands in its place.
If the incision is then delayed until it becomes more severe, consider it, if it is hard, dry in color, and of few senses: then do not touch it with iron: for it is a cancerous spot.
For many times water has incised the flesh and led to great evil in that place which had it.
And if the spot is not hard and of few senses, and you see that the incision can be made in all of it, then make the sick person well, and cut him without fear or hesitation: and cure the place along with it, until it heals over.
Chapter 26.
On the sewing up of the nose, lips, and ears.
You should know that when a break occurs in one of the cartilages of the nose, surgery is not effective unless in certain people.
Therefore, when such a thing has happened to someone, you should consider whether it is a recent fracture with its own blood: and then add two wounds together with sutures: and then take care of the wound until it heals.
And if the break has already separated the lips, and some healthy parts have been formed: then it is necessary that you cut off all of its skin from the outside, until it bleeds. Then add two lips together with sutures, and tie them tightly, and sprinkle the wound with dragon's blood, and crushed holly; and put over the powder a fragment of plaster of Paris, and some other consolidated plaster: and let it be bound for two days, or three. Then loosen it, and change the medicine: and let it go, until the hairs grow together by themselves. Then take care of the wound with ointment, until it heals.
The method of suturing is, to add the solution of a break, or with needles, as we have told you about suturing an eye; or to add the solution with a thread, as I have made you aware.
Chapter 27.
On the extraction of nodules from the lips:
Many people have hard nodules in the inner part of their lips, similar to small grains of herbs; and some of them are smaller, and others are larger.
Therefore, you should turn the lips inside out, and find all the nodule, and hang it by a hook, and drop it from all sides.
Then fill the space under the cut with dried blood that has been crushed, until the blood is dried up.
Then clean it with vinegar, and wash the place with it, where there is pain, until the wounds heal.
De incisione carnis natae super gingiuam.
Of the incision born of flesh on the gingivae.
Often a flesh-born wound arises on the gingivae, which the ancients called abluss.
So it is necessary that you should hang her by a hook; or that you hold her with forceps and cut her close to her root, and let the blood run away, or let the blood flow.
Then place on the sore-affected part a dried poultice, or other stimulating powders, drying agents.
That if that flesh returns after cure, it often does so again; then cut it again and cauterize it: for she never returns after cauterization.
De rasione dentium cum ferro, ut neque fac
Of the shaving of teeth with iron.
When the teeth are聚e together in the surface of the tooth from the inner and outer side, and between the gingivae hard tissue, rough hairs, and sometimes wear away, and become yellowed, and white-ish, until the corruption extends to the gingiva, and the teeth become rotten by that.
So it is necessary that you should place the sick hand between your hands, and the head of the patient in your lap, and shave off the molars and teeth on which appear to you the gums, and similar material like sand: until there remains nothing of them, and likewise do the same for the blackness, and whiteness, and yellowing, and other disorders until they are cleansed.
If then that which is in them from the beginning of shaving is removed, it is good: but if not, then repeat the shaving on them every other day, and third time, until the final study has come to them what you want.
And you should know that the teeth are used to different shapes of razors, and to many figures: second, the razor with which it is ras ed from below is different from the razor with which it is ras ed between teeth, according to other forms.
These forms of razors are prepared for you, which you see.
Chapter 30.
Regarding the extraction of pain from teeth.
It is necessary that you treat the tooth with all your skill and quickly remove it from the source of pain. For the tooth should not be left to heal on its own when it is removed, as the substance is delicate: until a time when there is no excuse for the removal of it, then it should be removed carefully, and certified by you to the complaining patient.
For many times pain deceives the sick person, and he thinks that the pain is in the tooth and removes it himself: afterwards, he does not cease to have pain until the tooth is removed from the source of pain.
For we have already seen this from the operation of bloodletting.
When, therefore, the tooth is certified to you by the complaining patient, then it should be scraped with a small scraper, which has some strength, until the gum is completely removed from all sides: then, with your fingers or with delicate forceps, slowly cut off the tip, until you hear it crack.
Then, when you have well positioned the forceps in the good place, and the head of the patient is between his knees: which you hold well, so that it does not move: then, pull the tooth along its straight line, so as not to break it.
If, however, it does not come out, then take one of their instruments and push it in from all sides with ease, and try to move it, as you did before.
If, however, the tooth is either pierced or corroded: then it should be filled with cloth: and you should hold it with a small hook at its tip, so that it does not break when you squeeze it with forceps.
And it is necessary, so that you do not get the scraping around the gum well.
And keep your strength, so that you do not break it, and a part of it remains, and returns to the sick from which greater pain comes at first.
And so, do not do that which the phlebotomators do in their haste, and their boldness in eradicating it, except that they administer to it what we have related.
For often they bring about great sicknesses in men, which are more difficult to be broken, and leave the roots of them all, or some part thereof; or take it out with certain bones of the jaw: as we have been frequently assured that this is done.
Then let it be cleansed after its eradication with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
That if a flux of blood should come from the places (for often it comes) then let some of the plaster be removed and filled with the blood, and let that place be so; and if not, let it be cauterized, if it does not give you plaster.
The shapes of the pincers should be such that they move easily at first, and then do not open when pressure is applied to them on the tooth: they should be like the large fingers, until when you press them they do not open themselves, nor do they open; their ends should be thick, and made of iron or of a hard pewter, straight ends: and in their ends should be teeth, some of which enter into certain ones, and close by constriction, so as to bite strongly.
And when they are made at the ends like the shape of an ear which is called a crow, and are of strong constriction.
Chapter 31.
Of the eradication of teeth and extraction of bones of the jaw fractured.
When a tooth is broken and something remains after its eradication, then let it be placed on the place with butter one day, or two days, until it softens: then let it be inserted into it with a chisel, or a pincers; their ends should be like an ear which is called a crow. The shape of this pincher is as follows.
Have the extremities made as a file inside: or like an alligator's skin.
But if he does not obey you to the exit with these tweezers, then you should caustice on the root, and peel off all the flesh, and insert an instrument called a small tongs, whose shape is this.
Set short the end, a little longer the thick one: and let it not be dipped, lest it should break.
But if the root goes out by that, it is good: and if not, you should move with these other instruments whose shapes are these.
The shape of the first end, in which there is some thickness.
The shape of the slim end.
And with the other instruments and tools which have gone before in the order of teeth.
Also sit the clamp with this instrument which is like a big hook, of this shape, of the twisted slim end, in which there is some thickness, so that it should not break: and let it not be dipped, lest it should break.
And know that there are many instruments for teeth: and the other instruments also do not count, and the prudent artisan discovers himself alone the instrument, according to which signified to him the operation and illnesses themselves.
For from diseases there are to those for which the ancient instrument did not speak, because of the diversity of their species.
But if a bone breaks from the jaw, or from any other bones of the mouth, then examine above it at its place with that which belongs to it out of the instruments and tweezers which I have spoken in extracting the root, and move with the gesture, whose shape is this.
Set at it some thickness gradually, so that it is stretched, or held with it the jaw bone, and does not move and push, until it goes out the jaw: and restore the place with suitable medicines for it.
If, however, there is pus in the bone, then saw off the part affected by the pus and treat it until it heals.
Chapter III. On the locking of teeth.
Of the important locking of teeth on others.
When teeth are not at their natural angle, they become rotten from the form of the mouth; and especially when this happens to women and girls, that is, young people.
It is necessary for you to consider. For if one tooth has come after another, and does not fit in place, nor can its lock be made or the grinding be done; then you should cut it out: and if it is joined to a neighboring tooth, then you should cut it with this instrument, of which the following form is.
It is like a small chisel, and is made of hard iron, with an acute end.
And let your cut be deep, so that you cut it over many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that it does not move one of the other teeth.
If, however, there is a prominent exposure of its grinding: then grind it with a chisel made of hard iron, the form of which is as follows.
It should all be made of iron, and the small point of its tip should be ground off like a chisel, as is done with an awl: so that the tooth can be grating little by little over many days with ease, so that it does not move the teeth, and then allow it to be sharpened at the end, grinding it with some rasps.
If a tooth is broken off, and hurts the tongue: then you should also sharpen that part, until it is smooth, and make it even: and then smooth it out, so that it does not hurt the tongue, nor damage speech.
Chapter III. On the retention of teeth with gold fill.Si D
On the retention of teeth with gold fill.
When there is a blow and jolt to the anterior teeth from a blow, or by accident: and it cannot be held fast to its place, so that it falls out: and it does not improve with careful treatment, then take a sharp wire and retain them with gold: because gold turns green, and spoils after many days; but gold never changes.
And let there be a thread medium in subtility and coarseness according to the quantity that it takes between teeth.
And the form of retraction is such that you take a thread and introduce it between two healthy teeth: then tie it with both ends between them, or one or more, until you come to the other side of the tooth with the thread. Then iterate the texture until the part from which you began: and tighten your hand with subtlety and wisdom, until it does not move at all: and let your constriction be where you tighten the thread, near the roots of the teeth, so that it does not move.
Then cut off the ends of the thread with the forceps: and gather both together, and bend them with your hand: and hide them between a healthy tooth and a moving tooth, so that they do not hurt the tongue: then let it be loosened in such a way as to remain strict.
If however it has loosened, or has been cut, tighten them with another thread, and let it stand with it in such a way for all the time.
And this is the form of the teeth, and the figure of retraction of two healthy teeth and two moving teeth, as you see them.
And when it is that one tooth has fallen, or two behind in its place, and remains as we have described, and does not make it except the craftsman be skilled, prudent, and experienced.
And when one of the ribs is broken: and it is made out of it like the form of a tooth, and is put in its place, from which it is protected, and tightened, as we have said: and remains, and adheres to it for a long time.
Head 34.
When the ligament which happens under the tongue, is either natural, with which man is born, or accidental, from an arrow that has already healed.
And the operation is, so that you open the jaw of the patient in his head in your neck and clear his tongue; and then cut this nerve ligament across its width until the tongue is released from its hold.
If there is anything hard and stiff in it and it is from the consolidering of a wound, then throw into it a hook and cut it across its width until you hit the ligament, and let go of the stiffness.
And let him not make a crack in the deep flesh there, and cut the artery there, and let there be a flow of blood.
Then rinse the incision with rosewater, or vinegar, or cold water.
Then put under the tongue a piece of linen that holds the weak one all night, so that it does not harden again.
But if there is a flow of blood, then put on the place a crushed piece. But if you are pricked by blood, then cauterize the place with a lentil cautery that suits it; and then care for him with the rest of the cure, until he heals.
Chapter LXXXI.
When a little sore under the tongue is absorbed that has become like a small rana, prohibiting the tongue from its natural function: and perhaps it grows bigger so much that the jaw is filled up.
And the operation is, so that you open the jaw without a doctor with the sun: and consider the sore.
But if you see that the color of the sore is dark, or black, or hard, and there is no feeling for it of the patient: then do not touch it, for it is a cancer.
And if it falls into whiteness, in which there is moisture, then throw into it a hook, and cut the sore with a very fine awl, and free it from all sides. If your blood pricks you in the hour of your surgery, then put under the sore a crushed piece, until the blood stops flowing: and then return to your surgery, until it is extracted from its bulk with its supplement.
Then clean with vinegar and salt: and care for it with suitable cure until it heals.
The treatment of abscesses of the two amygdales.
Chapter XXXVI.
When abscesses occur between the cheeks, that is, the glands, which are akin to abscesses, and which occur on either side: when cure with the above-mentioned method does not help them, then observe.
If, however, the abscess is hard, of a pale colour, and of little smell: then do not touch the abscess with iron.
And if its colour is red, and its root is thick: then do not touch it with iron, fearing a flow of blood, but leave it, until it heals. And then either pierce it: or let it burst of itself.
And if its colour is white, round, and its root is thin: then the abscess should be opened.
And the operation on it is such that you should consider before the operation whether the abscess is hot and quiet, completed, or rather threatened with some decrease: then let him sit down in front of the sun, and place his head in your lap: and open his mouth, and take hold between his hands, and press his tongue down with a tool, which has this shape.
Let it be made of silver, or of brass, that it may be sharp like a knife.
When you press it with the tongue and a swelling appears on your side: then take hold of a hook, and fix it in the amygdal, and draw it out as far as you can, pulling with it some of the skin.
Then open it with the instrument which has this shape. It is joined to the other by a ligament: therefore take care that its ends are not cut, so that the opening of each of them is in the direct line of the other: hence the cure should be with iron ingot, or an alloyed copper.
If this instrument is not present, then cut it with a chisel, which has this form. This blade should be sharp on one side and dull on the other.
And when you cut one side of the cheekbone, cut the other second according to this form of cutting.
Then after the incision, the patient should gargle with cold water or with vinegar and water.
But if there is a flow of blood, gargle with water in which the bark of the willow has been boiled: or leaves of myrtle and like things from the astringent, until the flow of blood stops: and then take care of the wound, until it heals.
And when there are blisters in the throat that are not attached to the two cheekbones. Then cut these according to what I have said in cutting the two cheekbones evenly.
And I have already treated a woman with a blisters that had grown between her throat, which was causing hoarseness, little sense, and almost closed her throat: and this woman breathed through my narrowed throat, and had already stopped eating, drinking water, and was close to death if it had lasted another day or two.
And the blister had risen only as much as to make two small bumps, until they had come out of the two nostrils.
So I hurried along and fixed myself on one of their hooks. Then I pulled it out, and a large piece came out with it.
Then I cut it off where it had come out of the nostril hole.
Then I made her go forward from the other nostril hole.
Then I opened her mouth and touched her tongue: and then fixed the hook in the blister: and then cut off a part of it, and there was little blood coming out of it: so the woman's throat is absolutely well, and she began to eat right away.
I did not stop to put on a lot of times for a long time: and the poultice succeeded in place where I hit, until it was too prolonged and with him that thing.
So then, I put a poultice on it between the teeth.
Then he stayed away from the addition: then I walked away from that part, and I don't know what God did with it after me.
On the poultice on the wound.
Chapter 37. On the poultice on the wound.
When a catarrh descends to the wound, and is poulticed, and it is long: then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the lower part thick, round, then it is called a pouch.
When it is treated with what we said about the separation, and does not bring about a cure; and you see that the poultice has grown cold from it, and has thinned out: then you should hit it.
And what is gathered together on it round, and has no length, and is bloody or dark in color, or black, and has no feeling: then you should hit the incision. For in that poultice there is a fear over the wound.
Then when you see it in the way that I said out of whiteness, and according to its length, so that you set the sick person before the sun: and press his tongue with an instrument, whose predecessor I told you; then fasten a hook on the wound, and pull it down: and hit it with one or two instruments which I said for hitting the two amygdales.
And you should not hit out of it, unless that which is added to it on a natural limit without addition.
For if you hit out of it more, then you wound the voice and speech.
Then after hitting it use what I told you in the incision of the two amygdales: and take care of it, until it heals.
If however the sick person shudders from the incision: then you should use your wit in cauterizing it without fear and anxiety.
And the mode of cauterization is not in her, except with sharp water: and it is, as you put the head of the nurse in your bosom. Then press her tongue with the instrument which we have said. Then take from the water which I have told you in the chapter of cauterizing, and bind it to this foot that is not extinguished, and put it not thick or thin, and fill it with this instrument whose this form is.
Sit at the end of her where the medicine is placed, as the ear is placed on the radius.
And place the instrument with the medicine on its upper part: and the sick man shall lie on his side, that he may run a salve from his mouth by internal medicine, so that nothing shall descend from it to his throat, and harm him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And you from the first shall put on her on a small quantity of the medicine at an hour's time, until you see it has become black, and has eased the tingling of the medicine.
And if you will that you take a cup, and pour it on him on the end of the radius, and dip the cup with the medicine, and push the radius with the cup into the canula from above, until the cup adheres to the upper part.
Do this many times, until you get what you want in the new cauterization. Then dismiss her: for she will be cured and will fall down after three days, or four.
That if you will be cured that you go the medicine, repeat it: and after the cauterization wash about her a new one with the butter, and purify with it what is in her from the medicine: and rinse with cold water.
And he will be cured outwardly with embrocations, and inwardly with gargles, until he is healed.
This then is the nature of the cure, more salutary than incising, and farther removed from fear.
And when ever it is necessary to treat with a ring and also with the thread that is thinner than the cautery and incision: for this reason it should be treated with sufumigation in this way. And when ever it is necessary to treat with a ring and also with the thread that is thinner than the cautery and incision: for this reason it should be treated with sufumigation in this way. Take also sumac, hyssop, oregano, rue, sseah (a kind of mint), chamomile, abrotan (mistleto), and similar herbs; and put all of them together, or some of them in a vessel, and immerse them with vinegar and make them boil: and the vessel should be covered with an uneven cloth: and a hole should be made in the middle of the vessel above which should be placed a sharp instrument according to this method.
Let it be made of silver or of brass; and the end in which is the granule should be put into the nosepiece until the vapour ascends to the tube over the cannula until it is very dark.
Then repeat this many times, until it burns.
And do not make this cure at the beginning if there is a wound. For this reason, add it to the wound, and do not make this cure unless it is at the decline of the heat of the wound.
If this instrument is not present with you, then take a tube and fit an end with wax so that it does not burn the nose: for the wax prevents the vapour from burning the nose; and this is good cure with health.
Regarding the extraction of spines and bones from the throat.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Often a tooth or a spine or a bone would adhere to the throat.
Then you should extract what is visible above what causes the pain, when you press the tongue with an instrument against the light and tell me that it is in the throat.
And if what is hidden in the throat does not appear to you, you should make a sick person fast before food digests in his stomach. Perhaps the part attached to the body should exit through the umbilicus.
Perhaps the sick person should swallow a dry piece of bread, or a leaf of lettuce, or swallow a dry cracker: or take a dry sea sponge and consume it; and bind it with a string, and then swallow it. When therefore he has reached the place where there are bristles or a tooth, and is removed (from the body), then he comes out.
If, however, he does not come out with it as I have said above: then use an instrument made of tin in the form of a funnel.
Let it be thicker than the radius by a little bit, and at its end let there be a roundness that can easily be inserted into his throat: and he himself should hold his head raised up.
And let him avoid touching his epiglottis, so that he does not cough, and pushes (the food) with it into his mouth, or inserts a bristle or a tooth with his own hand.
But because the sick person swallows it, that is better: according to his knowledge of the site of the attached part; and he pushes down or holds up his hand with the instrument, all this according to the quantity prepared for him, until he comes out.
Regarding the extraction of blood:
Chapter 39.
When you treat with blood-suckers as I have said above in the division of cure with the medicines, and they do not yield, then note in the throat in front of the light, or near to the light after having touched his tongue with the instrument that I have told you about.
If your yawn falls on a blood-sucker, extract it with a small hook, or with subtle movements, and turn it away.
If it is not possible with them: then take a closed tube and insert it into the throat up to the place where the throat meets; and then insert into the tube an ignited iron with fire. Make it many times over: and the sick person should abstain from all water during the day.
Then he shall take a full cup of cold water and open his mouth to it; and he shall set his mouth to hers and swallow nothing from it; and he shall moisten the water with his hand an hour after another. For a leech will fall at once when he feels the water.
But if he does not go out with him as we have described, then he will smoke the sick with lice, or with a tube as an instrument that we described in smoking the uvula.
Do this many times, for she will fall herself.
And the mode of operation in smoking is that you take a bowl, in which there are the uvulae of the louse with fire; and the bowl is covered with a cover, in whose middle there is an opening; and the end of the instrument is placed in it.
Then you will throw the smoke and put the sick person's mouth at the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that he does not go out with the smoke until you know that the smoke has reached the leech. For the leech falls immediately.
If he does not fall, then repeat the smoking many times.
And the sick person will bear hunger, and eat food, and other things, and will not drink water.
Therefore it is necessary that he go out with this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument from which the leech is removed from the throat when he falls on it and sticks to it.
It is similar to pincers, as you see: unless there is a small hole that enters into the throat. And its end is similar to an ear, which is called a cicogna, in which there is the keenness of the lime; and when it grasps something, it does not let it go at all.
Regarding the opening of the apotomates, and their sectioning, and care in general.
Chapter 40.
There are many kinds of apotomates, many ways, according to which the memory comes, namely, one, and one in this book: and they differ in the perforation of them, and in the sectioning of them from two kinds.
There is one which is of the species of aphemia in itself, and because it comprehends from the humors.
And the second way is because of the places, in which it happens from the body.
Since the aphemia happens in the head, it is different from the accident of aphemia in the anus; and the aphemia which happens in a fleshy place, it is different from the accident of aphemia in joints; and each of them has its own judgment according to operation.
And of the aphemias are those which do not need to pierce, except after the maturation of blood in them, and its completion; and of these are those which need to pierce when they are raw, and do not mature according to the completion.
As aphemia which is near joints.
Since the aphemia happens when it is near a joint, and its prolongation exists until what is around it is putrefied, so that the ligaments or nerves of that joint may have腐り始め、それゆえそのメンバーの収縮の原因となる。
Or is an aphemia at a main member: for if you delay the piercing of it until it matures, it will hurt either itself or by that main member.
Or is near a finger, so pierce it when it is immature: and do not need to pierce an raw aphemia, without completion of digestion, because it is near a finger, lest it should putrefy deep, and its lengthen to the inside of the anus, and become a fistula, or in the term of that which does not heal.
It is necessary that you know the time of piercing the aphemia, which has matured according to completion: and it is in the sedating of pain, the receding of fever, and the diminution of rubefaction, and pulse, and acuteness of head for an aphemia: and the other signs.
And it is necessary that you make the same piercing in a lower place of aphemia, and more prominent eminence: and let the piercing be cutting along the length of the body, if aphemia are in parts of hand and foot, and places of fingers, and of chords, and nerves, and arteries, and up to the last in all equal places, which is there no reflection.
In those that reflect, guide with a second perforation according to that member.
When however there is a hematoma in the fleshy places: then it is better that you should cease the perforation of it until its digestion is confirmed, as we have said, according to the complement.
For if you pierce it before that, the course of the virus will be prolonged from it, and it is full of dirt and stench, and perhaps it will harden its lips, and its depth.
And certain hematomas are pierced according to the breadth of the body when necessary: or according to that by which the member feels pain.
And it is necessary that you administer a small perforation in hematomas that are small and a wide perforation in hematomas that are large: or several sections according to the size of the hematoma.
And there are hematomas in which the skin must be closed up: and it happens when it has already been made like a cloth, and has reached its term, because it is already dead: like that which happened to many, such as blisters, and boils.
And there are those that cut off with three angles. And one of them is like the figure of a fig tree's leaf.
As the hematoma in the groin.
And there are those in which a round section is administered, and a lunar section: and similar ones to these sections.
In fact, as for that which has no head, such are the superficial hematomas, you should pierce it with a superficial perforation, or just flatly.
And it is necessary that when the hematoma is large, and has already gathered much blood, and you pierce it, so that it does not come out with everything, but take out a part of it: but draw out from it all at once. Then cover the hematoma until the next day. Then draw out some of the pus again.
Make it many times according to a graduation, until it comes out: especially if the person is weak of vigor, or a woman who is pregnant, or a boy who is young, or an old man who is decrepitous: for the spirit of the animal often resolves from the animal with the exit of the blood: and perhaps the sick one will die, and you do not perceive it.
Therefore, this chapter is written with great caution.
And after you have made the hole, from which you make the incisions, it should be necessary that you wash off the wound: and consider. But if the wound is small or the cut is flat, then administer wine from linen, or old cheesecloth. But if the wound is great and there are many cuts of the incision, then you should put licorice into each crease until they have healed together.
And if you have cut off a part of the skin in the wound, or if it is circumcised all around: then you should fill it with old cheesecloth, or as when the cloth is wrinkled, or scrubbed with linen thread without moisture: and bind it tightly until the third day.
Then throw it away, and take care of that with it as you should with ointment, until it is healed.
But if there is a flow of blood during your operation, then administer cold water and vinegar after it has been soaked up by the cloth: and lay it down repeatedly on the site of the bleeding.
But if the flow of blood persists, then you should administer a regimen and treatment, and powders which I have mentioned in many places in this book, and by division.
But if it is in the wintertime and the site of the wound has many nerves: then you should put powders on it with wine and hot oil: and lay them down.
And if it is in the summer and the places are fleshy: then you should put powders soaked in water and oil, or wine and oil, and all of that cold thing. Until the third day, as we have said, then you should remove the wound, wash it off, and administer to it what is suitable for its cure, until it is healed.
This is therefore what is necessary from the understanding of the treatment of wounds in general.
Indeed, according to half the distance between the two extremes, I have already spoken about all that concerns the care of the eyes, which is a way leading specifically to their cure.
Head 31.
§ On the sections of the scars that occur on the scalp.
On the scalp small scars occur, and they are of two kinds: nodules, which are surrounded by membranes that become sacs: they are almost like the feathers of a hen.
And there are many kinds of these scars.
Of them some are small; and of them some contain moisture similar to a lime; and of them some contain moisture similar to a dew or a mucus; and some are like stones, and some are hard.
And in the section of all these, nor is there any danger in their extraction, provided that you do not make a contrast with the arteries when you are cutting them out.
And the operation on these sections is such that you should try it out with a tool whose shape has been formed after this, which is called the Intromissum, until you know what it contains.
For if it is that which contains moisture, then dry it up by a second cut along its length: in this form.
And begin with the cut from line B to line G. When therefore the moisture is drained out, then remove the scab that contains this moisture, and do not leave any of it behind.
For many times it will return if some of it remains.
Then submerge the wound in Egyptian ointment if it is present, and if not, in water and salt: and fill it with the ointment, and leave it until another day. For this destroys what remains of the scab.
Then repeat the application of the Egyptian ointment on the wound a second and third time, and if your hand can bear it, continue to apply the ointment until you are satisfied that there is no longer any scabs. Indeed, this care with ointment will heal the wound.
If the abscess contains a swollen nodule: then dry it up according to this form, having the shape of a cross: and throw out the hooks between the folds of the incision, and scrape it off from all parts: and try your skill in removing the tickling skin which contains it.
But if it makes you contrary, then do as I shall tell you after.
And also do the same in the abscess, if it is hard, from the incision, and the cure in the same way as we have said.
And the section over a hard abscess is easier: for there is little blood and moisture. And sometimes some of these abscesses which are in the head in certain men do not have any moisture inside.
Which is this: because I followed over an abscess in the head of a married woman, and found an abscess like a solid and hard stone, rough, white, which could not be broken: and if anyone hit it with a blow, he wounded the flesh.
But in other head abscesses, apart from this, those which happen in the heads of boys, and at the roots of the ears, all of them are only superficial incisions.
Or put a perforation in them always from their lower part, so that the course of the poultice goes to the lower parts.
Then care for them with what suits them after the cure is over.
On the section of the striae in the neck.
Chapter LII. The head.
These abscesses often happen in the neck, and under the shoulders, and in the groin: and sometimes they happen all over the body.
And over those which happen from them in the neck, there is one and many: and they are born from one; and every stria comes out of its own tunica, as we have said.
And the kinds of these striae are many. And from these are the leaves; and from these are those which retain moisture; and from these are the evil ones, which do not submit to healing.
For in that which you see good of disposition in touch, whose color is clear and close to the skin, and moves towards all sides, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the jugulars, nor to the arteries, nor is it deep: let it be separated from the superficial section from the upper part to the lower part of the line, c. to the line, g., and scrape it off completely: and extend two skin flaps with a hook, or with multiple hooks, if you wish it, as we have said in the scalp bumps, and pull it out slowly.
And it is super cautelam, that not incideat venam, or nervum.
And let it not be acuter than the knife sharpens: so that it does not give you a hand with the incision, or disturb the sick, and you fall into something that is not necessary.
But if you cut a vein, or an artery, or prevents you from the operation, then place in a wooden peg three times broken, or some powder that stops the blood, and tighten the peg, and let it go, until the sharpness of the bump is softened, and the peg is softened: or he begins to rot.
For the blood is stopped by the powder: so that you can proceed with your operation, until you are finished.
Then examine it with your index finger, if there is anything left of the warts with a few others: so cut them and clean them up.
For if there is a large vein in the root of the warts: then let it not be cut from its root; but let it be tied with a strong doubled thread, and let it go until it falls by itself without doing any harm.
Then fill the peg with old tar, which you have already immersed in Egyptian ointment. Then the care for himself.
If the incised skin is whole, then you should gather two wounds together: and if you see that there is no excess left, then immediately stop.
But if you see that there is excess because of the size of the Strophe, then you should understand to incise its root and remove it; and administer the suture which we have described.
And which of the Strophae contains moisture, pierce it with a superficial piercing: so that you can see the place of maturity of it: and place the piercing from there because of what follows below the body, as we have said.
Then administer after the piercing with a liniment ointment and similar to it so that it corrupts what remains from corruption, until when you see that the wound has already been cleaned up: then take care of himself with a ointment for the generation of flesh, until he heals.
Chapter XLIII.
§ On the section of the epiglottis within the throat due to accident.
The ancient ones said that this section of the epiglottis, and no one in our land has done it, and this is the writing of their words.
But in those who have a synechieuzy, the section of the epiglottis should be removed: since it does not form an impediment by that means: because all the nostrils and lung are weak.
In these, however, who have a warm aphemia in the mouth or in the throat or in both amygdali, when there is no disease in the canal, it is necessary to use the section of the epiglottis, so as to escape from the destruction which happens from pre-condition.
It is necessary, therefore, when we want to cut this, so as to remove the epiglottis with small circles according to their size, which is between two circles according to the quantity, that it be a section in a sifil, not in a cartilage: and this place is fitting for sectioning, because it is apart from flesh, and the blood vessels are far from it.
If the surgeon is timid, then he should spread the skin with a hook for the gut. Then he will find the skin, until he reaches the canal: he must stop the blood if he sees anything come out of it.
Then he will make a incision in the soft part that we have mentioned: and it is shown on the section of the canal from pus which comes out from it, with what happens when it is interrupted, and with the abruption of the voce.
And let the wound remain open for a while.
When therefore the time is right, so that there is no fear of healing, take two lips of the wound skin, and seal it all by itself without the cartilage.
Then administer medicines which make flesh grow, until it heals.
Says Albucasis. Says Albucasis. The summary of this account, which we have mentioned, is not exposed unless it is known that the wound has already started to heal, and the sick person has been raised above death, and his anhelous desire has passed: they go to the throat to let the sick breath on a certain spot, and save him from death: for this reason they ordered to leave the wound open, until the malice of sickness is consumed, and it is as though its malice is itself: then they directed that the wound be closed, and care for himself, until he heals.
And this which I saw through myself, is that a servant girl took a knife and put it into her mouth, and cut off with it a part of the lung canal.
And I was called to cure her, and I found her grunting like a dead person.
Then I removed the wound thread, and I found blood which was coming out from a small wound. I therefore confessed that she had not cut off the nail, and I did not know how to do it: and wind came out of the wound.
Therefore, I did not feel pain, and I cared for myself until it healed; and nothing happened to the servant girl except a sore throat, and she recovered after a few days of improved health.
Therefore, I say that there is no fear when it comes to the epiglottis.
Regarding the hernia of the throat.
Chapter 44: Head
This swelling, called a hernia of the throat, is a large swelling, second only to color, and it occurs often in women.
And it has two causes: either natural or accidental.
Certainly, there is no fault in nature.
On the other hand, it is accidental and has two similarities with the lymph nodes. And the other mode is similar to a swelling that occurs due to the inflammation of an artery. And there is a fear there, and it should not be assumed as such without proof, unless it is small: and you should test it and investigate it with an instrument. If then the swelling is similar to a large lymph node and is not suspended with any veins: then cut it off as you would cut off the nodes: and remove it along with what contains it if it is in a sac: and if not, then examine it thoroughly. Then take care of the spot, as is necessary for healing, until it heals on its own.
Chapter 50: Head
Regarding the section above the nodules:
There are many kinds of nodules, and I have already spoken about their differences: it is necessary for me to describe the difference between nodules and swollen lymph nodes, as there is some doubt.
I say that when it comes to the exit, there is heat, fever, and painful pain, until an excess of fluid boils over, and putrefaction is completed: then, indeed, the fever and heat subside.
When it comes to a nodule, there is no heat, fever, or pain, and they are contained in sacs, which are their own sacs, and are of the color of the body: and they begin as beans, and resemble a basket, and are larger and smaller.
And they are of two kinds: either dry or wet. And the colors of moisture are many, as I said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to cure a node, you should test it and inquire about it first with the instrument called Intromissum, according to its form in the chapter which is after this one.
And the method of examining pustules and all nods is, that you take this instrument and introduce it into a moistened place which you have opened in the pustule: and you shake your fingers with it slowly, until you know that the instrument has penetrated the skin. Then you take the last hand of yours according to the size of the pustule.
Then remove Intromissum and examine what comes out of his opening.
If then there comes out a running moisture, whatever its color is: then dry the skin with a section, as I said of all pustules.
If then there does not come out moisture in the opening of Intromissum, you should know that it is fat: so dry on the skin with a section having the shape of a cross, according to this form, as I have taught you: and suspend it with hooks, and scrape the skin from all parts easily: and guard the cupping glass if you can over it, that you may drain out the healthy fluid with the Node.
If then the cupping glass breaks during the operation and it is not possible to drain out the healthy fluid, since this happens many times: then remove it quickly until nothing remains of it.
For if there remains of it a little bit or much, the Node returns after many things.
That if it wins you and remains of it a little bit: then fill the wound at your completion with some powdered corrosives acute: and tighten the bandage, and put it above the skin which sits the pustule warm, and take care of the skin with the rest of the cure, until it heals.
If then there is a large knot, then cut his two lips and care for it with him as it has become inflamed.
If however you have a new wound that pulses, or not pulsating: then approach, and fill the space under the skin with dried earth, and let it rest for two days, or three, until the tendon rots, and the bleeding stops: then go back to cutting out what is left of the knot.
Chapter XLVIII. On tools for cutting and drilling.
§ On the tools for cutting and drilling.
From these are the forms of intromission, and they are of three kinds.
For from these is a large one, and from these is a medium one, and from these is a small one.
Let there be made out of iron a quadrangular piece with depressed ends, that it may prevent the entrance of the incised part.
And these are the forms of percussion, and there is one, that is, the perforating: and they are of three kinds. One is called a mallet, that is, a perforator; and these are of three kinds.
For from these is a large one, and a medium one, and a small one.
Let there be made out of wood the appendages, and the outlets, and the tubes, and the buboes from him who is between them from the bones.
And others are round, and three-sided, and smooth, like the large needle with which the seats are supported, made of amber, or of brass, or of iron, or of silver.
And better ones are those made of amber.
And there are also percussion instruments of black lead, which are to be used that they may experience the outlets, whose reflections are to be managed, so as to reflect with their softness with those reflections.
And again they are of three kinds. For from these are long, and from these is medium, and from these is short, according to the quantity of the width of the tube and the strictness of its tightness.
Form A of Vinculum, and there are many species.
Because they are simple ones, that is, those with one curvature: and there are three species as you see, Great, Medium, and Small.
And from them are Blind Vincula: and there are three species.
And from them are Vincula with two curvatures, and there are three species: and from them are Vincula with three curvatures, and there are three species: and all of these are necessary in their place.
And these are the forms of Scalpels, with which they cut and ablate Knots and Abscesses: and there are three species: because from them is Great, Medium, and Small.
Their extremities with which the section is acute, other extremities are not acute: and they do not put them together, unless it is made with them a incision in order to cure an injury of the skin or nerve: and in order that the sick person should heal by it, and find a little bit of calmness from the burning than he finds when excoriating Abscesses.
They are made of brass, and they are similar to the radius, with which it is made alcohol: and in the long edge there is a small dot called "Spatulimilis" hidden: and in it it runs inside and outside when you use it, as you see.
Form of the Spatula which are hidden between fingers at the perforation of Abscesses: and they do not perceive them when they are injured: and there are three species, Great, Medium, and Small.
Form of the Windless which with which is cut off the flow of blood: and there are three species, Great, Medium, and Small.
Let them be made of brass, or yellow, round, about the same length as you see: and let them be delicate.
And let these species of Wind be with you Great and Small: in order that you might cut off blood with them at a high speed when necessary, and then when there is no medicine present for you.
Indeed, you should not use them in the abscission of blood from anywhere on the body, and you should only use them in muscular places: such as the legs, hips, arms, breasts, wrists, groin, and similar places made of muscular tissue, which are moist.
And when they become from them small instruments like the palm of the hand, according to their form: with which blood is cut off when it flows out from the site of phlebotomy, or at the incision of a vein, or an artery; and sometimes they become round according to this form.
Chapter LVII. On the care of the genitals.
On the care of the breasts of men which are like the breasts of women.
When the breasts of some men swell at night (that is, when they begin to be irritated in sleep) until they resemble the breasts of women: and remain swollen with milk.
Whoever wishes to avoid this (that is, milk coming out) should bind the breasts with a lunar band, according to this form, from A to B and G. Then scrape the whole area of the skin. Afterwards fill a wound with an ointment made from incarnated flesh. Then gather together the two lips of the wound with a suture, and take care of it, until it heals.
But if the breast sways towards the lower parts, and becomes soft through its size, as happens to women: then it is necessary that two sections according to the lunar form be found on either side of it, each one joined with the other by a line such as A joins B and G; and then the skin which is between the two lips should be scraped off, and the milk removed, and what we have said about the suture and powders, which are necessary in curing, should be applied, until it heals.
But if you do not wish to cut into it, because of the sickness or the flow of blood: then fill it with a corrupted oil-based ointment, and leave it, until what is left of the milk is corroded by it. Then the care for himself, until he is well.
As for the perforation of the abscess, which happened during the Titans.
Head LXXVIII.
This abscess that happens during the Titans, is of the kind of hard Strophula, which contains a blister, and from it are those that contain moisture.
Since, therefore, those are of the kind that contain moisture, it should be cut with a lunar section, according to this form, from line b to line g; and then, when all that is in the abscess has been drained out, then fill it with old dung, and let it go until another day.
Then the dung is to be removed, and he is to be cared for with an ointment suitable for it, until he is well.
If the abscess is of the kind of nodular Strophula, then cut on top of it, as we have said in the section on Strophula equally.
But if a nerve is extended in this way so that it emits pus, then administer cauterization on it, according to what we said above in that which was premised.
Head LXXIX.
As for the section of an abscess that happens because of the artery and vein.
When the artery is broken and the skin that is above it has become hardened, then very often there happens an abscess from it; and also because of the veins, so that it happens to them as it does to the artery, namely, that there happens an abscess and swelling.
And the signs by which it is known that an abscess and swelling are because of the artery and vein, are these: for, when an abscess is because of the artery, it is long, gathered in the depths of the body; and when the swelling of the abscess makes its way to your fingers, you feel as if there were a whistle in them.
And that which is because of the vein, is round in manifest form of the body.
And the section on this abscess is a mistake, and especially because it is under the armpits, and in the groin, and in the neck, and in many other places of the body; and it is great and very painful. Therefore, so that his care may be with iron, and since it is also in the extremities or in the head, let it be used.
Therefore, so that his care may be with iron, and since it is also in the extremities or in the head, let it be used. Super this therefore that is out of the inflammation of the opening of the artery, find in the skin section in length. Then open the section with a hook, then the artery: and free it from the tunics, until it is detected.
Then introduce under it the hook, and let it penetrate all the way to another side, and tighten the artery with a double thread at two places, according to what I taught you in the extraction of two arteries which are in the temporal region.
Then pierce the place that is between the two ligaments with a needle, until all the blood inside it comes out, and dissolve the aphthoma.
Then administer the cure that generates pus, until the ligaments fall: then care for it with unguents suitable for it, until it heals.
That if there is an aphthoma due to the section of a vein, then you must hold your hand so that you can get rid of the aphthoma with the skin for you as much as possible. Then introduce the hook under the place that you held with your hand, and let it penetrate: and let it go into it a double thread, until you get it out of the other side. Then bind the aphthoma with that good ligament: according to what I told you in the binding of a vein, from two parts with its two extremities with a thread.
If however you are going to extract a thread, then introduce another hook with another thread under the aphthoma all along the incision of the blade: press, and tighten your threads in four places.
Then dry up the aphthoma from its middle until it comes out what is inside it: then make an incision on the skin, and let go of what is bound to it.
Then put on top of that a very fine powder that you immersed in wine, and oil. Then administer the cure, which is done with liniments and ointments, until it heals.
Ch. 52
The next chapter deals with what happens when the nerves are twisted.
As happens with the apostema in an artery or vein, so it happens with nerves; that is, if there is a piercing, or if it comes from excessive work, and similar things: and it often happens to them in the places of the joints, or of the heel, and in any place where the tendons move: and it is a gray apostema.
Its color is similar to the rest of the body, and it is in many dispositions without pain: and when it is pressed with swelling, it feels like a kind of stupor within it.
And it is not an accumulated apostema in the depth of the body, but under the skin, and it moves all over, and does not complain about anything to the front, or ahead, or behind.
Therefore what is in the joints should not be touched with a iron. Perhaps, however, it happens because of contraction.
But in that which is in the head, or in the forehead, find a skin with swelling. If it is then a small apostema, then hold it with forceps and cut it off at the root.
And if it is a big one, then hang it on an hook, and scrape it off: then remove it, and gather the wound with a stitch: and take care of it, until it heals.
The head of the chapter on the cutting of apostemas,
Ch. 54 De sectione apostematis, quod accidit in ventriculo
Such things often happen to certain men, and to the rest of their bodies, those growths which are called "fungia", on account of their resemblance to fungi.
Their roots are small, and their heads are large, and their lips are spread wide. And they are few in number; and there is one which increases greatly in size.
And I did indeed see a man, and in his belly were two worms, which were more than other similar fungi: there was no difference between them, they were white, and their roots were small; and their lips were spread out, and they had a lot of moisture always running from them.
So I did indeed see a man, and in his belly were two worms, which were more than other similar fungi: there was no difference between them, they were white, and their roots were small; and their lips were spread out, and they always had a lot of moisture running from them. So I cut off these, and I found in the weight of one almost ten and eight ounces, and in the other almost six ounces; And the operation in cutting them is, that you should consider then, if he is weak, moist, and the color of the worms is white, moist, subtile roots: then cut him with a wide chisel, and let cauterization be in your presence on fire.
Indeed, many times the blood is discharged from him a lot when he is cut: so close if you are defeated by blood, then cauterize him.
That if you see him weak, timid, and afraid of the cut with iron, then take a wire from lead that is curved: and pull it with him athelum: whose mode I have said, and let go of him for two days.
Then add to the tightness of the lead. So do not cease to tighten the lead, when it presses on the worms, until it is cut off, and falls by itself without work.
If, however, the worms are big roots, then there is some fear and fear in cutting them: especially because they are in the belly.
But it is possible to cut half of it. Then cauterize him, so that he does not return.
Then care for the man until he heals.
And do not suppose that you can cut the worms which are of a dark color, few senses, and an appetizing appearance: for he is indeed an apostema cancerous: and I will come back with the memory of Cancer after this.
Chapter LII. On the care of the umbilical cord.
On the care of the umbilicus.
To deal with various causes of umbilical care. It may emerge from a fistula that opens on the belly below: or it may emerge from the rectum, according to whether it occurs in the remaining ruptures. Or from blood that flows from a vein, or from an artery, as stated above. Or from a constricted pleat of skin.
If, however, it emerges from a fistula that is clean and the discharge is thick: then it resembles the color of fresh blood: it is soft, without pain: and it appears in various places. And if it is due to the exit of the intestine, then its location is with that which we have mentioned, more varied in character. When you press upon it with your fingers, it is hidden: then it returns, and perhaps has a sound: and it is very prominent at the entrance of the anus, and causes a rumbling noise.
If, however, it is due to moisture, it is soft, and does not hide itself when pressed by your hand, nor becomes tight, nor does it add to itself.
If it is due to blood, then with these signs appears a bruise of a dark color at the tip.
If, however, it is due to raw flesh: then it is a bruise of a gray, thick, hard color, and discolors according to the quantity of one unit.
If, however, it is due to a flow of air, then the sensation of touching it is soft.
And the operation in that case is, as you should consider, if the umbilical eminence is due to blood of an artery or vein or a flow of air: then one should refrain from treating it. For in that is fear and dread, as I taught you in the chapter in which I said that bruises are due to an artery and a flow of air.
If the umbilical eminence is due to an intestine or a hernia, then you should prescribe for the sick person to hold his breath and remain standing with his body extended. Then mark with encaustum around the navel altogether. Then order him to lie down on his back between your hands. Then, with a mallet, beat around the navel from side to side in the place that you marked out with encaustic. Then extend the mid-line of incision upward, with a large hook. Then tie him around strongly with thread or silk knot: and let the knot be tied to an unharmed part of his body.
Then open the mid-line incision that you have extended, above the lymphatic duct. If you have already found the patient's hernia through the lymphatic duct: then pull out the ligature and insert your index finger into him, pushing the intestine towards his insides: and if you find a hernia: then grasp it with the hook, and cut off its surplus.
If, however, the opposite side is an artery, or a vein: then mark him all around. Then return to your operation. And take two needles and insert two strong threads into them: and insert the two needles around what you have marked out around the hernia in the shape of a cross, which you make to penetrate.
Then tighten the hernia in four places on the needles: and if you wish, remove the needle, and leave the place, until the flesh has become rotting: and let it fall down of itself: or cut it off when it becomes slimy and rotten.
Then care for the patient with unguents as needed, until he is healed.
If the navel's eminence is made of flesh that has become hard in it, or of moisture: then you must tighten the hernia, as we have said. And extract the blood or moisture that you have injected into him.
Then care for the patient with unguents so that the place hardens up.
Chapter LIII.
Of the canکر.
We have already spoken about the division of cancer, and how it is treated with medicines; and how to guard against its spreading by curettage with an iron implement, so that it does not ulcerate: and we spoke about cancer arising in the womb, and about the precautions needed for its treatment.
And the ancients said that when ever cancer is in a place where it can be eradicated: such as cancer that is in the breast, or in the thigh, and similar places, from the member located to extract all of it: especially when it is just beginning.
When however it is old, and is great, it should not be approached.
For I cannot heal from him anyone: nor did I see any other who has come to that.
And the operation in it, when it is located like we have said, is, as the saying goes, so that you go ahead and you release the fever from black cholera sometimes. Then phlebotomy itself if it is bloated with evident fullness.
Then prepare the sick with preparation, in which he is located with the operation.
Then throw on cancer the hooks that are suitable for him. Then wrap up the cancer with all the skin, according to the tracing, until there remains nothing of its roots: and let the blood not run, nor do you tear it quickly, except that you express the places, and wipe away the gross blood entirely by your hand, or with whatever is possible there.
But if it makes you contrary that the gross blood flows out from the incision of an artery or a vein: then cauterize the vein until the blood is cut off. Then take care of the cancer with the remaining cure, until it heals.
§ On the treatment of hydrops.
Head LIIII. We have already covered in the division of the species of Hydrops, and how water is aggregated: and the signs of each species, and the cure of it with medicines.
And those who are cured with iron, it is not except a single species of asclepius: and it does not approach iron of tympanic species: nor does the species of hyposarcoma go deep: for that is deadly.
When you are already treated with this species of Hydrops tympanic with medicines, and your treatment has not been successful: then consider. If the sick person has already been afflicted with one kind of illness and then another, different from hydropisis: as when he has cough, or diacrisis of the urinary tract, and such like: then be careful not to treat him with iron: for there is a fear of that.
But if you see a healthy person with an excess of strength and there is no illness other than hydropisis: nor is he a boy or an old man: then the method of operation in him is, that you should stand him between your hands, and let him express his wind from his hand driving water to the lower part of the rib cage.
Then take a spikelet with thorns, shaped like this. Set two sharp parts, one long and the other sharp at its end like a spikelet. But in him there is something that gradually becomes shorter, so that you do not break it while operating near the intestine, and you do not hurt him.
Then consider. For if there is generation of hydropisis from the part of the intestines, then it should be extended with a cut from the navel by three fingers' width, going directly below it on the rib cage.
But if there is generation of hydropisis due to liver illness: then your cut from the navel should be by three fingers' width on the left side.
And if that generation is due to the spleen: then your cut on the right side should be. And it should not also be that you cut on the side opposite to where the sick person lies, so that no fluids run to that weak place.
Then pierce the skin with an instrument all around. Then introduce it into the cut, and press with your hand with the spikelet between the skin, and squirt, as if you were washing him out: and let the amount that is washed be the amount of a nail, or around that.
Then pierce the squirt, until the spikelet reaches the empty place: and there is water. Then extract the same, and introduce into the hole an instrument whose this is the form. And it is similar to a tube: it is made of silver, or brass, or copper, or leather, or felt; and has on its lower part a small hole, and on its sides three holes, two on one side, and one from the other: and its end is incised according to the form of a penknife, as you see: at its upper end there is an armlet.
For when the instrument has reached the water, then immediately it descends over the instrument, and then it evaporates from the water at the same rate as the quantity of medium.
For if you evaporate from it more than is necessary, in an hour perhaps a sick person dies by the resolution of his animal spirit: or that happens to him which approaches death with fainting.
But evaporate from it according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what you indicate to you with respect to the dispositions of the nurse by its pulsation, and by its goodness.
Then extract the instrument, and retain the water.
That is, because it retains immediately by reason of the skin which retains the hole that is over the sifac: of which I tell you, so that you make it according to that method.
Then repeat the instrument on the other day, if you see that the sick one tolerates that thing: and extract also from the water a quantity of dust.
Make it those days without fear, and guard yourself from error: until there does not remain in the water except a little dust.
But if you are with the sick one, and you dismiss from the water a great deal: then take care of him with the grave on hot sand, and with great sweat in the bath and in the sun, and let him wait on hunger: and cauterize over the stomach, and the liver, and the spleen, after extraction of the water: according to what I tell you beforehand.
Of the care of infants who are born in places of their urinary system not pierced.
Chapter 50.
When any of the infants come out from his mother's womb, and the head of the child is not pierced, or there is a hole made narrow, or it is not in its own place.
Therefore, one should help with the piercing of him immediately when he is born, with a thin hook, according to this form.
Then put a small plug in the hole from lead, and bind him together: and hold him for three days, or four.
When therefore he wants to urinate, let it be moved, and let it go away. Then reduce the child again.
And if you do not put lead on, then it is possible that the urine which has flowed over the place, does not cause the child to be closed.
But he who has a small hole, is healed with lead, as we have said, for many days, until it becomes larger.
But those in whom the hole is not in its own place, are wounded. That is to say, since from those who are born, the hole is at the end of the penis' head: so that he cannot urinate in front, until he raises his penis by hand towards the sky. And there is no generation in him, therefore, because the semen cannot reach the mother according to its uprightness: and it is a severe illness.
And the method of action in that is, so that he lies on his back. Then extend the child's penis with your left hand by a strong extension, and cut the head of the penis from the proper place, with an edge, or with a sharp hook: as if you were cutting a staff, or like when you want to chop something, so that it resembles the head of the penis: and let the hole fall in the middle according to what is necessary.
And cause for yourself, during your work, from the flow of blood. For this often happens. Then stop the blood by him, and heal the wound, until it is healed.
Of the wounds that occur on the prepuce and the scalp of the scrotum, and corruption, blackening, and adhesion.
De Albather quae accidunt in praeputio et
(Sometimes these wounds occur on the scrotum, and there is a distension of foul flesh.)
(And from it another is malicious, and another is not malicious.)
(So the non-malicious one should be suspended with a subtle hook, and cut it off entirely until you wash it completely.) (Then put on top of it a cloth dipped in Egyptian ointment.) (Then take care for the wound with dye-finicon after that with ointment until it heals.)
(If the albather is malicious and of a foul color, then you should administer cauterization on it after cutting it and shaving it.)
(If, however, the albather is caught in the foreskin and not circumcised, and a part of the albather is within the foreskin, and a part outside: then you should remove the albather which is within first, until it is consolidated, then take care of the one outside: for when you do take care of it at the same time, the foreskin will not be secure unless it is pierced.)
(And there also happen wounds on the testicles and blackening and corruption on the foreskin.) (Then you should bring to a head all that which has already been blackened, and what wishes to corrupt, or what is already corrupted.)Aliquid enim ex illa albather non fuit nisi malus et malignus: itaque quod in praeputio, in uirga, et in testiculis accidere, om
(For some of that albather was not good and malicious: so that which happened on the foreskin, on the scrotum, and on the testicles, then take care with a line on top of it after that which has already been crushed with honey that has already been crushed with flour from granulated grains, and with herb
(Then take care for it with the remaining cure, until it heals.)
(If, however, blood flow occurs, then administer cauterization with lunar cautery, in this form.)
The cautery is used for two purposes at one time, namely to stop the flow of blood and to destroy a wound when it has become corrupted.
If the head of the wound has腐敗，and is destroyed entirely in an hour: then you should insert a copper tube into the meatus priapium，so that the sick can urinate on it.
However，if the foreskin adheres to the head of the penis，and this adhesion does not occur except in that whose foreskin is healthy，and circumcision is not required on it: and when an adhesion occurs due to a wound or a hematoma：then you should cut it out with a blunt scalpel，until the ligaments are released，and the head of the penis is freed from all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish them carefully，then you should cut off some from the head of the penis，and from the foreskin. That is，because when the foreskin is thin，it may be pierced quickly because of its thinness.
Then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a soft piece of linen，which has already been soaked in cold water，so that it does not adhere again.
Then treat with wine containing stichic acid，until it hardens.
Chapter LVII.
§ On the purification of infants and treatment from error by accident.
Circumcision is not a solution to continence，like other wounds: however，it is our desire and its use in boys is proper，we must indicate in it a better operation，and introduce a lighter one leading to health.
I say，the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books: for they do not follow their own laws，and it is only what we have learned through experience.
That is，because I discovered most of the arts，and the use of leeches and bloodletting for purification，circumcision with sharp tools，and sewing with thread，and cutting with nails.
I have indeed already tested all these methods, and I did not find any better method of cleansing with tweezers and thread.
For when очищing with needles, the skin often falls off. Since the foreskin has two tunics, perhaps one may be cut on the outside, and the other inside, and it is necessary to consider cutting that one, since it will hurt if it is left alone. And when the cleansing done by the finger is used, that is, a surgical instrument, it does not secure the incision at the end of the genital member, since perhaps it enters into its opening.
But in cleansing with a nail, perhaps the iron will break and ruin your work, and since the skin of a boy is short by nature, it often grows like this, so it does not need to be cleansed, and I have seen it too.
But cleansing with tweezers and thread has shown me a good experiment: since the tweezers are of the same proportion as the incision, since the sharpness that is on top is the same as the sharpness that is on bottom. But when you put your hand in your hand, two sharpnesses are proportioned and work together at the same time, and it becomes a compression of a similar figure, holding the skin of the penis all around, so that there is no mistake at all.
And the operation has its own way, so that you can guess at it, especially if it is from those who understand a little bit, which you do not do, unless you tie the thread only in his penis: and you leave him until another day.
Then let him be happy and rejoice in everything that is possible for you to do for him, since he receives his intelligence. Then let him stand between your hands that are prepared to set him down, and do not let him sit, and hide the tweezers in your sleeve, or under your foot, so that he does not see them at all, nor any of the instruments.
Then insert your hand into his scrotum and blow on the flesh and pull it upwards until the head of the penis comes out. Then wash yourself from that which aggregates in her.
Then bind the marked place with double thread. Then bind below it with a ligament of about the same thickness as the second one. Then hold with your index finger and thumb the lower ligament securely, and cut between the two ligaments. Then wipe the flesh quickly upwards, and pull out the head of the penis. Then let the blood run slowly (for it is better) and put on dust from above: and on the dust a cloth spread out in which is spread out the cured one in rose water, shaken with fresh oil: and leave it on top until another day: and care for the rest of the body with cure, until it heals.
The shape of the forceps for cleaning is this.
The two ends should be joined together, and should not stick out: and the length of the two hooks should be equal to the length of the two hands when they are spread out.
But a mistake in cleaning is: for perhaps it will skip all the skin inside, or a part of it near the incision.
So you must stretch it out from your hour with your own nail before the examination of the site: and cut it by equal parts.
If you cannot hold it with your own nail, then remove it with a forceps, and cut it.
But if it has passed over three days and what is under the scrotum remains swollen with a fever, then leave it until it cools down, and clean off the sore with ease, and cut it according to your preparation: and care for the head of the penis. For that will not harm him.
So then care for that with the powder which we discussed in the book on powders: and if it is cut from the skin above the mark, and projects upwards, it does not harm him either.
Therefore, we shall proceed with this treatment until the patient is healed.
Head L VIII.
The extraction of a retained foreign body from the urethra.
Retention of urine in the bladder, occurs from an operation performed by the lodgement of a stone, or congealed blood, pus, or born meat, and similar things, as we have said in the various methods of cure.
And if the urine is not resolved by [the above methods], and if there is a retention of urine because of a stone which has already reached the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bedridden. Then he shall place his feet on his back, and he shall stretch his stomach from the upper part of his back, and he shall restrain his breath as much as possible. So it is calculated with the neck of the bladder to expel the stone towards the rear: for thus the urine is released.
If it is not resolved with the above-mentioned treatment and the patient is painful to him, then you should administer the extraction with an instrument called a syringe, which has this form. It is made of silver, and it is fine, smooth, and sharp like the stem of a feather in its thinness, long in the resemblance of the palm of a hand, and in the middle: having a thin cannula at the end.
And the mode of exit of urine through it is, that you take a double thread, and tie it firmly at the end with wool or cotton, good knot: and introduce the end of the thread into the lower part of the syringe: and cut it with scissors if there is anything excessive in the wool, truly, you introduce it into the cannula with care.
Then he shall dip the syringe in oil, or in butter, and in alum: and make him sit on a seat, and he should put his bladder into it, and with wet oils, olive oil, and warm water.
Then he shall introduce the syringe into his penis with ease, until it reaches the root of the penis.
Then cut twice above the navel.
Then push the syringe inside of it until it reaches the bladder, and feel that it is already weak as it approaches the empty thing: and do not do this according to this order unless the canal, in which he puts, is bent.
Then extend the thread with wool little by little. For the thread follows the wool.
Then pull it out, and let the thread run along the urinary passage: and again push the syringe, and do not cease to do this until the bladder is empty, and feel a relief.
As for the quality of bladder washing with a clepsydra.
Chapter LIX.
When a wound occurs in the bladder, or blood freezes in it, or pus is clotted in it, and water and medicines are distilled into it: then make use of an instrument called a clepsydra, and this is its shape.
For it is closed, that is to say, shut. And in it are three openings, two on one side and one on the other, as you see.
And the cavity in which the thing that pushes is located is according to the quantity that it obtains without addition, until when it is drawn with it something is attracted from the moisture: and when it is pushed, and is expelled far away: second in that a clepsydra drops naphtha, that is, Greek fire in battles of war.
When you are dropping water into the bladder, introduce the end of the clepsydra into the water, and draw it out with what pushes upward, for the water is drawn into the cavity of the clepsydra.
Then introduce the end of it into the penis, according to which we have described the syringe. Then push the water with what pushes, for that water immediately reaches the bladder, so that he feels it weak.
Form a thin cloth with which to wrap the urethra.
Make it of silver, or bronze; its head should be higher than the corresponding one and a little lower at the back, and there should be a space between it and the ligament below.
Then take the goat's urine and put it in it to help you urinate. Then tie it tightly between two holes with a strong double knot: and heat it slightly with hot water over the fire.
Then insert the tip of the cloth into the penis, and then grasp it tightly with your hand over the urethra with the water pressure, until the patient feels that the water has already reached the urethra.
If you don' have goat's urine at hand, then take a piece of parchment and make it into a ring, and pierce it from all sides with its roundness. Then insert a strong thread in those holes, as if they were spinning. Then gather the ring together, as you would a loaf of bread: once it is gathered, place in it what water, oils, and waters you want to use.
Then tie the ring on the instrument: and do so with your hand as you did with the goat' urine to make it come to the urethra.
Chapter LX.
The extraction of a stone.
We have already spoken at length in the division of the species of stone and their treatment with medicines; and we have distinguished between stones that are generated in the kidneys, and those in the urethra, and their various signs: we have described the stone that is formed by hand and its section: this is a stone that is generated in the urethra: and one that is formed in the stalk: and I am telling you these things with clear explanation and abbreviation.
I say, then, that a stone that is generated in the urethra, often happens to boys.
And of its signs is that urine flows from the urethra like water in its thinness: and it appears in it white sand, and grinds the man's penis, and struggles with it, and hangs often. Then he erects it and turns it with him; the anus is moved with many of them.
And this healing of young men is easy, from him until they reach the age of fourteen years. And it is difficult with old men. But in the young it is half-way between that and this: and the healing is easier if the stone is larger; but if small, it is turned away from its place.
So let us come to the healing, first of all it is necessary that we should clean up the sick with a clister, which draws out all the dung that is in his intestines: for he sometimes prevents the discovery of the stone in the examination.
Then let the sick person be taken with his feet and shaken and moved towards the lower parts, so that the stone may descend to the depths of the rectum or sometimes come out from its high place.
Then let him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands below his buttocks, so that the whole rectum may drop down towards the lower parts.
Then examine him, and touch him from outside.
If then you feel the stone in space, immediately approach it with a cut above him.
If it does not fall under your touch at all, then you must wipe the index finger with oil from your left hand if the sick person is a boy; or with the middle finger if he is a full grown man: and push him into some part of his rectum, and examine the stone until it is under your finger: and turn him gradually towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press on him with your finger and push him towards the outside against the place where you want to make the cut: and order one minister to squeeze the rectum with his hand, and another minister to extend the testicles with his right hand from above: and with his other hand, to move the skin, which is under the testicles in that part where the cut is to be made.
Then introduce the spatulum, which has this shape. And find in it what is between the anus and the testicles, and not in the middle, at the side of the birth to the left: and let the cut go across it, so that the cut is wide outside and tight inside, according to the quantity that it is possible for the stone to come out from there and not larger.
Perhaps then the finger, which is in the anus at the time of the cut, and goes out without difficulty: for the stone is pressed by the finger in the anus, and comes out without any difficulty.
And you know that from the stone are angles and edges, therefore it is difficult for it to come out: because of this.
And from it is smooth, similar to a gland, and round: and its exit is easy.
So then add to it those which have angles and edges, in the crevice.
If it does not come out in this way, then you must put on your hands on it: or you tie it with a strong rope, the end of which is as the moon, tying it over the stone and not pulling away from it: or you introduce below it a thin instrument, curved at its ends.
But if you cannot reach above with it, then make the hole slightly larger. If something from the blood causes you pain, cut off the part that hurts.
But if the stone is larger than one, then push in the first large piece into the bladder. Then cut on top of it. Then push in a small one after it: and do likewise if there are two or more.
If the large one is very much so, then ignorance is how to cut across the top of the stone with a large cut. Since it happens that one of the two things is ill, or that he dies, or that there is frequent passing of urine: then soon, since the place does not consolidate at all.
But bring about its expulsion, until it comes out: or put some device into the fracture with pliers, until you pull it out quickly.
When you have completed your operation, then insert the thistle, and aloe, and dragon's blood; and bind it tightly, and place a cloth impregnated with oil and wine over it, or with rosewater, and cold water: that the heat may be abated by the cooling.
And then bind up the wound on his neck, and do not separate the ligatures until the third day. When you have unbound him, wash the place with much oil and water.
Then take care of the wound with the dye-affin oil, and with the basilic oil, until it is healed.
But if the heat of the blister added and corroded, and he has similar things: it is known from the exit of blood with urine. Then insert your hand into the wound and draw out the blood. For if it remains, it incites to the corruption of the blister and to its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, and water, and salt: and oppose to it whatever is suitable for the cure, until it is healed.
And during the hours of cure, bind two pillows and bands, a cause for the medicines that are placed on the place.
For if it is smooth stone, and it sits in the meadow, and it forms in it, and prevents the exit of urine: then take care of him with it before you come to the section. For many times you will be spared from the section by this cure, for I have already tested it.
And there is, to take the Forferator of iron steel, whose this form is, triangular extremities, acute, fixed on a wood.
Then take a thread, and bind it with him under a stone so that he does not recede to the blister.
Then insert the piercing iron into the shaft with ease, until it reaches the Perforator to the stone: and remove the Perforator from your hand little by little in that stone: and seal the perforation of it, until you make him pierce through one side.
He urinates, so let him be immediately washed.
Then press your hand upon that which remained of the stone from the outside of the urethra. For it itself breaks and passes with the urine, and the sick person is healed.
If you are not prepared for this cure, because of something that prevents it from being carried out: then bind one strand of thread underneath the stone, and another strand above the stone. Then dry the stone on top of the urethra between the two ligatures. Then extract it. Then loosen the ligature, and clean away the congealed blood, which came from the urethra.
And it is not necessary to bind the thread underneath the stone, unless you want to return it to the wound: and the upper ligature, unless when the thread is loosed after the stone has passed, returns the skin to its place, and covers the urethra: for this reason it is necessary that you bind the upper thread, so that the skin may be raised above, in order that it may return to your colleague, and cover the urethra, as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
As for the extraction of the stone in women.
Stones are not often formed in women.
If, however, a stone occurs in any of them, then the cure is difficult, and is prohibited on account of many reasons.
One reason is that the woman may be a virgin.
And a second reason is that you should not examine a chaste woman, or one who has a husband.
A third reason is that you should not examine a well-versed woman in this art, especially the hand operation.
And a fourth reason is that she is far away from the stone's location: for fear of injury, and because there is danger in the depth of the incision, and because it is painful.
If necessity compels you to do this, then you should take a female doctor who is well-versed: and there are few of them.
If you really want to do this, then ask for a skilled, subtle doctor; and a well-educated midwife who is familiar with women's affairs, or a woman who is experienced in this art: so that she may do whatever you instruct her to do from your questioning about the stone.
First of all, to see if the woman is a virgin: then it should be that she inserts her finger into her and looks for the stone.
If it finds itself, she should cover it with her finger, and then instruct the midwife to insert her left hand into the woman's crotch, and to inquire about the stone, after she has placed her right hand on the woman's hip, and squeezes it firmly.
If it finds the stone, then she should gradually move it from the woman' opening at the bottom with all her might, until it reaches the root of the hip bone.
Then she should cut it at the mid-point of the woman' hip opening towards the root, from whichever side it is prepared, and feel the stone in that place; and her finger should not move away from the stone, holding it underneath: and there should be a small section first. Then she should insert the bone end into that section.
Then she should insert the bone end into that section. If she feels the stone, then she should add to that second section a quantity proportional to how much the stone moves away from her.
And you shall know that there are many types of stones. For this one is small and large, hard and rough, long and round, having branches.
So you shall know the type of it, as I am indicating to you through this about what you want.
If then blood is making you weak, then add to the wound three times, and hold it for an hour, until the blood has dried up.
Then turn your attention to your work again, until the stone has passed out; and make yourself ready with the instruments that I have told you about for extracting the stone from the urinary bladder, so that you can use them in your work.
If the blood flow hurts you, and you know that the blood comes out of the artery cut: then put powder on the place, and bind it with powder stricture decreasing: and do not change it; and let go the stone, and do not pull it out. For a weak woman might die. Then take care of the wound.
So when the sharpness of the blood passes after a few days, and the place becomes rotten: then turn to your work until the stone leaves.
Chapter LII.
The section on the hernial section with water.
Ram's water is not, unless a collection of moisture in the sifac pearl, which is under the skin of the testicle enclosed in one: and it is called sifac.
And when it is in its own little pouch, which nature has prepared for it in a certain part of itself, until it puts out: that is another kind, and it is the skin of the testicles between the sifac pearl, which we have said: and it does not do this except rarely.
And the generation of this ramification is from the weakness that happens to the testicles: why this substance is poured out onto them. And when it happens from a blow on the testicles.
And this moisture is having many colors. Or indeed its color is changing into yellowish, or it is red and leafy, black, or white-aquous, and that is what is more:
And the signs by which one knows where the collection of water is, are these. For if it is in the sifac pearl that we have said, then theapostema is round at about the length of a figure-eight: and the testicle does not show, because moisture contains it from all parts.
And if there is moisture in the own little pouch, then the apostema is round with a part of itself, and for this reason one man is estimated as having another kind:
And if there is moisture between the skin of the testicles and the white siffac, then it falls down.
When therefore you wish to know the color of moisture, then experience the color of moisture in the post-mortem with the square, whose form preceded. Accordingly, because it is issued into the recess of the square, judge it that is between itself.
When therefore we come to the cure with the iron, then it is necessary that you instruct the sick person to have himself bled if possible, and you will see the body full of blood.
Then let him lie on his back on a high place, and put under him many towels.
Then sit down on his left side, and instruct the servant to sit on his right side, who will extend his penis to the inner side of the skin of the testicles, and to the side of the scrotum.
Then take a wide spit, and dry up the skin of the testicles from the middle along its length, up to the chest: and make the cut second according to an equidistant line that divides the skin of the testicles, until it encompasses the white siffac: and scrape him and observe, or quietly get away from it, so as to cut off him: and let your scraping sit on him, with the more he suspends with the egg, and carefully look at it with your scraping according to the quantity that you can.
Then pierce the white siffac with water in a wide perforation, and remove all the water.
Then separate the two lobes of the incision with a hook, and extend the white siffac upward, and do not touch the skin of the testicles that is encompassing: and cut the white siffac in whatever way you can cut it, either with its entirety, or slightly, especially its side. For if you do not examine closely, there is no security in the incision, except that water be returned to it.
If however his right hand goes out from his wound at the time of your operation: then when you have completed the dissection of the side, reduce him. Then aggregate the two lips of the skin of the testicles with a suture.
Then care for him as you do for other wounds, until he is healed.
If however the right testicle has become corrupted by a blackness from elsewhere, then you must cut away the outer part of the skin, taking care to prevent blood flow.
Then cut off the testicle with its suspension, and remove it; then take care of it as we have said.
If however water is gathered on both sides, then you should know that there are two branches; so dry one side as you have done with the other to make them equal.
And if it is equal to you, so that the operation is the same, then do it; then wash away the blood. And introduce the wet cloth between the loins and the fat; and place another dry cloth over the loins, which you have dipped in wine and oil, and spread it over the two testicles, and tie it with a thread, six times round; then take off the upper cloths, and they are dry; and bind them together above with a ligature, which has six turns.
Then take two cloths, and make them wet, and fill them with carmine, according to this similarity: and let the ends which are pressed together by the cotter, or moist wool; and aggregate them with a knot in the loin of the arm; and one end shall take hold above on some part until it reaches the back, and the other end shall take hold to the side of the pelvis: and both ends shall take hold beneath the two hips, and another end shall take hold of the two inguinas, and all the ends shall aggregate together in the loin of the arm.
And when this wire is medicated by the fire of the section with a sharp knife: and it is, as we have said, to take hold of the skin of the testicles with it; and it is burned, according to which we told you: until such time as it discovers white albumen containing water: then take hold of the fire, according to this shape.
The Greek letter is assimilated.
Then pierce with it that other one, the sihac, and let it burn until all of the moisture has drained out.
Then extend the sihac with a hook, and scrape with a fine red-hot iron, and cut it off as well as you can, until you have completely removed it.
And take care that the fire does not burn the patient.
And know that this operation is more salutary, and has a longer duration free from blood flow, and is better than the operation of section.
If, however, the opposite effect disturbs you at the time of section, or at the time of cauterization by heat, or by blood flow, or by anything else: then you should take care that you do what disturbances you with the cure which is suitable for it, as has been premised.
If, however, the sick person is timid and does not expect this operation, because of its horrible nature: then administer the piercing as I narrate below: and it is done.
When you are certified within yourself by that which we have said about the meanings, that the ramus is watery: then you should make the sick person sit on an elevated seat.
Then pierce the apostema in the lower part of its body with a sharp knife: and place the piercing according to the length of the body, and keep the aperture wide until all the water has drained out.
Then place a cloth over the spot, and tie it up, and let him run to drain off the remaining water: then take care of the wound, until the bruise has healed over.
If, however, there is an opposite effect of the drainage of water at the time when you pierce it: and this should not be except for this reason, because the white cloth causes an opposite effect in the orifice of the wound, and prevents the exit of water: then you should introduce a feather into the wound, or an instrument with which the water is drawn out, of which shape preceded it: or add a little to the operation of the wound.
And you know that water returns and is added after six months, or about them. But when it is added, then it returns in the same way, and the sick person will spend his days.
Head LIII.
On the care of the carnose ramulus.
You know that when this ramus is cut off, it leads to harm in many conditions. Therefore I send him away from that ramus so that he may be healed of it.
And I remember the operation on her and the appearance of the wound.
I say that many pustules occur in the bodies, from which the testicles are composed: and it comes about for various reasons, namely.
Or from acute swelling or heat, which is discharged to the testicles. Or from a blow.
And the color of the pustule corresponds to the color of the body, and it is not felt; and the pustule is gray.
And perhaps it is a stone pustule, whose color is dark, and there is no feeling of it.
And when it comes from the obstruction of arteries and the swelling of the veins: as I have already reminded you: or from the swelling of the feet.
Which is why, when it comes from the obstruction of arteries, it is recognized by the appearance of the pustule, when you compress it with your fingers. And you should not touch the person at all.
But that which comes from the swelling of the veins does not spread anything away from the body when pressed with the fingers.
And it is also possible that this ramus should be cut off, and that the flesh remain: and it is done so as to separate the skin of the testicles. Then extend your arm above, and pull out the skin with a knife or scissor: and free the suspenders from the water, and tie the band around it: and cut the suspenders off when you have freed the skin from all parts of it.
If therefore my bone is well healed with those flesh-borne bones, then you should draw me out, and strike me down.
And if there is an attachment between any of the joints, or in it that is between the bones: then you should release all that attachment, and strike it with a round incision.
But if the birth of flesh is in the place of the attachment that is behind: then you should strike all of it, and draw out my bone, as we have said.
When your operation is complete, then fill the bone with wool infused with rose oil, and wrap it in linen: then take care of the whole cure, until it heals.
Head LXIIII.
Regarding the care of the ramus, which is with the vine.
The use is an inflammation somewhat similar to a boil, with softening of the testes: and it becomes difficult on the part of the patient to move, exercise, and walk.
And in the cure of this illness there is a fear because of the previous memory.
But it should be said, let us speak about the operation in her as they did on the first.
I say, that you should make the patient sit on an elevated seat. Then push the suspender of the testes down to the lower part. Then hold the skin of the testes with your fingers, which are next to the pubic hair: and let another hold it as a minister, and stretch it out with a violent extension.
Then cut with an acute chisel-shaped knife across the straight of the pubic hair, until the skin is detected.
Then scrape off all parts, as we have said to you in the extraction of arteries which are in the tempura.
Then insert into them a little hook where there is a double filament, and tie the rope at the first place where the vines are: and tie it again at the last of them. Then cut it in half along the straight line according to the length of the body, and remove what is accumulated from the corroded faeculent wetnesses.
Then care for the hernia with the treatment of the remaining wounds, in which the health may grow again, so that the clothes which feed one testicle drop. For that is not bad through that.
But if it happens to all the clothes, then they should remove it for this reason from the testicles with the wetness: so that it is not shut off from its nourishment, through the incision, and does not heal, or scar, and is not a problem with them.
Chapter LXV.
As for the cure of the intestinal vitis.
The exit of this vitis is from the section that happens in the siffach expanse on the belly in the part of the groin of the testicles.
Why do the intestines come out from that break towards one testicle? And this break is either from the siffach, or from the extension of it.
And these two species arise from many causes: either from a hit, or a slip, or a noise, or lifting up of something heavy, and similar things.
And the sign, when it is from the extension of the siffach. This is what happens gradually over a long period of time and not suddenly; it is an swelling equally towards the inside: because the siffach compresses the intestines.
And the sign of it when it is from the section of the siffach, because it causes sudden, sharp pain at the beginning: and it is an swelling that shows itself under the skin and near to it; and that is because of the exit of the intestines, and their course towards the outer siffach.
And when it comes out with the intestino zireum: and this is called the zireum of the intestines, and the zireum, and sometimes it happens with a windiness.
And sometimes it runs into the feces in the intestines and stays there; and with that there is a problem of sickness: because it causes sharp pain, especially when it is pressed.
And there is a fear in the cure of this disease with iron: why should that case be avoided in it.
And the mode of operation is, that you should instruct the sick person to bring his intestines by hand into the cavity of his illness, if he obeys return. Then let him lie on his back between your hands; and wash his feet.
Then extend the skin that follows the skin upwards, and dry the skin of the testes throughout its length. Then fix in two lips of the incision, according as you open the section with them: and the section sits according to the quantity, that it may be possible for him to emerge from it his wound.
Then scrape the scrotum, and that which is under the skin of the testes, until when it is touched, it is hard on all sides: then insert your finger of the index into it that follows the testicle, in that which is between the white scrotum, which is under the skin, and between the second scrotum, and completely take away with it the adhesion that is in the posterior part of the scrotum.
Then move with your right hand into the interior of the skin of the testes: and with this extend the white scrotum upward, with your left hand; and wash his wound with the scrotum towards the section: and instruct the minister to extend the wound upward: and you dissolve the adhesion, which is behind the complete solution.
And seek with your fingers that there is nothing there from the intestines in white scrotum hard. If, however, there is any irritation from it: then push him down towards the navel.
Then take the acume, in which sits the thick thread, made of ten threads: and insert it behind the scrotum, that is under the skin that follows the section: then cut off the extremities that project from the thread, until there are four strands. Then compose some of them over some with a figure which sits in the form of a cross: and bind with them the white scrotum, of which we have spoken, because it is under the skin of the testes ligamento vehemently, until there can be no place from the water that nourishes them to send to them something: so that there does not occur from this therefore gangrene hot. And again place the second ligament outside the first ligament, two fingers from it. And after these two ligaments leave out from the foreskin, which is under the skin of the testicles, the size of a finger: and cut all of it roundly, and take it out of it.
Then dry in the lower part of the skin of the testicles, from which runs blood, and pus: as we have said before.
Then administer wool soaked in oil, and put it on the thread: and administer the ligament that we have described. And when the foreskin is cauterized with white alum which we said, after cutting it while fearing about the flow of blood. This often happens. And remove the ligament, until it falls by itself.
But if this case is delayed, then boil it with warm water: and put on that which we said, until it falls down.
Then care for the thread with the remaining treatment of the wound, until it is healed.
Chapter LVI.
The ramie wool.
In this ramie there was no one who dared to use iron for its treatment.
And first they said that it happened as we described in the ramie which is with Vinegar. Which is, that the ligaments used after cutting on it with ease go down: then dry in the middle, and care afterwards when it opens itself up, until they fall down: and care for the thread, according to what we said, until it is healed.
Chapter LVII.
The incision made in the groin.
When it happened that a rupture occurred in the groin, as we said, and the gap was large, and did not go down to the testicles anything from the intestines: and if it went down, it is little, and comes back in all times: but if it is prolonged with time, there is added a tear in the foreskin, until the intestines go into the foreskin.
And this happens from an extension of syphous, which is in the groin, as we have said. That is, because syphous extends: then it softens, and the place is inflamed, and it oozes.
And the cure of it is with a poultice, as preceded by its narrative.
And when it is cured with iron, in this way: and it is, so that the sick one lies on his back between your hands. Then dry the place of the rupture, the inflamed and oozing one, by cutting through its width, according to the quantity of three fingers.
Then tighten alsifak and, which are under the skin, until when it is touched, white alsifak, which is under the skin, follows it.
Then take a ray and put it on the place that is oozing out of syphous, and press it down to the depth of the hand.
Then sue two oozing places at the end of the ray out of syphous and join them together with a stitch; then remove the end of the ray.
And do not at all touch alsifak, nor stretch out one, nor anything else, as I have made you know in the cure of an intestinal root.
Then the cure of this wound. When you do this incision, purify it, and restore the bone, until it is hardened.
For alsifak is contracted, and no oozing is added to the rupture.
And the cauterium is better in this place, because it is nearer to salvation.
Chapter LVIII.
Regarding the softening of the skin of the testicles.
The skin of the testicles is often softened in some men, because those flesh which are between them become softened, and his appearance is made feeble.
Therefore it is necessary for him who is asked to cure his disease that he should lie on his back, and make the softened skin cover the natural skin all over.
Then sewed up the two lips with a stitch: and if the eye, first of all it is superfluous to skin softened three or four stitches, and firm stitch.
Then cut between the stitches.
Then care for the cure of the remaining wounds, until they heal, and let the threads fall off.
Chapter LIX. On the operation for castration.
§ On castration.
Know that castration is excommunicated in our law: and for that reason it would be fit that I should not remember it in my book here: and the remembrance of it is not necessary except for two reasons.
One is that it may be in the knowledge of a physician when he is questioned about it: and that he may know how to cure him who has it happen to him.
And the other mode is that we often lack castration of certain animals, for their benefits to us through it, such as rams, horses, and cats, and like creatures from among the animals.
I say then, that castration is done according to two modes. Or by friction. Or by incision and section.
In that which is done by friction, the course of the operation is: that we should make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles become softened and loosened and hang down: then we should nip them off with our hand, until they are completely gone and do not appear under the touch.
But in castration by incision and section, you should hold the animal, and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then bind the suspenders, and dry on all the wound one, until both balls have come: then cut it after you have scraped them both, and do not leave behind on it any scurf of skin, which is over the skin.
And this mode of castration is better than that which is done by friction: because by friction there might perhaps be something lost from the testicles, which would make the animal desire to copulate.
Then heal the fracture, until it heals.
Chapter LXX.
The cure for hermaphroditism is twofold.
(It) is from the testicles, by means of two modes. (The scrotum is) because it appears to be in that which follows the space, or on the skin of the testicles, in that it is between the two testicles, like a little woman's shape, with hair: and sometimes the urine runs from it from that which is in the skin of the testicles.
(In women there is) one sort, and it is a little woman' s shape (like the testicles of a man), placed on the rib cage like the testicles of a small child, prominent to the outside: of which one is like the penis of a man, and two like two testicles.
(And the cure of the three species, two from the testicles, and one from a woman, is this): because it is necessary that you strike off the added flesh, until you remove the impression of them. Then heal those remaining wounds.
(In the second species of men, from which the urine issues out from the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is there any cure at all).
Chapter LXXI.
(On the cutting of tenting and prominent flesh in women's vulvas.)
(The tenting is perhaps added to the natural thing, until it feeds and turns ugly: and sometimes it becomes enlarged in some women so much that it approaches to the crotch, and extends as far as to intercourse.)
(Therefore you should hold back the tenting with your hand, or with a pincers, and strike off it: and not finally in the cutting, especially in the deep root: so that blood may not flow.)
Then heal that wound with this cure, until it heals.
(But the middle flesh is flesh that is born in the womb of the mother, until it fills itself up: and perhaps it issues out to the outside according to the likeness of a tail: and because of this some call the illness with a tail.) We should therefore incise it as we incised Tentigine, and treat it until it heals.
On the treatment of a wart on a woman's thumb that is not piercing.
Head LVII.
Is it a wart on a woman's thumb that is not piercing, or a small hole? And it is either a natural one, or an accidental one.
This is an accidental one due to an underlying illness, and it may have arisen from meat that has become attached to the finger, or from a splinter of wood, or from dirt: it may be located in the depth of a wound, or in its sides, or in its upper part, or in its lower part; and it should be prevented from sexual intercourse and fertilization, pregnancy, and perhaps menstruation as well.
And the knowledge of this is obtained by the appearance of symptoms during childbirth if the swelling is visible nearby.
But if it is not visible, then feel for it with your fingers, or with a ray of light.
But if the swelling is caused by a small splinter that is near to two lips: then bring it closer, and wash it off.
And it is, as you place a few hairs between the two lips.
Then place your fingers of both hands at the same time, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread wide. Then open the two lips firmly, until the small splinter comes out, and the swelling is opened.
Then take a piece of wool, dip it in oil, and place it on the spot: and let the woman sit for a day, so that the spot does not become solid again under any other pressure.
But if the splinter is large and coarse: then it should be separated with a flat blade of laurel leaf similar to a splint.
But if the swelling is caused by flesh born: then suspend it with a hook, and incise it: and have with you remedies that stop the flow of blood without causing pain, such as acacia, and dragon' s blood, and congealed milk with its white of an egg.
Then insert a large cannula of brass, so that the ulcer heals more quickly; hold it in place for several days: and then insert the linch-pin made from dried linen, and then continue with the remaining treatment until it is healed.
And at times when a fetus is born, birth defects of the limbs occur: therefore they should happen in this way: since there is no opposition with iron at all when there is an ulcerous discharge from the womb and this is cancerous, there should be no contrariety with it.
Chapter LVII. On the Treatment of Hemorrhoids, Athahel
Regarding the treatment of hemorrhoids, Athahelis, and both red and white warts in women's genitals.
Hemorrhoids are an opening of the anal orifice, from which runs a great deal of blood.
When therefore the hemorrhoids have become large, they are called thistles; and I have already spoken in the division of their species and signs; and here I will speak of those which receive treatment and of those which do not.
I say then that the hemorrhoids which are in the orifice of the womb and do not appear to be sensitive: then there is no cure for them with iron.
But those which are in the orifice of the womb above where sensuality is, are those which are cured.
Therefore it is necessary that you should enter the woman into a cold house. Then extend Athahel with pincers or with a rough cloth and cut them from their roots.
Then sprinkle them with powder near the flow of blood from one incised powder without mortification: as acacia, and dragon's blood, and thorns, and similar things to them.
Then push her feet against a wall for an hour. Then put her in cold water.
If the flow of blood persiste: then let her sit in a decoction of myrrh, and castor oil, and gall, and similar things.
Then take horse-grain flour and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it to put on his back.
If therefore blood comes away with it, it is good: and if not, make the plasters adhere to the back with vinegar and milky wort, without scraping.
Then take wool, and soak it in taratrossic liquid, or in the juice of tongue-fish, or in the juice of willows with buds, that is, in glans, red wine, and make it adhere to the loins.
When therefore the swelling has settled, then take care of the place with ointment, until it is healed.
Alberth, indeed, is very similar to a red head-band, and has a rough appearance.
Therefore you should know that it appears even from it, according to what I said in the book of equal appearance: and take care of it, until it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
De perforatione Exiturae, which happens in the mother's womb.
There are various swelling in the womb, such as cancer, and a stone swelling, and sores, and blisters, and scabs, and scabs, that is, herpes, colic, and fistulas, and hemorrhoids, and rags, and little holes, and swellings.
And I have already spoken about all these diseases and their species, and the signs of them, and their cures, in a division: it is necessary for me to speak in this book about the hot swelling which happens in the womb, when it is from swellings which gather blood, and that you may know how its opening is made with iron.
Therefore you should know that you should reflect. When therefore the pain of the swelling in its beginning is acute with its percussion, and flame, and fever: and you see it red: if it falls on it, then you do not agree with its perforation: and take care of it with him as long as he enjoys his maturity, until when it has settled its acuteness.
Then it is necessary that you make the woman sit on a seat that has two seats, and lean back, or lie down on her back, and gather her feet towards the lower part of the thigh: and let her hips be expanded, and place her arms under her knees, and tie both with a suitable ligature to it.
Then the midwife should sit on the right-hand side of the woman, and administer the tool with which the opening of the womb is opened.
And it is necessary that when you administer this tool, you hold the ring of the womb deeply: so that the blood does not enter from the instrument more than the depth of the womb, and does not harm the sick.
If the tool is more than the depth, then it is necessary that you put down feathers over the depth of the womb: to prevent the entry of the whole tool into the depth of the womb: and it is necessary that you put a spin on it, which runs in the tool from the top side: and hold the tool, and turn the wheel, until the depth of the womb opens.
When it appears that it is coming out, and touches it with the hand, and is soft and smooth: then you should separate it from its head with a smooth edge.
When the lochia is discharged, then you should put in a ring of iron immersed in rose oil: or in viride oil, in which there is some constriction: and put the ring, and take out a section into the depth of the womb.
And put outside on the womb, and on the wool cloth clean immersed in water, in which there are boiled yolks.
Then take care after two days with an ointment that suits it, until it heals.
And when the womb is washed and the string, so that it is clusted with water and honey: then take a bath with water in which there is boiled radish root and long aristan: then return to the ointment.
If the bone is hidden within the womb, then one should prevent its cure with iron, indeed care for it itself as we have said in the division.
Chapter LXVII.
The teaching of obstetrics, how they should treat the womb according to the shape of an abnormal exit.
It is necessary for the obstetrician to know first of all the figure of a natural birth.
From the signs then, you shall know when you see a woman compressing herself towards her lower parts, and yearns to smell air, and feels relief on her when there is birth of the child, and hurried exit of the child: then you shall know that this birth is according to the natural figure, and it is an exit from her head, and second with her: or suspended, or hanging from her navel.
When then you see these signs, then it is necessary that the womb of her compress, so that the embryo descends quickly.
For when it has descended on her head, it has descended with her, and is washed out from it with good purgation.
Whoever is beyond this birth, is unnatural, unwholesome.
For when the child ever exits on his feet, and the body of it goes out before the head of it, and its feet and hands one, or its foot and hand one: or the head of it and its hands go out: or the navel and the back: and perhaps turns over its neck, and similar figures that are unwholesome.
Therefore it is necessary for the obstetrician to be prudent, subtle in all these things, and guard himself from error and delusion: and I am showing you every figure out of them, and how it works in it, and signifies by it, and makes a stir on it.
When the child exits on its own natural head, and becomes heavy on the woman, and has difficult birth, and you see her virtue already weakened: then make her sit on a chair, or have women support her: and pour onto her foenugraeco decotion, and with wet oils.
Then the Obstetrix shall put her finger between her toes with a small spatula, and find out with it the second time, and wipe it with her nail until she has run out of it what is in her from moisture: and press the womb of the woman until the baby comes down.
But if [the baby] does not come down, then it is necessary that the woman be clotted with foenugraecum mucus with siseamin oil.
Then you shall order her after the [clotting] to compress: and make her sneeze with a mixture, and hold her nose and mouth for an hour. For the baby will come out right away.
What if two hands of the baby come out first, it is necessary that you reduce them with ease gradually. But if it does not obey in the entrance, then put the woman on a chair, and lift her feet up: then turn the chair over the ground: and let the woman hold on to it so that she does not fall by the jolt.
But if the hands do not come out, and the baby dies: then cut them open, and take out the remainder of the baby: and tie her hand with a cloth, and pull it out with equality: for she will come out.
The exit of the embryo under its own feet. When the baby comes out under its own feet, then it is necessary that you push them up: then turn the baby little by little: and then make it even.
Then take one of her feet, and stretch it out little by little.
But when they have come out as far as the hips, then order her to compress, and make her sneeze with a mixture: for she will come out if God wills it.
And if he does not come out with what we have said above, then reduce the baby little by little, until you set it in the shape of nature again. For he will come out then with an easy exit.
If it is forbidden to tell the whole story: then take from the mucilaginous aloes, and oil of sesamum, and a liquid gum; and crush them all together in a mortar with good crushing; then put it on with the hand of a woman, and apply it to her lower abdomen. Then let her sit in warm water until she has a hypogastric swelling.
When you see that her lower parts are now warmed, then put on her some myrrh: and let her lie down. When she has held the myrrh for an hour, then let her sit on a seat. Then let her sneeze, and tighten her mouth and nose; and gently press her lower abdomen. For the fire will come out immediately.
Exit the fetus on to the knees and hands. When it comes out in this form, then she will find by gradual penetration of her hands. Then the woman shall lie on her neck, and let her feet hang down to the lower part; and she herself shall lie on a bed, and cross her hands. Then gently press upon her belly. Then pull out what is under her feet from the pubic region, until she is prepared in the lower part. If the fetus does not come out, then take her feet, and move them vigorously. Then gently press what is above the hypogastric swelling, until the fetus rises to the upper parts. Then let her insert her hands, and make the fetus even smaller; and order the woman to compress, until the fetus comes out.
The exit of the fetus hanging down from the hands. Let her find by reducing her hands. If she cannot reduce herself, then pour oil on the woman, and let her walk.
But if walking is not possible, then let her lie on a bed: and roughly shake her legs.
Then apply the liniment you have prepared from mucus.
If he takes it in, then make him sit on a chair. Then study the reduction of the hand, and bring it into its natural position; and have the woman sneeze, and order her to compress herself until she has gone out.
The exit of the fetus over its neck, with open arms, and it is turned toward the back of its mother. It is necessary that the midwife hold the fetus's hand, then rotate it gradually, and make it easier with ease.
When he is thus balanced, then place on his navel that which we have spoken of from oil and mucus.
Then order him to move his arms slowly. When you have done that, then make her sit on a chair, and order her to lean on the right side. Then order her to compress herself: and make her sneeze with a medicine.
The prepared exit of the fetus on the side. When it descended to the opening of the mother after this way with the second, then cut the second with your nail, until it is discharged from humidity.
If he is suspended over the face of the fetus and his neck, then cut him from the navel: lest he should retain it, and die.
Then push the fetus into the insides, until you have placed it according to what is necessary: and order the woman to compress herself sometimes; for he himself will come out by way of the outlet.
The exit of twins, or a fetus of many members. You should know that the twins often give birth; and when they are born three, and sometimes four. However, that is uncommon, and seldom happens.
However, five is a thing outside nature, and do not live together: and it holds them, although they multiply, second to one; and separates them by means of a knot, distinguishing between them the ligated one at the navel of each of them.
And sometimes they go out like a fetus going out naturally, easily; and they go out from that door, as we have told.
That if some of them are difficult at the time of delivery, and they go to that which we have said from the figures of the innatural, then take care of them as we have told: and let there be a soft woman, and let her do what she does with ease and slowness, and get used to it according to all the figure with him who is prepared by his leading to health.
The reminder that he is formed in the womb from embryos, and they are aborted.
When one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more ten are formed in the womb: and it has already been proven with me that a woman has emitted seven, and another fifteen, all formed.
That which is done by the measurement of the glorious sage.
This then is everything that it should be in the science of Obstetrics. Perhaps, indeed, it will come to that which is similar to that: so oppose him with that which is necessary
Chapter LVII. On the extraction of a dead fetus.
关于提取死亡的胎儿。
When you take care of the dead fetus with what I have said in the division of surgery, and it does not come out, and you force to use the operation with the hand, then you must consider.
If, then, the woman is of good virtue, and she is not with any of the accidents from which she fears harm: then it should be that the woman lies down on a bed, on her back, and her head is inclined downward, and her legs are raised up: and she should be held by two people, or tied to the bed, so that her body is not extracted along with the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the womb of the mother with oil wet with alum, and fenugreek, and linseed.
Then the Obstetrix shall wash her hands with these oils and mucus; then she shall insert herself into the womb with ease. Then she shall inquire about the place where she should fix the hook from the fetus, and the places convenient for that.
Consider therefore then, if the fetus is ready to come down on his own: then fix the hooks in his eyes, or in his neck, or in his mouth, or in his palate, or under his beard, or in his chin, or in his hip bones, and in nearby places; and under his loin cloth.
But if the descent is on his feet then, in the midriff, and in his ribs.
And it is necessary that she hold the hook with her right hand; and put the hook in her when she extends her left hand; and insert herself with ease, and fix the hook in one of those places we have said, until she has finished the job.
Then she shall fix in opposition to her another hook, or a third one, if it endures: so that there is an equal tension, and does not decline to one side.
Then she shall be extended with an equal extension, and not be extended only according to the straightness, but let herself move on all sides, so that the exit is relieved: as happens when a tooth is being extracted.
And it is necessary in that which is between that, so that the extension is softened. That if a part of it is retained then, it is necessary that the Obstetrix should wash some fingers with oil, and insert them from one side, so that they turn with them who retain it.
But if a part of the fetus comes out then, the hooks shall be exchanged to a higher place: do this until the entire fetus has come out.
But if a hand comes out before the other one, and it cannot be reduced by its contraction: then it is necessary that a cloth be wrapped around it. Then extract it until it is all out, and cut it or at the joint of the plant, or on the knee: and so it is necessary that you do in one hand, and in two feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or has happened to him constriction during delivery, or there is water in his head: then he should put between the fingers a sharp spittle, and find with it the head, and extract the water: or he should tear off himself with the instrument which is called Almisdac: whose shape came with the forms of the other instruments in the chapter which follows.
Similarly, if the nature of the fetus is of a large head, then he should extract it with the almisdac as we have said above. Then pull out the bones with forceps.
If he emerges head first and is constricted at the fork: then find out, until the water which is in the chest is drained.
But if it is not complicated, and does not submit to the delivery: then cut off the head abruptly, according to what is possible for you.
If the lower part of the leg is swollen, or there is water in it: then you should make an incision, until the water runs out.
But if the fetus is above his own feet, then his attraction is easy, and his direction towards the mother's mouth is easy.
But if he is constricted at the throat or chest: then he should extract him with a cloth which you have wound around your hand: and find out the throat or chest, until what is in them runs out.
But if other limbs are taken away, and only the head remains: then the midwife should put her left hand. But if the mother's mouth is open, then he should put his hand into the depth of the mouth, and seek with it the head, and pull it out with fingers until it reaches the mouth: then he should put in one or two hooks, and pull him out with them.
If the mouth of the mother is cut off, because of the swelling that has occurred to him: then it is not appropriate for him to work on himself, but it is necessary at that time to administer an infusion of liquid, thick: and to administer a plaster; and to sit in water which softens and moistens.
If the fetus is on his side, then it is possible that it will be even: then it should be administered what we have said about the single fetus.
If this is not possible, then he should be cut short, and taken out.
And it is necessary that you do not leave anything at all from the second inside.
But when you have finished your operation, then administer what we have said about hot swellings that occur in the wombs.
If blood flow occurs, then let him go down into the water of stigma, and administer the remaining cure.
And I myself have already seen a woman, in whose womb a dead fetus was: and then she was impregnated on top of another force, and then another dead fetus also came out. Then he happened to him after a long time of swelling in his navel, and it was swollen, until it opened up: and it began to emit pus.
So I was called to his cure, and I treated him for a long time: but the wound did not heal.
So I put on top of it some strong plasters of attraction: and he came out from the place of the mouth. Then passed a few days for him, and came out another mouth. So I was amazed from there, because there is no mouth in the belly.
So I thought, because there were bones of a dead fetus.
So I questioned the wound, and took out many bones, with a woman who was in better condition than herself: and now he no longer lived for so long a time, and sent out from the place a little pus.
And I do not hold this to be strange, unless there is in it a science, and an aid for it, which the skilled physician administers with his hand in the cure.
Chapt. XXXVII. Of the instruments necessary for taking out a foetus
The forms of instruments necessary for extracting a fetus.
Form of the scissor which opens the womb.
Here is the form of the scissor, which are equal to the books, and have two tangs at each end of two pieces of wood. But this scissor should be made smaller than the strector; and to make it so, let it be made either of ebony or of bushe-wood.
And the width of each piece of wood should be about two fingers; and the length of each should be a palm and a half, and less than that in the middle; and there are added to each of the two pieces of wood, which are already fastened together, two bits of the same wood, the length of which is a half-palm and a little more; and the width of either is about two fingers, or somewhat less.
And these two bits are to be inserted into the mouth of the womb, so that it may open when you turn the two scissors.
Form of another like that, but smaller and lighter.
Let it be made of ebony-wood or of bushe-wood, according to the similarity of the forceps. But at the end there should be two bits, as you see here above; and the length of each bit should be a palm; and the width of either should be about two fingers.
When you go to open the womb with it, then make the woman sit on the bed, hanging her feet from the side; and Then insert these two bits joined together into the womb; and you shall hold the lower end of the instrument between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument, as you do with the forceps, equally according to the quantity that you wish to extract from the opening of the womb; until such time as the midwife does as she pleases.
Form of the other scissor than those mentioned by the ancient authors, which drives out the fetus.
Form the head of the giant: and it is similar to the claw, which has teeth at the end, as you see.
And sometimes it is made round, like a claw according to this form, as you see, which has teeth like the teeth of a saw, so that it cuts and compresses when it is struck and compressed.
Form the hand that holds one nail.
Form the hand that holds two nails.
Form the blade that has two ends for cutting the head.
Form the two blades that also support.
These instruments are all used, and the more their kinds multiply and are prepared for use by the artisan, the faster they carry out their work, and the higher among people due to their quantity.
Therefore do not despise these instruments, although they are found to be prepared by you. It is inevitable that they are needed.
Head 78.
On the Extraction of the Second Book.
When the second book is held at birth, then you should take away the weak ones, so that it holds its breath. Then make her sneeze with a handkerchief: and tightly hold your hand over her nose, and the nostrils of it. If then she exits through this, it is good.
If not: then take a staff, and pierce in the cover a hole: and put in it herbs opening the mouth of the mother, such as calamus, rut, aneth, camomile, chamomile, and cinnamon, and let them all boil with water, and put them on fire.
Then place a wand of herbs on the hole of the vessel, and the other end in the mouth of the mother: and let her hold it until the vapor comes to meet the contraction of the mother's womb.
Then make him sneeze, as we have said. For a second time he will exit with ease.
But if, after this treatment, he remains and does not exit: then order the obstetrician to dip his hand in linseed oil or mucilage of althaea. Then insert it into the vulva, and ask her if she feels a second time. When he has found it, then take it, and stretch it out gradually.
But if it is attached deep in the matrix, then insert your hand, according to what we have said, until, when it finds the second time, it gradually removes it straight, so that the matrix does not fall with a sudden pull: it should be turned, so as to alternate from one side to the other with ease: then, the amount of pull should be added. It will then obey, and move away, and release itself from the adhesion.
If the mouth of the matrix is constricted, as we have already narrated: take care with the sneezing, and after the medicated oil with herbs.
But if it does not exit with all that we have said, then be careful not to tire yourself out with the extraction.
But it is necessary that when it exits from the mouth of the matrix, there are some bindings on the woman's hips. Then apply a ointment of four drugs to her. For it will make her putrefy after a few days, and dissolve, and exit.
But when it putrefies, an offensive smell emerges from it to the stomach and head, and hurts that one with a bad smell. It is then necessary that they administer suitable suffumigations to it.
But some of the ancient ones who have already been experienced in suffumigations of mustard and dried fig are now.
The form of the instrument with which the woman is suffumed during retention of the second time and the flow of blood.
Let it be made from a similar raw material or from the hair: and let the end be placed widely over the fire; and let the smoke be placed above plums; hold it, until that smoke is consumed: and then another one.
Chapter LXXXXIX.
Regarding the treatment of an untreated wound.
Many boys were born, and the animals of their herd had already been infected by a subtle sifac. It is necessary that the midwife pierce that sifac with her finger: and if not, she herself should pierce it with a sharp spatulium: and she should take care, so that the snake does not touch her.
Then put over it wool soaked in wine and oil. Then take care of the wound with ointment, until it heals.
If you think that it has been poisoned, then put a lead tube in the hole for several days, and let it be removed when the boy wants to defecate.
And also happened poisoning of the animals from the congestion of the wound or from pustules. It is necessary that that congestion be removed, and then it is to be treated with what we have said regarding the treatment from the corruption and lead.
Chapter LXXX.
Regarding the treatment of fistulas which occur in the lower part.
Fistulas which occur in the lower part are a nodulation, and grossness which occurs near the anus of the rectum: or in the space of one part: and it is a fistula, or several.
When therefore that nodulation becomes constricted, it opens, and runs out from it moisture like water, white, or pus.
And when they are from these fistulas, penetrating through. Therefore those that penetrate are recognized by the thing which is excreted from defecation, and air-tightness, when a sick person uses the toilet: and perhaps it is excreted from them naked.
And there are fistulas which penetrate into the space up to the skin, and up to the muscle of the groin. And they are those that penetrate all the way to the hip joint, and up to the tail of the spine.
But from that which is known The penetrating fistula up to the anus, and also from that which does not penetrate, that is, when you insert your index finger into the anus: and insert a fine needle into the fistula made of brass or iron: when there is no curliness.
If there is a curliness in it, then insert into it a fine needle or a shaft from the feathers of an eagle, until you feel the touch of the needle or the shaft on your finger: or a small nail in your finger.
If you do not feel it keenly, and there does not proceed from the opening any discharge, nor is it as I said, dry or scaly: then you will know that it is not a penetrating one: so turn your attention to the cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating all the way to the skin, or up to the edge of the bladder: then the meaning of it is the emission of urine from it, and its prohibition from this so that the place heals with medicines.
But if it is penetrating all the way to the hip joint, or up to the edge of the socket: then the sign of it is that the needle penetrates as far as there, if there is no curliness all the way to the socket: and the finding of pain in the surrounding part, and that pus is always discharged from it: and that it does not scab over with ointment, nor heal with a scabs.
And in these fistulas there is no cure at all: and the cure of them is toil and old age from foolish doctors, who make a lot of noise.
But in that which is not penetrating, and is not old, there is hope of cure with the iron: for I have told you, and I have already proved it: and it is so, that the sick man lies between your hands on his back: and wash his legs all the way up to his thighs, and his thighs are bent towards his belly. Then introduce a lead or air, if it is in a twisted fistula, until you know where the opening lies.
If, however, he feels it to be weak about a certain joint, then it is necessary that you introduce your finger into the joint.
If, then, you feel that the tenting has already penetrated through yourself by detecting it with your finger and between your finger and the skin or flesh: so you should certainly know that it is penetrating: do not therefore labor in it, since it is not a matter of its health, as we have said.
They said, however, that it heals in certain people by means of a substance and from the treatment they hoped for a cure, that is, as we preceded, to introduce the kindling fire into the fistula little by little and until it reaches a certain joint. Then repeat that twice or three times until you know that all the added filtered flesh, which is similar to a feathered tube, has been burned out, and
Then treat that with a smooth dressing in butter until the flesh that has been burned out comes off: and then treat it with an ointment that generates flesh and hardens it.
If, then, it heals, it is good.
And if not, then it does not heal with any other treatment ever.
And if it comes out, and does not reach as far as your finger, which is in the anus, and is between the finger and the tenting or a thick layer of flesh, or skin: and you see the fistula in it, following the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see that it dries out with the tenting that is in the fistula, until the drying out reaches where the end of the tenting lies, and it is released and falls.
Then clean those filtered flesh that are similar to a feathered tube so that nothing remains of them.
If however the blood is victorious over you, and it flows between you and your work so that it separates those muscles: then it is better if it was done quickly, and with more force of the caustic, cauterize her with fire, or with acute medicine.
For the caustic with fire collects good habits, to the burning of those muscles, and to the separation of blood, and drying up of wetness.
Then that care with mild baths in butter, or with chopped wands, until the place discharges pus, and those dried-up muscles come out in pus.
Then that care then a wound with consolatory ointments, which bring forth hard flesh: and there are medicines in which are staphylitis and drying up.
For when they have healed, then the cure is finished: and do not put off the application.
If however the fistula has reached as far as the depth of the hip, and it extends beyond the limits of the body: then insert your hand into it, and ask it.
If however you feel the attempt, and between you and it there is a defect of sine or flesh, and it is near to the penetration: then there is no operation in that, except by means of second opinion and hope.
That is, because it is administered in it one of two ways: or as it cauterizes itself, as we have said: or as it separates itself, until the consequences of its concavity come to an end, so that you can insert a caustic, and cure from nearby. And do not proceed much with the section, lest you fall on a snake that holds some part of it, and happens to the unfortunate end of exhaustion without intention. Then that care then with it that we have said.
Perhaps however it will be healed: or it will lengthen the defect, and dry it up until near to a hip, as we have said, or with an attempt, or with another acute instrument of extremes. Then clean those filtered meats that are in the incision, as far as you can with examination.
Then consider the restoration of the whole wound with the incision, and the opening of the upper part where it is consolidated; and there remains an open fistula in the inner part of the anus, and it will be looser on the weak one.
And when this fistula follows this way: and it is, when you put a probe into it: and it is in the side of the anus near the surface of the body with skin and the margin of the anus; then take the end of the probe that is like a needle's point, namely, the准备的针头, as follows. And put into it a threaded wire with five threads, and around it. Then put the probe with a thread into the fistula, until you get a convulsion of it.
If so it penetrates into the inner margin of the anus near, then remove the thread from that hole: so that you put your finger in the anus, and remove the end of the thread, and bring both ends together at once: and tighten them well, until one day or two days pass: and to the extent that the thread penetrates into the flesh, tighten it well, until those muscles that are between the two ends of the thread fall out: then take care of the wound, until it is consolidated, and heals.
If the hole of the fistula does not penetrate: then make it penetrate with any way you prepare for yourself, unless it is in a deep place. For you do not want to make it like this, that you do not hit the same one:
Then do with it as we have said, until it heals.
Form of the probe which finds the fistula, whose sharpness is sharp very much, and the other part is not sharp, so that it does not hit that which is not necessary, as you see.
Chapter LXXXI.
As for the suturing of hemorrhoids, from which runs blood from the incision of them: and take care of the fissures.
There are hemorrhoids in two ways. Either they are within the anus, like coal or plums; or nearly like grains of grain. And from them there are small ones and large ones: and the blood flows out of them always, and one is, and many are. And they are outside the anus, and at its extremities.
But those outside the anus are few in number and with little moisture, from which flows yellow water or a little blood regularly; and they are the color of the body.
And the treatment that is within the anus, is, as you order the sick person to lie down: and it is expressed, until it comes out of the anus, and appears smooth before you. Therefore hang them with a hook: or hold them with your fingernail. Then cut them at the roots.
But if they do not hold on to the hooks because of their moisture and softness: then take them with a rough cloth or with a twig of willow, and draw them out with your fingers. Then cut them, and sprinkle on them some hot powder after the cut so that they stay in place for a cauterization. Or cauterize them according to what has been said in the chapter of cauterizing. Then care for them with the rest of the cure, until they are healed.
If the anus does not comply with this exit, then clench the sick person with a small clister that causes pain, so that it may go along with what is in the anus, and complies with this exit when it comes out, if it comes out smoothly.
But if the hemorrhoids are external from the anus, then your task is easy and simple: you can hold them with your fingernail or with a hook, and cut them off. Then care for them with the above-mentioned means until they are healed.
And who loathes incisions with iron, then it is necessary that you administer sutures to them in this way. Accept a thread which has been wetted, and introduce it itself into the wound. Then remove the thread to the upper side, and let it penetrate with the needle into the root of its other part: and roll the two ends of the thread, in the lower part of the needle, and let them run parallel to each other: and tighten the thread with a strong knot. Then tie a knot in the thread, and remove the needle.
Do this with all the threads, and let one of them remain: and let it not be attached to its own end, that it may run away from it in case of an excess of blood.
Then put it on a cloth soaked in rose oil or olive oil, and put it on the wound: and order the sick person to lie down. Then remove the cloth, until it has dried.
When therefore the threads have fallen off, care for them with ointment, and with the remainder of the cure, until they are healed.
§ On the care of wounds. For many times there happen from drying up of dung, and from the natural contraction.
When therefore they have become old, and do not bear any medicine: then it is necessary that you shave them with the sharp blade of Spatulimilus, or with your own nail, until they are wet, and that you remove from them the upper cortex which prevents them from being consolidated. Then care for them, until they are consolidated, according to what is necessary.
If however they do not consolidate: then shave them again with a sharper razor than before, until they bleed much, and then care for them, until they are healed.
§ On the cure of scabs, and not of scabs; and of the threads of cicatrices, and of the ants.
Chapter LIII.
You should know that Almirmar is not anything but a round nodule according to the color of the body, similar to a claw on the head: and it happens in the whole body, especially in the lower parts of the feet and fingers: and it causes pain when walking.
It is therefore necessary to cut off what is on the edge of the claw, and to hold with pincers, or with a hook, and to remove it from its root.
Then this care must be taken: and if you want to cauterize that according to what preceded in his chapter.
From the animal however one is a small eminence, rough, filtered, round over the surface of the body. And often happen in the hands of boys.
And the cure of it is that you should extend the athelil, and press it on: or you should tie it with silk thread: or with wool, until it falls off. And if you want to, cauterize that according to what has been said before with fire, or with sharp medicine: and those athelils are removed immersed, and not immersed with an instrument that I call.
But the ant is also a small eminence, filtered, rough, over the surface of the body, dripping into the depth far away: and when it finds it cold, feels in it a similar stinging of an ant, and becomes all over the body: and most of it is made in the hands.
And the cure of it is that you take a tube from a goose feather, or a strong turkey feather: and put that tube on the ant, until it holds a circle of the tube from its parts. Then turn your hand with the tube, until you separate what is on the edge of the ant: and put it in the depth of the flesh, and remove the ant from its root.
And if you want to, do that with an air tube, or a iron tube, according to this form.
Let the tube be above a small limit, dragging a soft un-felt, so that it should ease the pressure of its grasp and its retraction.
And if you want to, cauterize the ant according to what has been said before in the cauterization of athelil in the chapter on cauterization.
Chapter 83.
On the forms of instruments used for enemas in the ailments of the anus, and for washing away the urine and colic.
When cloisters are made of silver, or of gold, or of brass, or of hammered bronze.
And when these instruments are small or large, according to those in which they are administered.
So that which is administered in the cure of young boys who are small, let it be small; and those whose anus is weak or painful, let their cloisters also be small.
A large enema.
The cane of the instrument, that is, the upper part in which it is tied to the uterus, should be wide according to this manner: and let there be a separation so that it is tied as you see, and the lower end which enters into the anus, should be dull, i.e., not open, soft, very gentle, drawing towards finesse: and on one side of its cane there are two openings, and on the other side a single opening.
And let the width of the openings be according to the thickness of the radii, and the thicker for the smaller, and let the uterus in which are placed the medicines be of a sheep-skin: or of a piece of paper shaped like an ashen, which is small: whose root is one palm.
And let many openings be pierced like the wind blows through, and let there be a space between each opening which is the width of a finger. Then introduce into those openings a strong thread from raw silk, which is made up of ten threads, or something like that, and tie it with one of the threads. When it is placed in this uterus, let a tight constriction be applied to it between the two openings. Then wash with it.
And this is the shape of the uterus here depicted and of the openings.
The quality of washing with it is: that you fill the uterus, or the uterus of a sheep-skin soaked in medicine which has been warmed according to the tolerance of the nurse, and let not be very hot or very cold.
Then the sick one is placed on his back, and his legs are lifted up towards the sky; and a blanket or mattress is placed under him, that is to say, skin over which men lie, or linen.
Then the end of the limb is smeared with oil, or with chalk powder, or with mucilaginous foil of fenugreek, or something similar. Then introduce the body into the wound with ease. Then a servant takes both of his hands and he pushes himself out with great force until all that is inside theClisteri has been expelled into the intestines.
Then take out theClisteri, and lift up the sick man's legs towards the wall.
If the medicine makes him come out, then hold on to him as much as you can. And if he sleeps all night with it, it is more effective for healing.
But if youClisterize him in the solution of a single day, and his departure is hurried: then repeat theClisteri until he is healed.
That if there are hemorrhoids, or sore posthemiums: thenClisterize with a thin solution very gently, wax, andClisteri from which the boys areClisterized.
And this is the form of a thinClisteri over which there is a tight skin.
Head, 84.
I have already said in the division of the healing of wounds which belonged to the book, and I now say here those healing with the hand, and with medicines, according to the second preparation.
I say then that wounds differ according to that by which they are made, and according to the place on which the wound falls.
Therefore the wounds which are often made, are like the blows of a stone: or the cut of a sword, or of a dagger: or the strike of a lance, or of a wood-splinter, or of an arrow. And of many other such things.
Wounds that are made according to the places of the body, such as an arrow that falls on the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the belly, or the side: and similar members from them.
And I am telling about the cures of certain wounds, so that I may put forth a reasoning and a rule for the remaining wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds: because the memory of the composers will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
I say: When it has happened in the head a simple wound, and there is no fracture of bone: then consider, if it is from a stone's throw, or similar to it, and already has frayed the skin only: and it is a great wound, and fear about possible gangrene of the warm: then approach, and immediately phlebotomy cephalic: and do not delay that: and extract therefrom according to the quantity of its effectiveness: if it were not prohibiting anything from the phlebotomy, especially if it were the blood which comes out from the wound little. And let the phlebotomy come from the opposite side of the wounded part.
And let the phlebotomy come from the opposite side of the wounded part. And let the sick person take care not to drink anything, and no wine, and no heavy food.
If however there is a prohibition of something, then it will be reduced from the food, and does not come near to meat, neither wine.
And place over the wound if it has happened to him a warm poultice, wet infusion in oil of rosemary alone, or with wine in which is stipticitis.
If however you are safe from a warm poultice, then place over the wound if it is new with its own blood, and has not changed itself air, dust which I will tell after a little while: and if it has already changed itself air, then place over it some ointment, until it heals.
If however the wound is large, or it is from an incision of a sword, and similar: and if its edges are not gathered by dusts, then gather them themselves with a stitch, according to what I will tell after about the wounds of the hand regarding their stitches.
If however the fracture has already been detected from the bone, and is hanging down, and there is no retentive force, except a small one in the suspender: then cut it off. Then care for the wound with medicines, and restore to it tough flesh in the place of the skin, and order the sick person to eat food in which there is moisture, such as are grains, and cooked rice, until it has healed like a scar: and give them similar things.
That if an injury is in the skin and does not attach to the bone: then cut off the whole of the putrid part, and throw it away; then care for that.
If however there is an artery in these wounds, or a new one from which blood flows: and does not stop with medicines, then inquire about the artery. If however you have not cut off the injury, then dry it up with sputum, or bind it. That if necessity compels you when it does not give what I have said, then burn it off, until the blood stops flowing.
If however these wounds are small and simple, then the work on them is easy and light: so that dusting over them this dust, for they will harden before they change.
Method of Powder for Burned Wounds. Recipe one part of olive oil, and two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of burned stone that has not been extinct: all are ground together, and sieved: and it is filled with it, and tightened with a good constriction, until it adheres well to the wound, and clots with blood.
Then tighten it on top with the powder, and leave it, and do not remove it until it has dried up: so that it does not ooze out. For it will not be cured by medicine, until it is cured.
And when it has done this lime alone, when you do not have with you olive oil, and dragon' s blood also does the same operation on many large wounds, when it is put on them and tightened: and are wounds recent with their own blood, which has not been altered by air.
If I have already changed the air by some change, especially when it is in the time of summer, then this powder's purpose is not in this position: therefore take care of him with what we said, so that you put on her some unguents digesting: or put on her some flours from barley, made with water and honey, until they emit pus. Then take care of the rest with this cure, until they are healed.
But if it happens that a bone fracture is small and has been broken, then remove it with the Gesti: and I have already said the cure for fractures of the head as it will happen.
Regarding wounds of the neck.
If a wound is in the neck, there is no difference in treatment between it and a wound of the head when it is simple.
But if a wound has already penetrated the neck's nerve, or artery: then if it is a nerve, there is no skill in it except to let it run its course with what makes a harsh stipulation, such as vinegar, and dressing, and things like that. Since they are harmful to the nerves, and make them twitch.
Do not put anything cold on the wound at all: since the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuance is with the brain, which is a noble member: and let this be used with what cure is made from lene, such as calx lota with sweet water sometimes infused with oil, or with rosewater oil, and thistle, when it is rinsed with sweet water: and also the mineral stones, in this way, and wet unguents.
But if the wound is large, then administer a suture: or cover its lips with powder. Then take care of him, until he is healed.
But if a wound is deep, or has occurred in it a pocket of pus on the lower part of it, then pierce it in a more depressed place.
If the artery is already cut in the ulna and its blood flow continues: then separate, or dry it up, and bind it; or, if necessary, cauterize it.
But if the spine has already been injured and some of the spinal fluid has been spilled or most of it has been lost: then join the skin with a stitch above the canal of the fluid, and do not touch the fluid, but make it level and reduce it back to its natural shape. Then tighten the wound with a stitch that diminishes gradually, and leave it for a few days. Then treat the wound with ointment to prevent pustules and drying, until it heals.
But if the ulna has already made an impression on the bone, then examine it: if there are any bone fragments in it, remove them all, or as many as you can: and if it is not prepared, leave it until the ulna rots, and separates and comes out gradually.
If the ulna is still new, then powder it with powder that hardens. But if a fistula has developed in the ulna, then treat it with the treatment described in the chapter on that topic.
On the ulna in spatulas.
If the lance or knife has made a deep wound: then examine it carefully. But if from the ulna comes a fever, and the person who has it becomes weak: then you know that the ulna is deadly.
If it is not deep and is still new with its blood: then do not put powder on it at first, nor tighten it so that the blood does not flow into its depth and return to its heart, and instead make it ooze a little every day.
But if the ointment is not present with you, then put a clean cloth on the wound to absorb what comes out of it due to moisture: and let the person who is ill sleep on the ulna so that he may run to catch what is aggregating in it.
If indeed they have already been three days or more without injury, and there has occurred no spasm of illness, nor a bad tremor of the heart, nor a narrowing of anxiety, and their remaining vision is good: then you will know that the wound is healed. So take care of it with care and with the rest of the cure, until it is healed.
If indeed the healing of it has been excused, and it has now opened forever, then you will know that it has now become a fistula. So take care of it from its own chapter.
And if the wound is from an incision of a sword, or of a knife, and it is simple on the surface of the chest, or of the back: then take care of it with what precedes it from suturing, if it is large: or with dust, if it is small.
But if indeed it has made an impression on the bone, and has cut it from there with a club: then inquire about the wound, and quickly approach to remove those clubs, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them, until the wound has rotted away, for the extraction of them is a relief.
But of the remaining wounds and accidents of the other member, the judgment in the cure is the same as that which I have said.
Of the wounds of the belly and the exit of the intestines and the coming out of them.
The break that happens in the belly is great, medium, and small.
So then when and how often the intestine exits, or the number of intestines.
Why do they enter each other, and their stitching is more painful and difficult.
And a small break is also difficult in another way. So follow, so that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not incline to the place of their entry at once: for indeed it swells up, opens up, and thickens up: why does the entrance of it become difficult?
Therefore, it is better to make a mid-way disruption: for when the intestine does not reduce easily, as it does in these two species, a mid-way disruption is made.
Know that the suturing of wounds is done according to four ways.
Two common sutures join together in the suturing of the eye, and in the suturing of the other wounds of the body; and two other sutures, each by itself, communicate with the rest of the wounds. However, there are more proper when it comes to the suturing of the eye; and I will tell you each one, with exposure and explanation.
I therefore say that when the wound is small and it is coming out of it some intestines, and it is difficult to reduce them: then this is done for one of two ways. Or because the disruption is small, as we have said; or because there is swelling in the intestine due to cold air.
When then should this be done? Then you should warm the wound, so as to submerge a sponge or a wet cloth in warm water alone. Or you should decongest with squinantic water and celery and pepper, and blend it with the intestines, until the swelling goes down.
When then does the wine do, in which there is stipticitis: and it is better than just water in resolving swelling.
When then you see the swelling has already gone down, then wet the intestines with strong beer or wine. For through this the entrance is relieved, when it is smaller.
If, however, the retreat of it is excused after this treatment, then find a little disruption with the instrument with which they are torn hemorrhoids.
And the first treatment is better when it is prepared, than the section; and there is no coercion to cut after need and a lack of instruments.
Let one part of it be twisted, acute, and the other not acute, and its extremity is fine, a little less sharp than the spine of the pen; and it is like the sawn piece, as you see it.
For when the ulna is enlarged and the intestines are put in, then it is necessary that his reduction be made according to his own natural form in his own place, if possible above it: for it is better.
When, however, the fracture is wide in the lower part of the uterus: then it is necessary that you should place the sick one on his back, and put his legs higher than his head. And if he is in the upper part of the uterus, then place his head and his chest higher than his lower parts.
And likewise, if the fracture is in one of the two parts of the uterus, then place your intention and your attention always on this, that the part where the ulna is should be higher than the other part.
And thus it is necessary, so that you treat the wound in large wounds and in middle-sized wounds.
But in small wounds, place it according to what is prepared for you.
Then make sure that a faithful minister who holds the whole fracture with his hand is present between your hands: and gather his lips. Then identify from him who follows someone to sew something after something: and this is the method of common sewing of one thread.
And it is, so that you take an amount, or a number according to the quantity of the width of the wound. Then let go of the end of the fracture by the amount of a finger's length, that is, doctor: and fix now one in front of which you enter into it a thread in the two ends of the skin, with the two ends of the silken thread that is under the skin from the inside, until you make it penetrate from the other side, and you have already gathered the two ends of the skin, and the two ends of the silken thread: and there are four orders.
Then tie it with a double thread around the needle from both sides at the same time, until the two lips of the wound have been gathered together by the falling in: and there are two threads.
Then let go of the grosness of the finger as well, and fix another one in it: then make it straight with a thread, as you did with the needle first. So do not cease doing this with it as long as you feel pain from the spine, until you complete the compression of all the wounds.
And let the points be of a medium size between thickness and slimness: for thin points wound the flesh quickly; and thick ones enter difficultly into the skin: therefore it is necessary that the points be of a medium size both in thinness and in thickness.
And it is not necessary that the point should be placed near both ends of the skin very much: lest the flesh be wounded quickly, and the wound open before its consolidation, and also be stretched with the stitch so that the wound does not be prevented from its consolidation.
Then cut the ends of the points so that they do not hurt the sick person while he is sleeping: and put thereon little pieces of cloth from all sides which shall hold the ends of the points: and let them alone until you know that the wound is consolidated.
And this sort of stitch with points is much more convenient for small wounds. For a stitch of their points is sufficient, or two, or three around them.
But a second common stitch is to bring together the ends of four: the ends of the two pieces of skin, and the ends of the two sutures in one thread, with a point in which the fillet is rolled up of equal thinness and thickness.
Then when you have penetrated with the point the four ends, draw it back from that part from which you began to take it, so that the fillet is stretched from the upper part of the wound: in order that there may be a stitch, as if it were a stitch of a cloth with which the cloth is tied up, and place between each stitch a quantity of thickness of the little finger.
This kind of stitch is known to men.
And with this stitch I sewed up a wound in the man's belly, which had been cut by a knife, and the cut was deep about a handbreath: and there came out of his bowels round about two palms' length of middle intestine, and the cut was in the middle of the belly.
He then reduced that after the intestine had rested outside the pelvis for 24 hours.
So the wound had healed in about 15 days, and I nursed it, and he recovered: and after that he lived for many years, in good health.
And the doctors said that he would not recover.
But by a miracle I healed it without ointment. Because I was in a place where the ointment was not available, and there were no medicines. So I put a wet cloth on the wound twice a day, and I bathed it with honey water until it healed.
But there are two kinds of surgical sutures, which I will describe according to the account.
And it is as if you were to begin with an acute stitch, and to insert the thread from the outside to the inside part.
When the needle therefore penetrates the skin, and goes into the fold according to the length and width of the whole body: release the end of the thread that you inserted from the outside, and let it penetrate the other end from the inside to the outside at the other end.
When you have thus made it penetrate, then let it penetrate according to this in the same end towards the back from the outside to the inside: and release the end of the thread that you inserted from without, and let it penetrate the other end from within to without at the other end.
Then also from this same side, and with the same end, and draw it out of the skin where it penetrated: and take the thread that has passed through the skin.
Then also reduce it into the same skin, and with the other end draw it out of the skin, and take the end that was in the back with this end towards the front: and let it go out of the skin from that part, and make this end move once, and the other move twice: and let it move so as to go round all outside according to this example.
And the outline of this stitch, is as its stitches are sewn together by the skin: so that its one thread goes from one end of the skin; and so that you dismiss it with another thread from the other side until you have finished.
The second type of stitch is a special kind of stitch, which has been described by Galen.
This description of the stitch is told as if it were saying, in accordance with a certain similarity, how some physicians put it together, so that it gathers all its parts in a way that is appropriate to nature: and they apply one end to another end, and one end to another. And this is what I will tell you.
It is necessary that you fix this at the end of the midline near to you from the outside part, and let it penetrate into the inside in that place alone; and dismiss two ends of the thread. Then turn around this again, and let it penetrate from the outside part to the inside at both ends of the thread, that is to say, on either side.
Then turn around both of them, and also let both of them penetrate from the inside to the outside, in two ends of the midline, which are opposite on either side.
And this mode of sewing is a better stitch than an ordinary one, and it is a stitch whose recollection came before.
This is, then, the speech of Galen as well.
And certain people said: The stitch should be straightened out for the foot with two toes. That is, so that you put one thread into both of them; and begin with the introduction of the acupuncture from there where it is in you, and let it penetrate to the other side, following the pattern of those who sew their skin together evenly.
And you should know that when the break is in the middle of the foot: then the stitch of it is more difficult than at other places of the foot.
The judgement, however, on the treatment of wounds, is a judgement on the other wounds.
That is, because when you sever a fresh fracture with its own blood, before it alters itself with air; and reduce the intestines, and its own self, and fit self: then place on the powder of incisions.
If the air has already altered the fracture: then place on the wound some ointment, which are present with you, until it makes pus: and fall off the strings, and solidify the sifac, and improve. Then care for that as is the cure of other wounds, until it heals.
If you do not have the present medicines, then place on the wound at once, so that it begins to emit pus, and change the poultice every day, as I have taught you, until it heals.
For you do not need other medicine in many dispositions when wounds are simple.
If you should suspect that the fracture is communicating with a main member in the injury, then it is necessary that you dip the linen in oil of moderate heat, or in rose oil: and place it on the wound in the circle of the places which are between the hips, and under the armpits.
If it feels pain, or punctures, or putrefaction in its intestines (for this often happens) then clisterize the wound with black wine, hot, especially if putridness has already reached the intestine, and has made an exit penetrating up to excretion.
And know that what is from the large intestine is easier to heal: and that which is from the small one is more difficult to heal.
But the intestine which is called Jejunium does not accept healing from a fracture that has happened in it: and this is because of the multitude of its folds, that it is from fractures, and its great length, and because of the lightness of its body, and the nearness of its nerves.
If however that which proceeds from the fracture is sharp, and you succeed in reducing it: reduce the intestine according to your reduction, reducing the intestines equally.
If he has indeed passed the time, and it has already become viridescent or black: then you should tie him up with a rope above the spot that has been darkened by him, so that blood does not flow. For in such a place there are veins and arteries.
Then cut where that ligament is, and place the two ends of the rope hanging down from the lower part of the wound outside of himself: so that there will be a drawing away from you of his attraction, and extraction of himself from the wound at the side of the sinew, and emission of pus from the wound.
Remembering the wound that happened in the Intestine.
When the rupture happened in the Intestine, and it was small: then it is possible that he can be restored to some men: indeed, for I saw who was wounded in his belly by a lance thrust, and there was a wound from the right side of his stomach, and an old wound: and there was a fistula, and there came out excrement, and vomiting.
So I applied the treatment, until I was confident about his recovery: and I did not hesitate to examine him, until he was healed and the place had been hardened.
After I saw that the place was now hardened, I feared for the illness that might happen to him in his belly: and it did not happen to him from that event any evil. And he remained in his better state of health, eating and drinking and enjoying himself, and going into a bath, and exercising himself in his walks.
And some of the experimenters said, for when it happened in the Intestine a wound, and it was small: then he should be tied up in this way. And is, so that you take big-headed ants. Then gather together the two lips of the wound, and place one ant on them, which has an open mouth on the two lips of the wound. So when you lift it up over them, and tie his mouth: a knot is tied in it, for it clings to them and does not untie itself.
Then place another worm near the first, and do not cease to make that worm move after the second quantity of wounds on the whole body.
Then reduce the wound, and apply the poultice. For those remaining heads attached to the intestine, until the intestine is fed, and heals, and does not cause any harm to the whole body.
And it is also possible that the intestine be tied together as well with a thin thread: which is taken from the animal's intestine, attached to it when it is inserted into the wound.
And it is, so that you take the end of this thread from the intestine, and let there be a lot of flesh removed. Then tie the end of this thread with a thin piece of linen. Then insert that thread into the wound, and apply it to the intestine. Then reduce the wound to the dissection.
And this method of suturing with the worm and the intestine is not anything but second to the first in trust and hope.
Know that the wound which is large and broad, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines: then it is not a skill unless it is a delicate operation, nor is its healing at all certain.
The care for Zochaemen, and Fistulae.
Know that all wound, or ulcer when it is old and aged, and turns into a sore, and does not heal, and always discharges pus, and does not close: then it is called generally in any member a Fistula, and we call it by that name Zochaemen.
And a Fistula is indeed by the bitterness of an ulcer, hard, white: which does not cause pain, with which the feathers are bent inwards: and for that reason it is called by some Risati, that is to say, feather.
And it is in certain hours moist, which discharges pus. And perhaps it is broken up by moisture at certain times. And when this moisture is much, and it is little; and it is thick, and it is fine.
And I have already pre-empted in the division, then when I said wounds, that any wound which does not heal, nor is born in it flesh, is not this but only because of a new cause of diseases.
Of which one is because of the scarcity of blood in the body; or because of the malice of it; or because it is between itself and on its lips hard flesh, preventing the birth of flesh; or because it has much dirt and filth; or because the wound is putrid within itself, and the matter that is cast out of it is bad quality; or because the cure is inconsistent with its cure; or because the corruption falling in the region is a kind of pestilence, or by virtue of the region, as happened in Caesaraugusta: for in this it is difficult to digest diseases, and healing is delayed in it by nature's means: or because there is only one jaw, or because the number of bones.
And I have already shown all the stations and causes and signs of them, and their cures with doctors in a division: and it is necessary here that I should tell you about the cure of the fistula and the zuken, which is done by means of an operation with the hand.
You must know that the fistula happens in all the members of the body. For from them are the fistulas that reach to great veins and arteries, or nerves, or to the intestines, or to the urinary bladder, or to some of the ribs: or to some of the vertebral bones, or to some of the joints made up: like the hands and feet: and from them are those that reach to the proximity of the main member, and similar.
Which of these fistulas is difficult to heal from this illness, and does not receive a cure, and the occupation with it is work and ignorance. Et quod in illis est sanguinis interius, et materiola putrida mittitur, et per eam uel male uel mediocrem curare possumus: sicut in fistula que facit inter nervum occipitulos, cuius causae sunt capite oribus, et torqu
If it is from fistulas of whose depth does not reach these places which I said: and you hope and trust in its cure, and you see to the understanding of it, then take a trial from air or iron if the fistula runs according to the right way, and examine it with itself.
But if there is a curvature in the fistula, then investigate it with a thin lead probe. For lead, with its gentle alleviation of one's own body, and its curative power concerning curvature.
That if the fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to indicate it with a probe. Therefore let one inspect the openings from among its openings.
For because of the moisture that clisterizes him, it examines towards other openings, and it runs out of them.
Then ask to inquire after the manner by which it is possible for you: that you may know that there is a mouth, or a nerve, and that the fistula runs distant or near: or that the fistula is one of whose openings are many, and that it stands over all of them, with your greatest strength: when your inquiry, that you interrogate the sick, and your finding of pain at compression with your hand on the place, and similar indications and causes of accidents apostemated.
When then you stand by all of those stations with a true stance, then proceed to cure according to your confidence: and it is, when you consider then, if the fistula is near apparent, or in a healthy place distant from the junction, or from a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or one of the places which I said to you: then dry up the fistula according to what was preceded in my narrative, and remove whatever is in it from filtration, and corrupted meats, which grows in its orifice out of flesh, or a tendon, and similar things: and cure it, until it heals.
But if the fistula is of a deep distance, and runs according to the right way: then it is necessary that you separate it in the depth as far as it is possible for you. Then wash it with all its corrupted flesh.
Then administer the poultice of vinegar mixed with acute medicines: and insert it until the fistula which you have confined with iron is closed; do this several times, until the acute medicine has completely eaten away what remains in the closure of the fistula from the corruption.
Then restore it with ointment which generates healthy flesh, until it heals.
If it does not heal with this, then cauterize it according to what we have described.
If the cause of the fistula is an orifice, and you have confirmed this to me: then examine it, and dry it up according to what I have told you: if it does not permit you to do anything of the new tissue, or nerve, or main member, as we have said.
If an orifice is discovered on you and there is some corruption and blackening: then shave it, until all the corruption is removed. Then care for the flesh with whatever will heal the flesh, until it heals.
That if it does not heal, and it discharges pus as it did before: then you should know that you have not completely removed the corruption.
Therefore examine it again with a scalpel, and feel whether there is any resistance to the razoring of flesh, and wash it thoroughly with your last strength of cleansing.
Then restore it. If it heals well, then that is good; and if not, then you should know that that corruption is deep within the body, to which you have not gained access. It is therefore not your work, unless you let nature take its course with it.
That if the corruption is in a small orifice, and it is possible for you, attract it with subtle hooks which are appropriate for it.
If there are many bones, then feel whether all of them can be attracted, and do not let anything go with your strength.
If anything that you are attracting from moisture causes you any difficulty, or there is any error or doubt in cutting them, then cut the moisture and flesh, if they are there, and free the bones.
If indeed you are not prepared to remove bones from your body at the right time, then place them on the limb that should decay; and let go of them until they decay, as they decay around those bones from flesh and moisture.
And guard the bone so that it does not harden. And let the incision that you followed in your operation heal. Then place on top of the bone, if you wish, three times soaked in sulfur with oil: or three times soaked in Egyptian ointment, or some other ointment.
For when those humors begin to decay and the bones separate from them, it is a relief to remove them, and their attraction to each other.
But if it is a large bone, such as a thigh or hip bone, and similar ones, and one that has decayed, then make the incision with a last cut until it is removed, until the decay and blackening are gone. Then restore the limb.
But if that which is decayed in it is a large part, and the decay has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to cut it off, and to make an incision all the way to the place where the decay begins: then care for it until it hardens.
And I will tell you the story of the man who had a leg infection. So that it might serve as an example and a help for your operation,
He was a young man of about thirty years of age, who had a pain in his leg, due to a growth that had risen up from within the body, that is, from inside, until it reached the flesh, and caused a large boil: but there was no external cause.
So when the time came with an error of the doctors, until it opened up and many fluids came out. And his treatment was postponed until his leg was wrapped up, and many holes were made in him: all of which discharged pus and body fluids.
Therefore many physicians had dealt with him for about two years, and there was no wise man in the art of hands until I was called, and saw his wound, and the materials that flowed out of those orifices with a great course: also all his body was already dismembered, and his color was citrine.
So I inserted my hand into one of the orifices, and it came to the mouth.
Then I scrutinized all the orifices, and found them to pour out into one another on every side of the limb.
Then I dished it up, and followed one of the orifices until I detected part of the bone: and I found it to be corroded: which was already corroded, and blackened, and rotted, and pierced, until it penetrated all the way into the marrow.
Then I sharpened what I had detected, and prepared it from corrupt bone.
And I sheared off what was not in the bone except that corruption, which I could scrape off and sharpen. And I had already scraped it off.
Then I placed the wound with medical consolidates, spaced out in a long area. And this was not consolidated.
Then I inserted my hand again, and detected it on top of the first detection: and I found a continuous corruption with bone, and sharpened what was evident to me from that corruption as well.
Then I tried to restore it. And this was not restored.
Then I detected on top of the limb again, and did not cease to cut the bone in pieces, and try to restore it: and this was not restored until I cut from the bone a palm-length piece, and extracted it with its marrow.
Then I restored it with medical consolidates, and it healed quickly, and was cured: and this iteration in the operation, and cutting of itself, would not have been necessary but for the weakness of the nurse, and her lack of tolerance, and my fear over it dying: for it happened to him at all times from excessive bleeding during a syncopes.
He was therefore whole in his healing: and a new bone grew in the place of the old one, and good order was established in his body, and his strength returned; and he continued in his habits: and he did not cause him any harm at all in his walking.
But if the jaw is broken high up in the body already: then it should be closed by this means: that you take a piece of rope and tighten it at the end of the prominent bone; and you order someone to stretch it upwards: and you place another piece of rope, thicker than the first one, under the first. Then tie the wound over the flesh which is next to the bone; and extend the end of it, so that you pull the flesh down from below: and then you cover the place where you want to close it up, so that the flesh does not hurt when you cut it.
Place a piece of wood or a board under the bone from below: because when you do this, it does not hurt the corrupted flesh.
And it should be so that there is a little space over the corrupted flesh, so that the bone does not appear in its appearance; and it does not seem to feel any pain: and it pushes at its own will towards another closure.
That if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, a part of it continues with another part; and the corruption is in the middle of it or in one of its parts: then you cover all the flesh completely. Then place a piece of wood below.
Then close that part from the first where there is corruption until it continues in another part; and let the closure be at a little distance from the corruption in length as we have said.
That if the corruption is in the joint, then cut that joint which is corrupted, and close the bone where it continues from the other part.
But if the corruption is in the connection of two joints, then there is no sense of touch in it but only abrasion.
That if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or in the sole of the foot: then the matter in it is difficult to do much with. It is true that you should inquire how corruption appears to you. And cut off that part and clean it up in whatever way is possible for you, and with whatever skill you possess: when it does not give you a contrasting vein or nerve.
And know that many tools and saws are used to cut these bones depending on the position of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness and fineness, and their size and smoothness, and their rarity. Therefore it is necessary that you prepare the instrument suitable for any type of operation.
And know that these operations require a long study when you hold the instrument in your hand. And the knowledge of these methods will be a witness to your skills; for then you will have found out by yourself what is suitable for each disease and disorder.
And I am confirming to you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments, which you should present as examples for those that you cut and test by your own experience on others.
The form of another saw.
The form of the blade that cuts with ease. Let the head of this razor be made in the shape of a star-shaped claw: and its edges be made in the form of an ellipse.
And it is not suitable unless it rubs with the head of the razor when it rusts, or has a wide and large opening.
The form of a larger razor.
The form of a wide razor.
The form of the closed razor.
Form of a razor other thin.
Form of a razor other curved extreme.
Form of a razor smooth, thin edge.
This is similar to a Razor, and the end is like an edge of a saw: it is exhibited in many places from the incision of bones.
Form of a razor that comes together with its incision which has been pierced through from the bones.
The end of it is triangular, acute at the ends.
Fit from India. And also let everything that we have said about razors, incisers, and saws be.
On the incision of ends, and fastening of bones.
The ends putrefy, or for an external cause, or an internal one.
But when the patient has been cured of the corruption by the medicine of medicines, and there is no cure: and you see that the corruption incises on the member, which does not affect anything: then it should be incised on that member until where the consequence of corruption goes, so that the sick person may be healed through it from death, or from a worse defect of the member.
And the sign of what has happened to it is that the member is ruined, until it is healed: which burns itself up, or腐敗s after decay: until it incises on that which follows it on the member, and grows into all the body.
Place then with its incision, and likewise if the cause of corruption is from pounding of some fruits: as of sea-scorpions, and flies, and nettles, and others similar.
But if the corruption or pounding is at the end of a finger, then cut off the finger, and not leave space for the corruption, so that it may incise all the way to the remaining hand.
And likewise if it has happened in the hand, then cut off from the root of a fire-steel, and not leave space for the corruption, until it takes hold in the arm of the steel.
And if he has broken it, then cut the arm at the shoulder in its joint.
If, however, it is a fracture and you see that he has gone all around the shoulder: then death is imminent for him. And besides that cure, the amount of strength is necessary.
And likewise do for the foot, when there is a fracture in the toe, then cut it at the joint: and if he catches in the nail, then cut the whole foot. If, however, he has climbed up to the knee, then cut the leg at the knee joint.
That if the fracture has already reached above the knee, then there is no hope of recovery, unless amputation and forsake the sick to death.
And the way to cut a limb off, or to break it is, to hold the lower ligament tight, which you want to cut: and tighten another ligament above that place. And stretch one minister of the ligaments downward: and stretch another minister of the ligaments upward upward. And you shall separate the flesh that is between the two ligaments with the chisel widely, until all the flesh is discovered. Then cut it, or break it.
And it should be that you put all the parts of a cloth, so that the saw does not touch the healthy place: and cut the lame with added heat, and put on poultices.
If, however, there is a flow of blood inwards while you are working, then burn the place quickly: or put on some powder that stops the blood. Then turn to your own cure, until it is complete.
Then bind the wounded limb with a fitting ligament, and cure it, until it heals.
And I will tell you what happened to the man in his foot, this same thing that I told you.
That is, because it happened to the man's foot, a blackness that resembles the burning of fire: and that corruption first occurred in his toe, until it covered his whole foot.
Therefore the boy recovered from the pus, after he saw the corruption affect his member with a great deal of pain and a change in its color; and it infected him at the joint, and he was healed.
And after a long time had passed, the same corruption happened to him in the third finger of his right hand.
So he came to me, and I tried to heal the excess with him when I put on his hand from the medicines after purifying his body: and the excess did not respond, and it began to hurt again in another finger; until the corruption began to affect his hand.
He called me to cut his hand off: and I would not do it, hoping from me regarding the excess response: and I was also afraid of death by cutting his hand off next to the incision. Because the strength of the boy was above dying.
And after he was disappointed from me, he returned to his land: and he came to me about it, because he wanted to recover, and he cut off all his hand: and he was healed.
And I did not bring this account unless it be an aid to that which falls from the kind of this disease: and to show what means, and according to what happens.
Regarding the care of abscesses, and the quality of the clisterization with medicines.
When an abscess happens to be in some fleshy member, and the abscess lasts long, until it collects pus: then it bursts, or pierces, and that which is in it comes out, and there remains a hollow place like a pit: and the skin that is over it is as thin cloth: and does not spread to the last degree of corruption, nor imprisons into the mouth, the nerves, or the ligaments: it deserves to be called a sinus: but does not carry the name of a fistula: nevertheless, if it prolongs its space, until it impresses corruption in some of these members, then it is called a fistula, or a sore.
And the cure is that you should strike off his whole skin like a sleeve; and especially when it has become thin, and made like a sheet of cloth; and believe that it will not stick to the place because of its corruption.
But if you hope that the skin will stick and that that corruption will not come to pass at the last consequence: and if there is a thickness of flesh on the skin, then cure him with clister; and consider towards the neck.
Then if it is large, and the pus that is discharged from it has a foul odor: then clisterize him with Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, and oil, and myrrh, taking equal parts, mixed together in a vessel; and let them boil on the fire, until the medicine reddens; and let it come to a syrup.
Then take from it what you need; and dissolve it with water and honey, and clisterize it with him with the sin; and tighten the orifice of it, and let the medicine flow into it for two hours.
Then extract him with the expression; let him be for days until the sin is clean, and the smell is gone.
And when you clisterize it with water of ash, when this medicine is not present with you; and is, that you should take the ash of oak wood, or the ash of oak; and throw it on the water. Then boil it, and clisterize it with it, until you believe that the sin is now washed away.
That if the sick person does not tolerate Egyptian medicine or water of ash, then clisterize him with water and honey, to which has already been added some crushed myrrh. Or clisterize him with honey and wine mixed, for the property of honey is to clean and wash away; and the wine makes the sin adhere, especially when there is an abundance of stimulative and dry.
When you have done this sometimes and have trusted that the corruption of the sin has already been removed: then let him make him a clister, with what he does, to bring flesh into him.
And it is so that you may take from the plaster dyafinicon: and dissolve him with rose oil, and wine astringent: or make him a clister with certain medicines, and other ointments, whose properties I have written in the book of ointments.
That if the opening of the sinus is strict, in which the tube of the clister does not enter: then enlarge it a little with iron: or put in it the licorice that has been soaked in oil, in Egyptian ointment, or in basilico ointment, until it is enlarged.
And likewise if the opening is also wide, then join the lips together with a stitch: and let go out of it a quantity in which the clister is to be made without adding anything.
And likewise if the opening from which the pus runs is elevated towards the upper part: then dry him up in a lower place that is in him, so that the pus may run down from it: because when the pus is constricted in the depth of the sinus, it prohibits flesh to be generated in it.
That if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus all around below it according to what you want: then try, so that you prepare the member with preparation by which the pus runs out from it with ease according to what is prepared for you. Try so that nothing of the pus is left in it at all: and take medicines consolidatio that are placed over the mark, suited to what you want. And spread them on a linen cloth. And have there such a quantity of cloth that it may communicate with the whole sinus. Then cut with forceps on the direct opening of the sinus hole, a little larger opening of the sinus. Then spread on the other cloth with soft ointment according to the quantity of the hole: and put it in a distant position from the opening of the sinus, so that the outlet of the pus may be eased: and do not hold the cloth large, except after some days.
And yet he who is above the sinus opening, he whom you stir at all times so that he emerges from it with pus: and as you know, the infection that comes out of it is much or little, digested or undigested.
And when you consider this place of the sinus again, whether the master feels pain there or not; and if there is no pain there, and if there is a pus there, or not.
When your treatment therefore extends thus far, and you see the matter that comes out above the sinus opening; then know that the sinus is already attached, or approaching attachment: then therefore solve it in the morning, or on the third day; and when you have solved the wound, then change the cloth with another, and renew the unguent.
If however the pus comes out of the sinus after a long time, do not despair concerning its attachment, for its healing approaches, since there are people who delay the generation of flesh in their wounds, and there are those who bring it about in the opposite way.
But if the pus comes out of the sinus after many days, then know that the sinus is not attached.
But if the attachment of the sinus is delayed and its course is prolonged; then add to the drying up of medicines, that the doctors may make them dry in their substance, and in their power so as to be like the dyphinicon unguent, when added to it in excess of what is necessary from the oil.
And from this last, as regards its treatment, it is that you should take the dyphinicon unguent, and solve it with rose oil, and rub it on the old wound to the same extent as to its substance.
Then therefore bind it up with it, and use it.
And this same action is similar to that of the dye-finicon unguent when it is not present with you, and honey when you have decanted it until it thickens, and use it. Take myrrh and aloe and olive oil; let them be thoroughly mixed together and then put on honey while it is still hot above fire. Then bind a cloth over the wound and tie it tightly around the sinew: and with the honey that you have prepared, cover the wound until it thickens: and then apply the powder on the wound, and bind it again to the cloth, and tie it up.
And when that is administered in it aristorcia long, and roots of the celestial liliy, and the liliy it self, and herb flour, and centaurea. Use either simple or aggregate ingredients, strain it through a sieve, and then apply the powder over the honey that you have poured out: and use it.
If it does not heal with this cure: then you will know that there is corruption in its depths: or if it has already made an impression on the bones, or on the other hard parts of the body, or on the ligaments: then treat it with the cure of fistulas, as has been described.
Of the cure of the panaritus and the scratched nail, and the cutting of the finger added, and the sectioning.
Panaritus is an abscess that comes out under the nail of the thumb or foot, and perhaps also from the other fingers.
When it is then prolonged in its course, and the cure of it is neglected, and an abscess forms under a warm thumb: or if it corrupts, and discharge pus, until it corrupts the nail root: and perhaps it also corrupts all of it, and perhaps it reaches corruption to the mouth, until it has a foul odor: and makes the tip of the finger wide, and makes its color dark.
When you then treat the wound, with what we have said in connection, and your treatment does not bring about a cure: then you must cut off all the excess that is left from the nail. Then cauterize the nail after that. For the cauterization of the nail, for the wound is hot.
If the bone is indeed healthy, and the nail too, and the nail's additions are already compressing the flesh towards the insides, and it begins to sting and hurt: then you should put Radium under the angle of the nail that stings the flesh, and push it upwards: and cut into the flesh with ease, and place on top what remains of the flesh from the burning medicines, until it has all moved away. Then care for that with the nail, until it heals.
But if the corruption has already impressed on the bone, then you should cut into that bone and remove it: for it does not heal at all while it remains in it.
If you see the corrosion and the corruption penetrating into the finger, then cut it at one of its joints, according to what has been said above in its remembrance. Then care for that, until it heals.
But if there is a pulling or pounding of the nail: and there is a sharp pain in it, then you should let blood from the wounded part at first. Then dry the nail with a sharp Spatemile, cutting across from top to bottom.
And guard it, so that the cutting does not reach the flesh under the nail, for you would make happen through it a very painful pain for the sick person, and it would be a cause of the birth of flesh added in place.
Then care for that place with what sits there pains.
The finger that is added in some hands of men, perhaps is whole of flesh: and perhaps there are bones in it, and perhaps there is a nail in it: and the birth of some of its joints, or the birth of its nail, perhaps is in the knuckle joint, or perhaps it is born in some of the joints of the finger. So this that is born in some joints of the finger does not move: and this that is born in the joint of the finger, perhaps moves.
Therefore, if he is a man who has flesh, then it is easy to cut him. That is, so that you strike him at the root with a broad knife.
But for one whose birth is in the root of the joint, cure is difficult. Therefore, abstain from cutting him.
But in that person who is born in the finger near the last knot, then it is necessary that you strike his first flesh with a round incision all the way to the mouth. Then clamp the jaw with one of those clamps that are convenient for it. Then care for the person, until he is healed.
But the consolidation that happens in fingers opposite to each other, often happens or from the birth of a man, that is, he is born with it, or from the consolidation of a wound, or from a fire burn, and similar things.
Therefore, it is necessary that you separate that consolidation, until the fingers return to their natural shape. Then place between them a chisel, or cloth soaked in oil with rose water: so that they do not unite quickly, and separate them: or place between them a thin piece of lead, until the spot joins together as it should.
And also if such a consolidation happens in some fingers with the palm, then dry that consolidation, according to how it is prepared and becomes the shape of the limb.
Regarding the wound:
The veins are closed, large, and full of melancholy effusions that occur in many parts of the body: and most of them are found in the legs, especially in the thighs of those who move about a lot, and of those who carry heavy loads.
Therefore, it is necessary that you administer strong purgation to the body from time to time with black cholera in order to eliminate the excesses.
Then take blood from the patient with a bazilicus needle.
The cure of these veins with iron is according to two methods. Vnus eorum est, ut secentur, et extrahatur sanguis niger. And the other mode is, that he should hold fast the vein and draw all out.
But the sectioning of it is according to this mode. Clutch the leg first with warm water a lot, until the thick foul blood has dissolved. Then tighten the wound of the nurse from the upper side of his hip, all the way down to the knee with the rope. Then dry the leg in one place, or two, or three wide sections.
Then he should hold fast the blood, that is to say, draw it out with his hand from the lower part of the leg, all the way up, and let it run first to the upper part. Then dry the nail down below: until he walks out of blood, as much as you see will suffice, and what strength the nurse can bear.
Then bind it up: and order him, that he should refrain from foods which generate black cholesterol; and again let him undergo an evacuation and a phlebotomy, when the veins are filled, and that pain does the sick man.
But his elevation is according to this mode. Scrape off the leg nurse, if there are many hairs on it. Then put him into a bath: or clutch him on the leg of himself with warm water, until he is red, and the veins are flowing; or exercise him strongly, if there is no present bath, until he is warm.
Then dry the skin at right angles to the vein's section along its length; or in the end of it near the knee, or in the lower part of it near the heel.
Then open the skin with a hook, and scrub off the scar from all parts, until you can feel it; and is it at the appearance of it, that you see it turn red to black by the decay. Then when he has come out from under the skin, you will see it white as a cord.
Then introduce below it the radium, until it has been removed and has exited the skin: suspend it with a blind hook, gently.
Then dry off another section next to that section with three fingers. Then scrape the skin from the upper part of the buttocks until it appears. Then remove it with radium as you did, and suspend it with another hook as you did at first.
Then dry off another section, or more sections if you wish to do so. Then remove it and cut it at the heel.
Then pull it out to the section above it.
And make it, until you have pulled it out of the upper section, or longer sections, until it has exited all of it: then cut it.
If it does not submit to you for being removed and cut: then introduce a strong double-edged knife and tie it up, and remove it: or introduce below it the radium: and move your hand around all of it until it has exited. And make sure that it does not get cut. For if it is cut, it will be difficult for you to remove it well, and it will enter into the body and cause harm.
But when you remove it all: then place it on a place wet with wine and oil, or oil only: and take care of it, until it heals.
That if the vine is contracted, having a tortuosity where it turns to the parts of it, and is not like what we have said according to the straightness: then you must find on all parts of its tortuosity, and the places of its turning.
Then suspend it with a hook, until you have removed it all: and make sure that you do not get cut by the section next to it, or hurt yourself: for it will be difficult for you to remove it from on top of you, or to pull it out. Conserve therefore your prudence.
The form of incident which heals is vitis.
The form of incised wound which heals is vinum coptum.
It is not curitis like the other Incision, nor is it acute extremity, so as not to wound the vein; and it is gross flexibility, mild: for if it were thin, it would be hurt by its own subtility: but there is a superfluity of grossness in it, as we have said.
On the extraction of a vein from the leg.
This vein is generated in the legs in warm lands, such as Alizegi and the land of the Arabs, and in arid, hot lands, little tender, that is, in which grass does not grow, nor trees.
And perhaps it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And indeed its generation is from putrefaction which occurs under the skin, as it happens within the bodies of serpents and worms ascariuses, and worms generated between the skin and flesh.
And the sign of the beginning of this vein is, that it happens in the leg a hot inflammation. Then the place becomes blistered. Then the vein begins to issue out from the place of its blistering, as if it were a root of a plant, or an animal.
But when this extremitas of it appears, you shall then bind thereupon a fragment of lead whose weight is from a drachm to a claw-weight, up to two drachms and mark the same: and let go the lead suspended out of the leg.
Howsoever it shall go forth from it to the externals, bind it within the lead and mark it. Which if it should be prolonged for a long time, then cut a part of it, and bind the remainder. And do not cut it up into roots before it shall have gone forth all out. For if you should cut it, then it will contract itself and go into the flesh; and it makes happen a pustule, and decay in that place, and a bad wound.
So then it should be handled gently and slowly extracted until it has completely emerged from the last of its own, and nothing remains in the body: and from this very vein emerges in some people which is five palms long and ten. And I had already reached it because he had emerged from 20 palms.
But if you are injured at the time of your medical treatment: then insert a ray into that hole and pierce it with a long blade along with the body until all the contents have been completely discharged from it: and administer putrefaction to the site with medicines for several days. Then take care of him with the cure of wounds.
And this very vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears in the ankle of the foot, or in the foot itself: and many openings occur to it, and a branch emerges from every opening.
So then take care of it as we have said in division, and with the above-mentioned things that were preceded.
Regarding the section on worms born under the skin, and it is called the "bad trouble".
This "Illness" is called in some country "the bad trouble": for this often happens that worms emerge bare and a single one is born, which appears between skin and flesh.
And it was felt throughout the body when it rose and fell: and it was perceived by touch when it walked from one member to another, until it stopped wherever it stopped in the skin, and emerged.
And its origin is from the putrefaction of certain kinds of dung. As happen worms and snakes, that is, earthworms, and pinworms in the stomach.
And they fear its maliciousness. Because when he begins to move in the body and rises to a head, then perhaps it opens within him, and emerges, and destroys an eye: and this happens often.
So then if you are going to care for him and extract it, then that will not happen unless he walks or feels it himself.
Therefore, so that you keep what is above him, and what is below with strong constriction of the ligament. Then dry on top of him, and then extract him.
If it penetrates into the flesh, and not into his whole body: then place on the spot a cautery with fire until it dies.
And greater what is feared is corruption of him, which corrupts his eye, as we have said.
But if you see it has already reached the head near the eye, then tighten what is below with good tight constriction. Then dry on top of him, and then extract him.
And it is necessary that the sick one uses his own purification, with medicines dissolving bad putrid humors.
And he protects himself from foods that generate putrefaction.
§ On the section on disease of Nakir.
This disease is called in our land Nakir, and it is a pain that happens in some member, and then it changes from a member to another.
And indeed I have already seen him, according to what I tell you. I was called to a sick woman in some rooms. And she took her arm, and I saw swelling of the lung in the arm joint.
And after an hour had passed, I saw one swelling walk with a flame as if it were fire, rising faster than it can go: like silver in flight, when it runs from place to place.
So then the pain left that place, and was fixed in the shoulder.
Then he sat for an hour, and ran through the remaining body, until it reached another arm.
Then he told me that he was writhing all over his whole body, according to what I saw.
I am astounded at the swiftness with which he transfers his member from one part to another. And I too did not see this disease before, with my eyes, in such a way. However, I see many who suffer from the pain that one member causes another: and I do not see this one with my eyes, as I saw it in a woman.
And I do not think that this is, except that it is for this reason, because that woman was from those who are from dry bodies of stinking limbs: hence it appears to the sense that this swiftness is transferred.
And it is necessary so that it does not appear in this way with regard to those who are luscious and have humid bodies, of secret limbs.
When you then apply the cure to him, and the patient feels this pain: then if it appears to your eyes, as we have said, then lift him up quickly: and dry him out on top of him until he walks in that swiftness: and caustice the place.
If, however, you do not see this one with your eyes: then cure him by scrubbing the body, and with it what drives out the swiftness, and makes them red with foamy pills, and pills of bitter wormwood, and others like them.
Regarding the extraction of arrows.
Arrows differ according to their species, and according to the places in which they are embedded in the body.
However, there is a difference between them: for some have large tips, and some are sharp; and some are convexed, and some are concave. And of these some have three angles. And of these are the tongues. And of these are the stars.
However, those that fall into members according to the two ways. Or if members are from main concavities, like the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidney, intestine, bladder, and similar to them. When therefore he falls upon any of these limbs, and the signs of death appear to you, which I shall tell you afterwards, then it is necessary that you should extract that arrow from him, for death will overtake him in that position. And when these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not buried deep within the limb, then extract it, and be concerned for the wound.
For when the signs of injury to the brain appear, when an arrow falls into it, and pierces the bone, and comes out above the brain, there happen: for there is a violent headache, and blurring of vision, and dizziness, and reddening of the eyes, and swelling, and reddening of the tongue, and spasm, and confusion of thought, and loss of memory, and cholera. And perhaps blood comes out from the nose, or ears. And perhaps speech is severed, and the voice is destroyed. And there comes out of the wound's place a white, pulpy moisture. And there comes out of it similar to a meat broth.
But if these signs appear to you, then refrain from treatment, and extract the arrow if it has not come out.
The signs of an arrow that falls into the heart are: for it is near the left nipple: and feels as if fixed to a hard thing, not to a soft one. And perhaps the arrow has a movement similar to a pulse: and black blood runs from the limb. And follows it coldness of the limbs, and cold sweat, and fainting fit. So you know that death has certainly come.
And the sign of an arrow that wounds the lung is: blood spitting from the limb is frothy: and the veils that cover the neck, fall down, and change their color in front of the eyes. And he breathes out great, deep breaths: and seeks cold air.
If the arrow falls into the chest, which is within the breastplate: then it is close to the lower back: and it causes a great fever with severe pain, with sighing: and all the limbs of the shoulders move.
And if an arrow falls into the belly, then perhaps it has exited from a little indigestion from something eaten.
And if an arrow falls into the belly, and lodges there: it exits some stool from thebowels, or a piece of flesh, or an intestine which has already been torn. So there is no hope for its cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
If an arrow falls into the bladder, and it exits urine: and it proceeds from it something to the outside, and the pain is stronger over the sick one: then know that it is fatal.
The remaining limbs, such as the face, neck, mouth, spleens, ribs, hips, and legs, are saved according to multiple dispositions: when the arrow does not hit a blood vessel or nerve: and the arrow is not harmless.
And I tell you that I saw such arrows, which he used to indicate by way of example for your cure.
That is, because an arrow fell into the eye of a man's tear duct, at the root of his nose. So I extracted it from him on the other side, under the fat of his ear: and he was healed, and there was no harm to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from the Jew, which had fallen into his fat under his lower eyelid: and the arrow was now hidden, and I could not get it out unless I cut off part of his cheek, to which it was attached in its own wood: and it was a large arrow among the arrows of the Turks, with a soft iron, in which there were no bars.
So the Jew was healed, and there was no bad happen to his eye.
And I drew another bow from the throat of a Christian.
And it was an Arab bow, and that is where the ears are. Then I followed behind it with two arrows: and now she was submerged in his throat. So I went with care, until I had drawn her out: and the Christian was well.
And I drew out another arrow from a man who had fallen into his belly: and we thought that he should die therefrom.
After which I left him for thirty days, and there was nothing changed in him from his habits, then I followed behind the arrow: and I followed it up, and drew it out: and he was well, and no misfortune happened to him.
And I saw a man to whom the arrow had fallen on his back, and it was mending over him. After which it was after seven years, the arrow came out at the root of his hip.
And I saw a woman to whom the arrow had fallen into her belly, and it was mending over her, and the arrow remained within her: and there was nothing changed in her from her habits, and the woman did not find any harm in any of her natural actions.
And I saw another man to whom the arrow had fallen on his face, and it was mending over him, and remained, not finding much pain in it: and there were many such things like this.
And I drew out an arrow from the prince of the king, which had fallen into his nose, and was declining a little on the right side: and the arrow was hidden all together.
So I was called to his cure after the fall of the arrow for three days. Then I found the bow string very tight.
So I asked her with careful touch, and I did not feel it: but he himself felt the prick and pain under his right ear. I therefore hoped that it was that point at the end of the arrow.
I therefore prepared the plaster with which to draw out the force of attraction and digestion, confident within myself that if I should remove the place, a sign would appear to me of the arrow, so that I might cut over it: and this did not happen in the place suggesting that the arrow was lying in wait there.
I therefore persevered with the plaster for many days: and nothing happened, and the fracture was healed in the meantime: and he remained weak from being unable to remove it from that space for a number of days, until one day he felt an arrow in his nose. And he told me that.
And he told me that. I therefore placed sharp medicine on that fracture for many days, until it was open: and when I tried to move him, I felt the end of the arrow sticking into the wood.
Then I added the sharp medicine to the fracture through which it was open for a number of months, until we could see the end of the arrow clearly: and time passed with him while I was adding the sharp medicine.
Then when the fracture had healed and I was able to push the bones together, and make them move, and they would not come out: then I did not cease to apply gentle pressure, and to devise means over it, until one day I pushed on it with bent forks, according to the form of their ends at the end of a chapter, so that I pulled it out. Then I restored the fracture.
And the doctors say that cartilage in the nose has not been restored. I therefore restored it, and the fracture was healed, and all the injury was healed with complete health: and he did not suffer from anything at all.
And I will tell you the quality of extracting a certain kind of arrow: so that you may have a rule and a sign on it, which I did not mention.
For the parts of this art and their distinctions do not comprehend with a description: nor does that book understand it, and the craftsman is prudent to compare little with much: and when he is present with him who is absent, he finds an operation new, and a tool new for going down matters foreign to this art when they occur.
I say then, that arrows do not depart from the member on which they are fixed except by two ways. Or by attraction from the place from which it entered. Or by the opposite of the other part.
And those that have exited from where they entered, or are an arrow going in a fleshy place: and is attracted, and exits.
That if it does not submit to the exit at the time when it falls: then it is necessary that you should let go of it for a few days, until the flesh which is around it decays: and the attraction of it will be alleviated, and its exit.
And likewise if it is drawn into a bone, and does not submit to you to the exit, then let go of it also for a few days: and again with the attraction and movement every day, until it exits.
That if it does not submit to you to the exit after a few days, then you should make a hole in the bone from all sides with a sharp object, until the arrows increase. Then attract it, and remove it.
If however the arrow is already hidden in the place of the body and concealed and hidden from sense: then examine it with effort. If you feel it, then attract it with some instruments that are suitable for attracting it.
If you cannot get above it, because of the constriction of the wound, and because of the length of the arrow in the deep: and there is no bone, or nerve, or vein: then find above it, until the tendon is enlarged, and it is possible to remove the arrow.
That if there are ears that hold it, then free the flesh that is fixed in them from all sides, with all the effort that you can: and efforts, if it cannot be healed on the ears, and their twisting, until it heals.
And you when you administer the extraction of the arrow, wherever it is, then use the twisting of your hands, with forceps to all parts, until you make it heal: and the last subtility, so that the arrow does not break, and becomes difficult for you to attract it, and its extraction.
That if you cannot get above it in one hour, then leave it for a few days, until what is around it putsrefies. Then repeat it: for sure bandages If however the contradiction is causing you a flow of blood, then administer what we said in its chapter on healing: and protect your skill from cutting a vein, or a nerve, or a tendon.
And administer the efforts in every way that you can possibly heal the arrow: and let it be with ease, and tranquility, or tardiness, and firmness, as I have told you.
And it should be that, when you take out the arrow, it is with a view to making the injured person recover his health according to the figure, according to which the arrow was in the wound of the arrow itself. For it is more certain. But if it is not possible for you to do that, then administer what is possible for you from figures.
But if the arrow that comes out of the other side is already going out from it a little towards the outside: or makes a bump on the ends of the arrow by touch from the top part of the skin nearby, and you see it sticking out: then cut off over it, and make the incision according to the quantity that they hold in them the arrows.
Then attract it: for it becomes easy to exit.
But if it retains in the bone, then twist your hand according to its roundness, until it impresses the arrow in the bone, and magnifies itself: then attract it.
And if not: leave it for a few days: then repeat it, until it exits.
That if the arrow is in it, then push it with that.
But if it fell wood, and you have to administer the push: then introduce into it an instrument that is smooth, so that it enters smoothly from its tail the arrow: then push it with that.
But if the arrow is smooth, then push it with an instrument that enters into it. For the arrow is relieved by this.
That if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary, so that smooth meat, in which is venenum: if it is possible for you to do this. Then take care of it with that when it comes into contact with that.
That if the arrow is falling in the chest, or in the abdomen, or in the groin, and it is close to you that you touch with your hand, and it is possible for you to cut over it: then cut off, and take care away from the incision of the vein, or nerve, and remove it.
Then take care of the wound, if you see it, and take care of that, until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps, with which the arrows are removed.
If the ears are similar in shape to the nose, and have been made like iron: when they are placed over the arrow, they do not allow it to move.
And from them there result many kinds, great and small and moderate, according to the quantity of the size of the arrow and its width and the constriction of the wound.
Their shape is a kind of cone.
And their form is deaf.
This is the shape of deaf ears like a cone, so that the entrance into it may be relieved and driven in with it.
Regarding the lancing of veins.
There are thirty veins from which blood is drawn.
Of these in the head there are sixteen: two pulse veins, which are behind the ears, called the two herbs; and two arteries, which appear in the two temples; and two veins which come from the two eyes, which are called the two lookers-about; and a vein which is prepared in the middle of the forehead; and a vein which is at the end of the nose. And two guide-veins, which are in the neck. And two veins which are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins which are in the lower lip. These are called the Algecirich veins. And two veins, which are under the tongue.
But the veins that are bled in the arms, there are five veins in every arm.
One of these ears is called the cephalic, and proceeds from the side of the skull; and it is named by the common name the vein of the head. And the Scaly. And there is a middle vein, which is composed of a basal and a cephalic branch; and it is named the common body vein. And the Basilica, and it is placed in the domestic side: and it is also called Titillicaris. And it is named by the people of many hands. And the tendon of the bicep, and it is placed on the edge of the wrist: and that one is in which bloodletting is done, and that one which appears above the thumb with a visible protrusion.
And the salvatory, and it is new which is between the ring and the little finger: and they are two branches.
And in the leg and in the foot there are three hands. One of them is that which is under the thumb on the side of the palm. And the second is the saphenous vein, and its place is at the heel from the domestic side. And the third is the nerve, and its place is at the heel on the side of the palm.
And in the other leg there are three hands like those.
Now concerning the bloodletting of two veins after the ears.
The bloodletting of two veins which are after the ears is an ancient practice for hemiplegia, hemianopia, saphena para, and bad ulcers on the scalp.
And the quality of bloodletting depends on how much is drawn. And it is, like a washing cloth for the head: and it rubs the back of the neck with a good rough rubbing. Then tie the sick man by his neck with a strap, until two veins appear. And their places are after the ears in two depressed places of the head. So ask them with your finger, and where you feel the pulse of the veins under your finger, there are the signs with a caustic substance.
Then take the scalpel of the bloodletter, and that one is called the incisor. Then insert it into the flesh under a vein, until the bloodletter comes to the mouth. Then wipe your hand with the vein and the skin from above, and cut the vein with a cutting of the skin. The length of the incision should be equal to that of two fingers spread out, or about that: and let blood flow as much as necessary.
Then tighten it with powder, and let it go, until it heals.
And already at the beginning of this book he preceded in the incision of ears, and their cauterization.
In fact the two arteries which are in the two temples for phlebotomy, are for the old hemianopsia: and salt the palatine bone, and press hard: and run the course of the flowing acutes towards the eyes.
And the quality of phlebotomy is according to what I tell you. Let the patient turn his neck very much, until two veins appear with a manifest appearance: and show me the pulse of the ears under your finger. For then are the signs with the caustics.
Then wet the skin above the vein with your index finger, and insert the phlebotome below it, and wet the vein above. And cut it, as you did with the two other veins: and let blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
Then remove the tourniquet and place your finger on one vein for an hour. Then put on a powder and strings, and tighten it with strong pressure: and let go until it heals.
And already at the beginning of this book he preceded in the remembrance of ears, and their incision, and their extraction.
In fact the iuementum of phlebotomy of the frontal vein is after phlebotomy of the head, for old diseases of the face: and for hemianopsia, and redness: and foul sores.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is according to what I tell you. The injured man held his neck with his hands while blood flowed from him, until a new cloth appeared. Then take the instrument called "Fossorum".
Place the prominent point that is in the head of the "Fossor" above the cloth, and strike it with a pestle or something else in this manner; and let the blood run according to the quantity you want. Then solve the piercing wound, and tighten it, until it heals.
And sometimes open with a phlebotomist on the side. However, it is not necessary that there should be an acuter-ended phlebotomist like the other phlebotomists, rather than a wider-ended one. And phlebotome it according to the transvention: since the mouth is near: and perhaps, when it is thin, the phlebotomy breaks when it is pressed.
However, the two veins which are in the two tear-shaped places of the two eyes, run to the eye from a wart and redness; and darken the eye, and cause facial ailments.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is, that it should tighten the injured man's neck with blood flowing from him. Then phlebotome them: and you stand over his head.
And the phlebotomy shall be made according to the transvention a little in length, with a little pestle, for there is no flesh in this place. If the phlebotomy is thin at the end, it may break.
Then let the blood run according to the quantity that you need. And place a cloth on them, and tighten them at night, and solve them.
The veins of the nose are phlebotomized, which is useful for an acute fever, a strong blood pressure, facial illnesses such as hemianopia, and redness that has occurred in the face; above all, when it is old.
And the quality of phlebotomy is such that it tightens the weak neck. Then take his nose with your left hand, and take the phlebotome thin, long; and fix it on the mid-leporis of him, between that which distinguishes the nose according to the straightness. For the new one is not apparent to the sense there, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary that you make your hand with the phlebotome a little loose: and let the blood flow according to your need. Then bind it up for one night. For that is quickly healed.
For the two phlebotomies of Guidegi is to constrict the feverish, and to take hold of leprosy, and melancholy diseases, and impetigo and bad ulcers, and corrupting ones, that is, herpes zoster.
And the quality of these phlebotomies is such that they tighten the weak neck with a ligature on each side: and let the workman stand over the sick man's head, and let the sick man sit on a chair.
Then take one phlebotomy long and wide a little. Then draw out the measured quantity of blood, or according to what you see is necessary for that one. Then do the same with the other new-born.
Then loosen the ligature and tighten two strings in the middle, so that the sick man does not get tighter. And let it go until morning. For the wound is healed.
The Phlebotomies of Al-Ghaberich: The veins of Al-Ghaberich is the phlebotomy to constrict: because it brings to the drink in the mouth, and corrupting of the tongue: and bad ulcers, also those that are in the naso, and around it.
And the quality of phlebotomy is so that you may make the sick sit before you; and tighten his neck with a strap. Then you will open his mouth and look at the two nostrils; the one on the right side of the mouth is called the right nostril, and the second on the left side is called the left nostril, and each has a different color: the right nostril is red, and the left nostril is black. And this is true: because there are little nostrils around them, black. So cut each one as you cut.
But if there is a doubt about them on you, and you do not know which one of them it is: then you will cut at the larger nostril, and you will make known its quality.
And also do the same for the two nostrils that are on the upper lip; and much more so because the custom is with it: and cut the two nostrils that are on the lower lip.
De phlebotomia: Venae sub lingua post Cephalicae phlebotomiam. The two veins that are under the tongue phlebotomy is to test: it is true, because phlebotomy of the head is to make a test for any disease that is in the throat, and any disease of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomy is so that the sick person sits between your hands to the sun: and wash his tongue, and look under his tongue on one side with one vein, and under his tongue on the other side with another vein; and let each one’s color change into blackness.
So phlebotomize each one of them, and take care not to hold your hand in phlebotomy. For the veins are under it, and perhaps it will happen that there is a flow of blood out of them.
The three veins that are cut in the foot; but there is a phlebotomy custom on all people.
And phlebotomy from them [i.e., the lungs] is done in two ways. Either pricking with a phlebotomy needle on the side: or oiling at the place of a cautery, and it is called Anelid; either drying with a phlebotomy knife, and it is called Alnelid. And this is the form of it.
And from them are two kinds of phlebotomy needles, and they differ according to the width of the veins and the thickness of the skin; The form of the phlebotomy needle with which one makes a section is wide, as you see. And it is fitting for opening closed veins, full, coming from the body, visible, thick, and those which contain  thick blood, turbulent.
And this phlebotomist is of lesser width, and more delicate at the extremities.
And it is fitting for phlebotomy of small veins that contain  subtle yellow blood.
The bazilica, which is a single vein among three veins, the phlebotomy with a knife is a good thing. Because it draws blood from the ailments that are under the throat and the neck, which is next to the chest and the belly; and it is fitting for the phlebotomist to cauterize it, and let him fear what lies under it, because there is an artery. If therefore he should make a mistake, and he adds to the phlebotomy a piercing, he will strike that artery, and he will spill the flow of blood. Therefore it is fitting, so that one does not pierce it with a phlebotomy needle: but let him dry it with Anelid.
That if it does not appear with a manifest appearance, then one should remove it, and turn it to another, or you will seek a branch of it: or you will phlebotomize the place where it is. It itself is manifest, and dry it with Anelid phlebotomy, as we have said.
If, however, you wish to bloodlet him from himself, then it is necessary that you should strike before the stricture of the arm, so that you may touch the place, until you know the place of pulsation. Then mark the spot with a causticum, then the arm, and dry up the vein with a cautery, as we have said. And let the percussion not fall away from the space of the artery.
And when you see, when you tighten the ligament, the swelling in the place that you have marked with the causticum, then that swelling is the swelling of the artery: therefore remove it.
That if you see the blood rising with the bloodletting, like a boy's urine, and it is thin blood, red: then you will know that it is from the blood of the artery. Then therefore bring your hand near, and place your finger on the space for a long time, then remove your finger. And if blood is cut off (for it is often cut off) then tighten the arm, and release him: and let the injured be at rest from his movement: and sit on his fear.
And let him not move for a few days, until he is healed.
But if blood is not cut off, and it overpowers you: and there is no present medicine for you in the moment of your need, then strike an artery, if it appears to you. For its extremities do contract, and blood is cut off.
Or take a piece of cork, and find it: take a half, and tighten it on the place of the stricture of the vein going down, with a ligament and powder until another day.
Then if blood is cut off, it is good. And if not: then take care of the person with him, remembering the place where the blood was cut off: and cutting off his blood is not difficult in many dispositions, because of the small wound, and the possibility of a ligament from the arm.
But the venesection of the dark-colored blood is a procedure that draws blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body: therefore, because it is composed of the branch of the Basilica and the branch of theCephalica, as we have said.
And it belongs to the phlebotomist to do this, lest he suffer from phlebotomy, because under it is a nerve. If therefore he adds to the venesection of phlebotomy and finds a nerve, it happens that he falls into a stupor, and his recovery is difficult, and perhaps does not recover completely.
And this nerve appears often to the sense. But if it is hidden in some people, and is slender, and does not show itself: then you should place your phlebotomy so that the phlebotomist makes a section with Alnecil, and απομακρύνει τα νεύρα με τη δική σας αντοχή.
That if the vein is between two nerves, then find a vein in length.
On the cerebral vein. But the procedure for venesection of the cerebral vein is that it draws blood from the head and contributes to the ailments of the eyes.
And you should use the proper oil in this vein if you want to, so that the phlebotomist pricks it with the phlebotome's olive oil, or with the phlebotome's myrrh: for this is the salvation of all veins, because it is not an arterial vein, nor a nerve.
But you should be careful with the venesection, so that you only take the head of the laceration and find a more comfortable place: and it does not hurt him if, after the first blow, he does not return to it with venesection from time to time.
But perhaps he bleeds when he is not venesected at first blow, but it does not hurt him that bleeding from time to time, if it happens in some people.
On the utility of phlebotomy and on the precautions to be taken when performing it. The quality of phlebotomy and the complications that may arise from it, which you should consider how to correct.
First, then, of what you should be aware, that phlebotomy is administered not for the sake of health but to preserve it, and its persistence and caution from the advent of illness.
And so that phlebotomy is performed in one of three positions which a person lies in bed, namely the cephalic, the femoral, and the bazal. And so that phlebotomy is performed at the beginning of spring on a fasting person, in summer, and in autumn after a feast, when there are signs of fullness.
And so that phlebotomy is performed on the first or third day after having slept for three hours.
But phlebotomy which is administered to the sick does not have a determined hour; but when it elicits convenience and necessity towards it, at night, or by day, and at all times, and in all places.
And it is not appropriate that boys should be phlebotomized until they are fourteen years old. Nor should a pregnant woman be phlebotomized until the fourth month up to the seventh month. Nor should elderly people be phlebotomized who have already passed the age of sixty.
When anyone is to be phlebotomized, it is necessary that he should clean his intestines before phlebotomy with a laxative, if there is much waste retained in them: so that the blood does not attract venereal diseases from the intestines through the main veins.
Nor should a patient who is aching or nauseous from fasting be phlebotomized, nor should those who are drunk have it taken away from them until they have recovered from their intoxication. Nor should an invalid with hydrops be phlebotomized.
And let phlebotomy be repeated again after a fasting fever, and a lack of appetite, and a flow of urine, and an increase in sexual activity, and labor, and exercise, and vigils, and fasting, and all that dissolves virtue from the body or animal.
Then consider in subtlety of humors before that, if blood is thick with food and drink, and medicines: if possible is him that.
Then let the bath be introduced, if anything does not prohibit it: or he exercises a little exercise, in order to refine the blood.
And place the phlebotomy on his chest in his bosom, about the third day, as we have said: and be careful, that his chest should be drained of that blood that day from all animal bad accidents: such as anger, fear: and all bodily accidents, such as labor, punishment, excesses, and those like them.
And make these things available to him: because the custom of men is that they have always used aromatic substances, and their fragrance, and festivity, and such like, through the quantity of possibility.
Then let the phlebotomist sit on a table, that it be higher than the phlebotomy table: then he shall take his arm, and rub it with his own hand twice, or three times. Then let him tie the ligature with the cord, and roll it up once.
And let the constriction be strict, because constriction is unequal, or by excess in the constriction, then it prohibits the course of blood: or in softening, then also it prohibits the course of blood.
Then after the constriction, let the phlebotomist rub his hands together skin to skin, until the veins swell, and present themselves to the sense.
Then let the phlebotomist wipe the phlebotomy with a little oil, old, of his own proper.
Then let he put his right index finger of his left hand on the vein at the place where he intends to make a phlebotomy, little: so that the vein does not run away, and the piercing noise is not heard. For the veins are like a cord running away when making a phlebotomy: and those are full of blood: and when you put the phlebotomy on them, it is pinched under the phlebotomy, and deceives the phlebotomist, and does not open the vein: and if it opens it, then it is constricted: therefore, in all these things, let the phlebotomist rub himself, and be careful in these things.
Then deposit the phlebotomy. If then a new wound opens from one vein, then it is good. And if not, then repeat the other vein beneath that place a little, or above it with haste: if not the place swells up.
What if it swells up, or if the patient is feeble, then let him be discharged after one or two days: and do not tie a ligature tightly. For perhaps the swelling will be drawn in by the heat. And do not put him into a bath.
Then repeat the phlebotomy if he likes it.
What if the opening is small, or blood flows lightly: and be careful not to lose a quantity of blood more than you draw out: then repeat the phlebotomy in the same hole again, and add something to the procedure.
And do it quickly, before the place swells up: for the place will swell up in many people during a short time.
If then you see that he has already swelled up, then do not repeat the phlebotomy at all, for it does not excuse you with him for anything. And put something on the spot from a fat oil: for it will ease the course of blood. And this place is better than his own oil, and other oils better.
And likewise administer the fat oil in all your phlebotomies when you want to stop the course of blood: and they make it with myrrh when put on from one of these spots.
For blood is thickened and resolved when it is thin.
What if a great swelling occurs in the place where the phlebotomy has been made, for this often happens, especially when one has not had phlebotomy at that place before, or if a small opening has occurred, then bind it and put over the spot a sponge dipped in warm water and salt, and heat it slightly: and tie it up after an hour: for it is resolved.
It is necessary that you do this after the blood has come out from the wound itself with its own supply, or from another wound.
Which if it remains in the place for some days of redness or swelling does not harm that; and if there is a wound, put on it some aloe, or dissolved myrrh: or some juice of peppermint, that is, of calamus or similar to it.
And many times indeed have there occurred injuries and eminences with phlebotomy in the Basilica.
So place your hand over it, then if it is soft to the touch when you press it with your hand, then that eminence is bad. Therefore, so that you put on it some of that which we have said. For perhaps it will flow from it blood of an artery.
But make a poultice with it where there is a stain so that the place hardens. Then take care of the wound with the rest of the cure, until it heals.
And it is necessary that you should give every man blood by the amount of his own virtue. And that which appears from a red color on the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it not come out until it turns red; and likewise if you see it thick: then let it not go out until it thins out; and likewise if it is sharp, then let the sharpness go out from it.
And it is necessary for the one who is full, strong, and resistant to the extraction of blood by a single vein, so that phlebotomy of the green increases, and the phlebothomist stands on the side: but in the weak, stand opposite to it.
And it is necessary that he should draw out the wound with a tight hole, and it is better that which is administered in phlebotomy of the green is, so that it is a transverse section, not a cut.
And this method of phlebotomy is safer from the flow of blood, and from incising a nerve: and it is more praiseworthy, and healthier than phlebotomy by the width and length.
And to whom it is usual to syncopis when phlebotomizing, it is necessary that he eat before phlebotomy a little bread infused with water of granate and muslin: or if he is warmed up, secaniabin; and let him squeeze out blood from the three veins, or four.
And if the complexion is frigid, then he should take before phlebotomy a little bread infused in syrup of myrrh, or in syrup of honey perfumed with spices, or in perfumed syrup with fragrant species.
That if it happens syncopis during phlebotomy, and is the cause of its output of blood much: then it is necessary that he takes in a cup water of meat, and perfumed syrup: and he uses aromatic with algalia, and he spreads his chest with it: and he uses the rest that we have said in the division in the chapter syncopis from the evacuation.
Whoever wants to heal his arm, and let his blood run out: it is necessary for him who whose phlebotomy is for great euacuation, and its power is weak, to let his blood run out little by little through the quantity of power in continuous days.
Whoever wants to heal his arm, and let his blood run out second time, and his body is strong: then he should do it after seven hours, or nine from his first phlebotomy.
Whoever wants to attract blood from his body to the opposite part of which he leans: it is necessary that he should do it on the second day, or on the third.
In whose body is now much blood warmed up, and it becomes acute, and causes a fever: it is necessary that he should go out of it in a single beat, and extract from it a lot of quantity: and it increases the opening until syncopis happens: after which you have preserved all conditions of phlebotomy: and let you put your hand on his pulse at the course of blood, so that death does not happen at the place of syncopsis. Therefore, it often happens that the phlebotomist does not know and falls by negligence.
And it is not fitting that when you wish to cut the arm and draw blood in the second place, you draw the blood while the orifice of the vein is already closed, and make the exit of the blood difficult, so that it presses down on itself with a sudden movement, and extends quickly. For this is an evil thing: let go of it at once until the phlebotomist draws blood in the second place.
Or take away the coziment of the blood which is in the orifice of the vein with the phlebotomist, and put a little dissolved salt in water on it. And put on it some of the tar-salt or green-salt, and put the compress on it slightly, until the blood exits.
But if the vein is already torn, then let go of it, and do not tie it up, until it cicatrizes.
That if necessity compels you to draw blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then either phlebotomize the person above that place, or in another arm at another vein.
But the vein of the arm is phlebotomized in the place of the Musculi, and Basilicae, which are not visible, because it is made up of them.
And the quality of his phlebotomy is such that he puts his own hand into hot water, until it turns red, and the vein appears clearly.
Then tie it tightly on top with a little constriction of the middle ligature. Then phlebotomize the second time slowly, not widely and not along its length; and let the opening be broad, and your phlebotomy should be done just above the knuckle, so that it does not hurt as much.
That if the exit of the blood is prevented, then repeat your hand in hot water, and let the blood run into the water until you satisfy your need.
But if you are in summer days, then you are excused from washing your hands in warm water. And indeed a great deal is put forth regarding the flow of blood in hot water during the cold season.
And phlebotomy of this vein is healthier for all veins, since it is not pulsatile and there are no nerves.
But phlebotomy of the right hand is salutary for people with liver ailments.
And the quality of phlebotomy is such that you should wrap the hand with a ligature, or your hand, after having introduced it into warm water, until the vein constricts and clearly feels very sensibly. Then phlebotomize her by passing through. And if you cut her entirely, it will not hurt her at all.
And preserve, do not introduce your hand after phlebotomy. For under it are the nerves of the fingers denuded from the flesh.
Then repeat your hand to warm water, and let the blood run in it. For if you do not repeat the hand in warm water, the blood will coagulate at the opening of the vein, and the flow will be prevented.
But when you extract a quantity of blood as required, then put oil and salt on the vein so that it does not harden quickly.
And likewise you should do, as you make with every tight branch.
But the procedure of phlebotomy from the left hand is: for it is suited to liver ailments; and likewise do with phlebotomy as you did with the second equally.
But the phlebotomy of the saphenous vein is for ailments that are in the lower part of the body, such as liver ailments, and retention of menstruation, and diseases of the kidneys and bladder, and old ulcers of the legs and buttocks, and similar ailments from diseases.
And the quality of phlebotomy is such that he should introduce his weak foot into warm water; and let him make friction over it until the veins give off a strong scent, and then bind above the ankle with a ligature. And indeed the site is at the heel, which appears opposite the thumb: and many branches extend from it on the face of the foot.
Therefore, let us draw blood from it in a larger branch of its or near the heel in a group of its: for it is better and healthier.
That if you draw blood from it on the face of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are under it on the face of the foot.
And place your phlebotomy where you wish to draw blood from behind, so that you do not want to injure it: and let the phlebotomist be safe.
But if the flow of blood is prohibited, then turn over his foot into warm water: and let the blood not run into it until it has been emptied.
That if the phlebotomist has made a mistake in the first cut, then let him keep with the phlebotomy to the upper part somewhat, for the site is healthy, and do not be afraid of injury from it when you draw blood, as we have said.
And also with the saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
But the location of the sciatic veins, as we have said, is at the heel from the side of the forest.
And the support for the phlebotomy is, to the pain of the ankle, when it is because of warm blood.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is, that it may enter into a weak bath and quicken: and tighten his leg from the side of the ankle up to the heel with four fingers, for it does not appear unless because of it.
When it does appear, then draw blood from it according to whatever ability you have, or its transmutation: and it is better, or as if you want to injure it, or separate it by a cut. For the site of it is healthier, and it itself is hidden in many people greatly.
For the site of it is healthier, and it itself is hidden in many people greatly. That if you do not injure it, and does not appear at all to the sense: then draw blood from one of its branches, and that appears on the back of the foot, and opposite the ear: and be careful of the nerves, and let the blood run in a certain amount as you wish.
Then cut away tightly, and place the skin over the site of bleeding, and tighten the site. For this quickly heals.
(The text continues with a discussion of ventosisation and its quality of use.)
Bones are made from horns, and from brass, and from urine.
And Ventosection is done according to two ways. When with scarification and drawing of blood, and one is ventilating without scarification.
And this Ventosection which is without scarification, is according to two ways. Or indeed it is with fire. Or is without fire.
And the ventilations which are administered with scarification and drawing of blood, are four dozen places in the body. Of which one is Ventosection of the Al-Nocrati, and it is lastly of the head: and Alkhel, and it is middle of the neck: and uentosae Alhagdahim, and they are two laminae of the neck from both sides simultaneously: and uentosae of the mind, and it is under the mandible in the lower mouth: and uentosae of the two spatulas: and uentosae of the tail end: and uentosae of the two fires, and they are middle of the two arms: and uentosae of the two legs: and uentosae of the two shanks.
And indeed the ventilation does not draw blood from you out of small scattered veins in the flesh, and for this reason the power does not come out of them, such as is the case with phlebotomy. And it is not necessary that ventilation is administered with fire or without fire in any sickness which is caused by fullness, until the whole body is emptied.
That if necessity calls for ventilation from sickness, or because of custom, we shall administer it at any hour at the beginning of the month, at the end of it, and at its middle, and at whatever time it shall be.
That is, for a man is one who, when he is multiplied with blood, until he needs extraction by ventilation, finds in his head a great swelling, and swells.
And of them is one who finds fullness and redness on his face, on his head, and on his neck. And from these comes the itch in his face and forehead, and darkness and dullness in his eyes.
And from these comes the scalp, which is full of hair. And from these comes the riser, who laughs a lot. And from these comes one who finds the taste of blood in his mouth, or spits it out with his tongue, and swallows it. And from these comes the one whose sleep is disturbed. Who sees blood and red color in his dream, and those who have been killed, and plagues, and things like that.
When we then see anything from them, and especially if it is on the third day of the month: then let us make the scalp appear, after having passed two or three hours since morning.
But the sign of the scalp is this: for it brings a burden to the head and that it flows down to the eyes. But it should be after the evacuation of the whole body.
And this is called a scalp because it has been pulled by phlebotomy of the head.
And it should not be worn by one who has a cold complexion, or one who is hoarse. For it does great harm.
And for this reason it should not be worn by the elderly, and not by those who have cold ailments in their heads.
But he who is diligent with it, falls into oblivion.
And for this reason you should order the scalper to put his hand with the scalp when it is somewhat lower down, fearing the generation of oblivion.
Ventosation or alkohl is the place of phlebotomy of the brown vein, and phlebotomies of the basilic veins, and for this reason it brings sneezing, constriction of the throat, fissures in the instrument of constriction, coughing, and filling up.
And it should be driven out by alkohl thoroughly, for if it is put below, it generates weakness in the heart and stomach.
To draw out wind and the agues, observe the pains of the head, and eyes, and headache, and perforations, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is the place for phlebotomy at the Basilica.
And you should prevent the ventosator from holding his hand too soon with the scarification, lest he hit an artery and cause a rush of blood to flow.
But if it is under the chin, observe the wines in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar ailments that are in the mouth; and it is the place for phlebotomy elsewhere, which are in the two lips.
But if it is with the spatula, observe toward the alchafach (a type of wound), which is made by retraction and heat.
However, if it is in the internal parts of the two folds (of the skin), observe the phlebotomy of the three veins, Basilica, Fusca, and Cephalica: for they draw blood from all the small veins that are in the flesh; and these small veins draw the blood from other larger veins until they reach the three veins.
And you should prevent the ventosator from proceeding too far with the scarification: for the place is bare of flesh, and beneath it are nerves and arteries.
But if it is a ventosation that vents on the alchaus, observe the hemorrhoids of the anus, and ulcers lower down.
And you should prevent the ventosator from making it too large, and from making it of iron: for the place does not tolerate strong suction, and perhaps the fine ones break; and it is scarified with a large scarification.
But if the winds are in the crura, they diminish little by little: for they draw blood from all the body, and cause the old pains in the kidneys, and membranes, and bladder; they provoke menses, and cause bowel movements, and vomiting, and it is the place for phlebotomy between two saphenous veins, and alhorcobeni.
Indeed, the body grows weak, and it often causes syncope in many people.
And the pressure of the two krur winds is close to the pressure of the two krur winds.
The quality of the position of the winds is that you place the wind in the first place with a moderate pressure and do not prolong the position of the winds but put them quickly and move them quickly so that they bring the humors to the appropriate place: and do not cease to repeat this and continue, until it seems to you that the place has already become red and swollen, and it appears red blood: then therefore you make a incision, and repeat the suction slowly. Then consider in the arrangement of the bodies.
For whoever among people has tender flesh and rare pores, it is necessary that he make the incision once, not more: so that the site does not ulcerate.
And order the winds to amplify the incision and make it deep: and moderate the suction in ease, and speed, and smooth motion.
If there is a lot of blood, then you should make the incision twice. Indeed, in the first place the way of the subtile blood is opened and made to flow: and in the second place, in the perscrutation of the exquisite extraction of thick blood.
If, however, the blood is very foul, then let the incision be made in the fourth place: so that the last result is obtained.
And to the last, when we want to extract blood slowly, a little or not at all, one incision is enough for us. If we want to extract a lot of blood, let us make multiple incisions.
And if we measure that the blood is thick: then it is necessary that the incision be deep: and the equal term in the incision is the depth of the skin.
What is this that needs to be administered from oils when positioning the winds, and what does the wind-shift cause?
In that, indeed, whose skin is thick, tough, dark, and whose pores are tight, it is necessary that the places of Ventration be anointed with open, soothing, and resolute oils: if in season of summer, as is the oil of many, or the oil of black seed, or the oil of sweet almonds, or the oil of cucumber seed.
And if it is in season of winter, then the oil of narcissus, or the oil of lily, or the oil of chamomile, or the oil of sassafras: and to these similar ones.
And if there is a superfluity of heat, then let it be the oil of amber, or the oil of myrrh, or the oil of albus, or the oil of annatto: and to these similar ones.
And if it is windy and has wide pores and tender flesh, then it should be prevented from the oil, and these places of Ventration should be washed after wind with rose water, or cold water, or spring water, or cucumber water, or portulaca water: and similar to these.
But that which has much blood of humidity should wash the windy places with vinegar, or with myrtle water, and sumach: and similar to these.
Whose superfluities are thick, should wash their windy places with old wine, or with samsou water, or with the decoction of althaa, or chamomile: and similar to these.
And it should be prevented that wind should be taken in a bath, or in a shower-room; and moreover it should be administered after leaving the bath for an hour, or for two hours.
And it is not fit that anyone should sleep after wind.
What is that which is to be observed that Ventration and Phlebotomy may be made before wind?
And after that, you should observe in the first place: then if Ventration or Phlebotomy are on the choler, and their sharpness and inflammation are directed to his blood: then it should take something cooling, such as granatum mus; also lettuce with vinegar and radish, and marjoram: and similar things.
And put his food-vessels near him, and meat which he relished, and cooked foods with herbs: and things similar to these.
And if his complexions are cold, he should take in drink syrup of honey, or of almond-milk, or alsican made from seeds: and drink a wine with a strong odor, which is between new and old: and let him be commanded to eat little food. And put his food-vessels near him, and meats of birds: and let him eat doves, that is, young pigeons: and let him eat cooked pigeons.
And it is necessary that the drink of his diurnal rest and bloodletting be more than the food: and it is necessary that a remedy be given in drink to some men at certain hours with turpentine-alcohol, or medicine made from musk, that is, muscat, or alselith before bloodletting: and after bloodletting, or before: so that the principal members may be strengthened, and the blood subtilized. And it is not necessary that they drink it in a warm drink.
On Bloodletting without Scarring. And the Bloodlettings which are without Scarring, are those laid on the liver, and the spleen, and the stomach, and over the belly, and places of the testicles, and the pixis of the anus: for these members do not suffer from scarring on their own.
And is not sought through them, unless by an attack from a member of blood to a member: such as we lay a Bloodletting on the breasts in the sickness of a flux of blood to the nose. And we use them, that we may cure a member's Cold Bloodletting which has been irritated: such as we lay a Bloodletting on the belly, and the umbilical region. For it rarefies the member, and warms it, and takes away pain because it resolves the Bloodletting.
Also is laid on the kidneys, when there happens to be a deposit of bile, or a stone. For with its strength it either opens the wound or removes the stone from its place.
And likewise when laid upon to heal, and the spleen to be handled within them both.
And these Wind-afflicted are to be dealt with by a sharp cut only. And when they are treated with fire.
And when they are treated with warm water in pleural diseases: and that is, so that the Wind be filled, and be great, only warm water, or water in which have been boiled herbs fitting for the purpose.
The form of the Wind-afflicted when treated with fire.
Let the width of his opening be two fingers wide, according to which form we make it: and let the quantity of it in the depth be half a palm: and let it be in the side of it in the place which is about the middle of it, a small hole, according to the quantity which is put into it: let it be made of brass also, or yellow, gross of margin, soft, equal, tertius: so that it may not hurt the limb at its position over it: and let there be in the midst of it a crossbar of brass or iron, whereon a candle is placed with fire.
And this Wind-afflicted may be made great, greater than we have described, and less by little, according to the diseases and age of him who uses it.
For the Wind-afflicted are different for boys, and for those who are declining in years, and for large persons' bodies.
The quality of laying this Wind upon with fire, is, that you kindle a lamp with fire from a flannel erringly, or a small candle made of wax: and put it on the crossbar in the midst of the Wind: so that the heat of the fire may be round about the lower part of the Wind, so as not to burn the body with its heat.
Then put it on the member: and let the finger be placed over the hole which I said, until we have held the Wind in position: while we hold it, take away the finger, and there will escape into the hole a vapour, and the Wind will be set free at once.
Then light the fire of tin according to its fashion, and keep doing so if you wish.
But in a place where ventosa is used in the treatment of pleurisy with water, there is no transverse pipe or opening, and it is not used unless water is added to it and placed on the limb only.
And this is its form.
And this Ventosa is the better one because it can hold a lot of water.
[On the suspension of sanguine sugar].
Sanguine sugar should not be used in many cases, unless the limb is unable to hold a ventose because of its smallness, such as the lip, or the gum, or things like that. Or on a naked member devoid of flesh, such as a finger, or a nose, or things like that.
And the quality of their use is this: when you take them from sweet water where they are found, clean them from putrefaction.
Then let them be left overnight and the next day in sweet water until they are hungry, and there should not remain in their stomachs any of the drug. Then the body should be evacuated first with phlebotomy, and then with ventose. Then wash the limb with a nurse's hand until it turns red. Then place them on top of the limb.
When they are then filled and fall, and it is possible to suck the place with ventose, then it is better to use this method: if not, then wash the place with vinegar. Then with much water, and a rub, and squeeze out.
If the flow of blood is prolonged after the use of sanguine sugar and it remains sticky: then put a linen cloth in cold water, and place the limb upside down until the stickiness disappears.
If blood increases, then sprinkle the body with ground zegen, or gall, and things like that: until the blood stops flowing.
The middle parts of the vessels that have been cut should be placed on the site; and they should be left until the roots of the vessels have become attached to the site, since blood has been cut off.
And it is necessary that, if it is necessary, the blood sugar should be changed when it is possible, because it is not good to stay in one place.
But if the blood sugars are prohibited from suspension, then the site should be cleaned with recent blood. Or they should be placed in the places for a while until some of the blood has come out. Then they should be placed, because when they feel that they have some blood, they immediately become attached.
When you want them to fall off, sprinkle on them some crushed aloe, or salt, or ash: and they will fall off immediately.
This chapter is also very often necessary in the art of Medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures, and the dislocation of accidents in bones.
Know ye, O sons, that many of the doctors do jest hereof, and are stubborne men; they have not examined the old book, nor read a word thereof.
And because of this cause it is, that this mode out of the sciences in our country is reserved. And I was not satisfied therein at all, and I was not made competent thereto unless for the length of reading of the ancient books, and study upon their understanding, until I drew out the science of it from them.
Then by experimentation and study of a long life.
And I have already described to you out of that in this chapter all the science which contains my art: and concerning what is past by experiment, after I have shortened it for you, and have freed it from elongation, and shortened it at the end of abruption, and have shown it at the end of declination: and I have formed in it many shapes of instruments which are administered in it, with the addition of declination, as I did in the two preceding Chapters.
Chapter II.
In the prolog to this chapter, we shall state at the outset what is to be considered first in this discussion of the stationing of the members: namely, that you may know and learn this noble art well, or at least gain some knowledge of it, so that those who are zealous for it may learn from you.
I say, therefore, that when it happens to anyone that there is a fracture, or dislocation, or twisting, or a fall: then you should be the first to prepare for phlebotomy on him and to resolve it, or both at the same time: if nothing forbids it, as might happen with the loss of strength of virtue: or is he that has happened to something from those boys, or an old decrepit man: or is the time of a high fever, or a cold fever very sharply.
Then be satisfied with your food, with cold spices and poultry, and with hairiness of the head: and prohibit wine, and fatty meats, and eating too much from dishes, and all food that fills the veins with blood. Until you are secure from a high fever, and do not delay the flowing of the matter to the member: then return the sick one first to his usual customs with which he is accustomed.
When, therefore, the mouth begins to be healed, then you should feed the sick with very nourishing food, dry, and grainy, in which there is a drink: such as is made from wheat flour mixed with water, and rice, and bread, and feet, and entrails of animals, and eggs, and fresh fish: and strong wine, and similar things. For in this regimen the clotting of the fracture is sooner made, and better.
And know that the bones that are broken, when they are in the years of old age and decrepitude, cannot continue always, because of the drying up of their members: and they are strengthened and continued in the end of leniency, such as are the bones of young boys.
Indeed, nature attaches something similar to a broken bone from all parts, which is sticky, which adheres and tightens it until it is glued together on both sides, until it comes to the end of strength and firmness, as it was in the beginning, until it no longer allows itself to be affected by its operations: and for this reason it is necessary that you place food in the sick dishes, in which there are weight, and wetness, and stickiness, as we have said.
And you should know that the types of fractures are various, depending on the diversity of the limbs: for a fracture of the leg is different from a fracture of the skull bone: and a fracture of the chest bone is different from a fracture of the back bone: and likewise each and every limb is different in one way or another: and I came with a reminder of all kinds of fractures presented in its own chapter, distinct from the other. And the species of bone fracture also differ from each other.
Since it is made by a curved fracture, except that which happens in it of the stars. And when a fracture is made according to the length of the bone: and there are fractures of his legs, that is, stars, and additions coming from, such as are in the reed, when it is caught with a knife to write. And not coming from: and there is a fracture with a wound and rupture in the head: and there is a fracture, a small crack.
And every kind has its own tool, or its own proper instrument in restoring it, according to which comes the reminder of it, presented in its own places.
And from this it is known that the bone fracture is, its curve and eminence: and its appearance to the sense, and its sound when you press it with your hand.
When it is not in place, the curve appears visible, and its eminence: and its appearance to the sense, and its sound when you press it with your hand. So then is there no fracture there, but it is possible that there is a curve or a small crack: so you do not need to move it at all with your hand and compression, but rather place something on top of it from the medicines, of which the reminder comes, after a moment that it fits in place: then tighten it tightly with a slender band.
And you should know that when the part is arched and divided into two, apart from what happens there in terms of satagiae, all parts are moved away from their comparison: then it is necessary for you to start from your hour to rectify it, making it even before it happens apostema hot.
If, however, it happens to him that apostema is hot, then leave him for a few days until the apostema is calm. Then make it even in any way you can from slowness and ingenuity.
And you should know that the restoration of him and his equating is easier than the bones, where satagiae happen.
Then tighten it, according to what will come to your mind about him.
If, however, the satagiae are in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member of two parts, if the hand is there, or the foot: or with your hand if the member is small: or with two ropes, or with a rope and a hand.
And your position should be that you place the member on an equal place, according to its natural figure, until all parts of the broken member are extended: then try, with all your ingenuity, to bring it back into shape in any way you can in its places: and carefully, according to your strength, so that no pain happens on the weak one through your operation, nor over-exertion: and be careful, according to your strength, that you apply one of the two bones to his partner, according to the better forms.
And it is necessary in that hour that you try and touch him with your hand. If, however, you see something different there, then make it even, and make it equal by the amount of your strength.
And be careful about not extending too quickly, and do not compress too strongly, as many do with the stoics. For many times they cause to happen through their operation its hot apostema, or contraction in a member: as we have already seen that from their operations.
Then after resting, and letting the wound heal, and tightening his member, and quietness, and tranquillity; and remind the sick man about himself. And let the man be careful, so that he does not moan in his hour of need, and his sleep is disturbed during his operation, and his agitation during his digestion, and all his movements at the end of his strength. And so that he may be careful, that the position of the member does not remain in one place with which pain is caused. That is, for when he feels pain in the position of the member's disposition, or injury: then one should turn him over to a position from that with which he does not feel pain.
And be careful with him, so that his position is equal and straight: so that twistedness does not occur in the member when he is healed.
And the quality of a tight member that has been broken is according to the width.
You should know that broken members differ in their length and form, and their size.
What are shorter ones, such as the arm, finger, or paw, then one should make the wrapping soft and thin. What are the bulkier ones, such as the hip or leg, then one should make the wrapping thick and hard.
For a broad ligament joins a large member and ties it together with an equal tightness so that it does not enter the member in any spot.
Then after you have evacuated your discharge from the equating place put a suitable liniment on it, with a soft cloth over the break site. Then start to wrap the ligament over the break site three or four times, as the member deserves it; and grip your hand lightly with the ligament.
Then walk with him to the upper side from the break spot, and tighten it less than your tightness that you tightened the broken place. Then, as you extend it with an involution from the site of the fracture, and soften the rigor gradually, until you have taken away from the place a large part of the sick member.
Then take another one, and extend it again over the site of the fracture with involutions. Then carry it with an involution to the lower part from the fracture. And let your operation continue on the rigor of the involution and its softening, according to what we have said in the first superior involution.
Then place between the involutions of the cloth or fabric with which you even out the rigor, if there is any curvature of the fracture: and if not, do not place anything in it.
Then extend again on the other taken one. Then immediately set equal to these involutions of stars made out of place, if there is no swelling or fever in the place.
But if there is an inflammation or a swelling: then place over it what sits that swelling and takes away the inflammation: and let it go for a few days. Then tighten again on the same stars when the swelling has gone.
And let the stars be made from the middle of the broad boards, rasped, and formed wisely: or from wood from which are made cribs, that is to say, branches of a palm tree, or a gorse, that is, branches of a holly: and let the width of each star be according to this form, and this figure.
But it is necessary that the star placed on the wound should be thicker and wider about than the other stars: and that the length of the star should be according to what is suitable for the member from size and proportion.
Then tighten again on the stars with another one, according to the same rigor. Then bind from above with the fils made out of place, according to what we have said about the rigor: and it is, that your rigor should be on the site of the fracture more: and the greater it is extended from the fracture, the smaller is the rigor.
It is necessary that they are fine threads in thickness and fineness, and they are from soft linen.
For if the threads are thick, as is the case with the sutures that surgeons place their threads from twisted linen cords, there is a great mistake, for constriction falls outside the quality.
And fine threads also do not agree: for you do not achieve that which you wish with constriction, if they are there.
And it is not necessary that it be between a thumb and a finger.
That if a sick person is injured through the ends of the sutures in healthy places: then place under them from soft stuff, or red wool, until there is no injury from it.
But when there is a fracture with an ulnar bone, and there is a rupture in the skin, I remember it in the second chapter with singularity.
And you should know that not every broken limb needs to be stitched from the first day. That is, because the limb is large when it is broken, it is not necessary to place the top sutures, unless after five days, or seven, or more, according to your security from infection.
And this is the way that ancient people used to patch, which are placed on a fracture and dislocation.
The common shortened way of the patch, restoring a fracture, suitable for many compartments, especially for women and children, because it is from this that heat does not affect, nor cold.
And it is so that you take from the flour which is ground, and it is a meal hanging on the walls of the mill when moved by the wheel: and shape it as it is, except that you add white wax to it, and do not make it dense or thin. Then use it.
The other way of the patch, which restores a fracture and a dislocation, and twists. Brew meslin, and laurels, and acacia, and poultices, and myrrh: and suck all of them the juice of one pound of myrrh, and five of aloes, and twenty of alethic resin, let everything be well shaken, and let it be mixed with water of alethic resin: or with alumine, if the complexity is hot. Then use this plaster. For this reason, good composition is, when broken bones are mended quickly and gives strength to many people.
The method of applying the plaster is as follows, which also helps in the healing of fractures and dislocations. Brew myrrh, and meslin, and alethic resin, all of them the juice of ten pounds of myrrh, five of aloes, six of acacia, and twenty of Armenian bole, let everything be well shaken, and let it be made with water or alumine, and let it be administered.
The method of applying the plaster to injuries and separated bones from their sites, and to calm pain in an injury, to heal broken joints, and to mend a broken bone. A soaked wool is placed, and immersed in vinegar and oil, and is placed on the spot.
In this plaster, there is no power of restoration, but it is good for calming a hot swelling: and it drives away pains on its own.
The method of applying the plaster, which restores a broken bone. Soak leaves from an oak tree and leaves from a wild papaw; shake them all up, and make the plaster out of both.
The method of applying the shortened plaster, administered to restore a broken bone: and when you wish to resolve a swelling that is present. Brew the root of alethium, and chamomile, and flowers of wormwood, and herb-grain, all of them one part; let everything be well shaken, and let it be made with wine, if it is not a hot member.
If it is indeed heated, then then apply wet with coriander seed water, or water, and use it.
A stronger method of application in the case of a hard dry sore when the member is to be restored, namely: Take the root of aloes, and linseed, and bilberry, and mallow, and samsuc, and flower of caraway, all in equal parts; these are to be well pressed together, and applied with oak-bark water, or sweet water, or wine. All this is to be used according to the heat of the member, and the quieting of its heat.
Hippocrates indeed in his book did not say that a broken member should be placed on a poultice made of straw and oil: nothing else; and he tells us to use it when the member is neither too hot nor too cold.
But Galenus, however, used to apply to the broken member for its restoration certain things in which there is a drying up of heat, such as myrrh and aloes and olive wax and similar things of which we have spoken.
A method of application that is useful for wounds and pain. Take mug-wort, and chickweed, and hair of man's teeth, or hen's feathers, and aloes, and salt; all in equal parts: press them together, and rub them up, and make an ointment.
But as to the quantity, according to how much should remain of it for it not to run out, and then to dissolve, you are to consider that if there is no pain, or itching, or movement in the broken jaw from its place: do not break up the plaster over a few days. If there should be a very painful itching, or an inquieting pain, or swelling: then at once break it up, and dissolve it at the same time, and take away the plaster from it; and take a piece of linen cloth, or a sea sponge, damp with water: and immerse it in warm water, and wash the place with it, until the itching is calm, and the pain subsides.
If there should be a very painful itching, or an inquieting pain, or swelling: then at once break it up, and dissolve it at the same time, and take away the plaster from it; and take a piece of linen cloth, or a sea sponge, damp with water: and immerse it in warm water, and wash the place with it, until the itching is calm, and the pain subsides. Then release the limb to rest for an hour. Then cover the wound with wool, soaked in vinegar and oil, or oil infused with rose water; and bind it to the body for a night, until the fever has subsided, and the inflammation of the member has settled, and the pain has abated.
Then massage the wound with a mild emollient; and do not bind it tightly at first, nor use tight bindings, until the wound has healed.
If you see that the swelling, redness, pain and inflammation have completely disappeared, and that the wound is well covered by the poultice and bound firmly, then apply the poultice again as before.
If any of these things do not occur in the member, then do not remove the poultice until after three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when the poultice has been left for twenty days all over the wound, as far as appears from the healing of the member, so that it is firmly attached to the fracture, and the blood clottings are approaching; add also then more than your first constriction; and add also then an increase in the food diet, as it were by reminiscence.
But if you see that the place of the fracture is drying up and growing weaker more than it should: then know that food is forbidden from reaching it. So soak it with warm water at every hour, and keep it covered for all three days, and allow a little bit of air to the wound.
By this means, therefore, the member is supplied with food, and heals quickly.
But this, that is done by dull healers from a broken member's fracture, when not done first, as it should be, and done according to the tortuosity of the break, is an error in their work, and a great fear: and if it were right, the ancients would have written about it in their books, and would have worked it.
And I did not see anywhere their footprints at all, and it is better, so that it is not done.
§ On the making of an accident in the head.
The kinds of fractures are various, and their forms are many: and the causes of them are distinct.
For this type of fracture is made from impact when the weapon strikes and the impact carries on until it reaches the bone's syphacus, which is beneath the bone, as it does in wood with an axe: and for this reason this type of fracture is called axial.
Or a weapon cuts into some bone and cuts its face, but the cut does not penetrate to the very end of it: and this type of fracture is called a kalaan, that is, an absolute lifting.
And there is a joint of two fractures, or large, or small.
And one type of fracture is a crushing, or wearing away: and its cause is impact with a stone, or falling on a stone, or similar things.
And this type of fracture is also piercing, which is beginning to approach a flap, which is beneath the bone: or is in the face of the bone: and this type of fracture is also a joint of two fractures, small or large.
And one type of fracture is hidden in a bone in the subtlety of a hair: and it is a small crack, and because of this it is called this type of fracture Capillaris.
And from these is a fracture which is made from falling or striking with a stone, and from things similar to these, which makes the bone's lamina go inside, and it is joined by concavity: as happened in the case of caldarius' wind, when it was struck by them, and some of them went inside.
And many things are made from this in the heads of moist bones, as are the heads of boys.
And all these types of fracture are separate from each other, and I come with a reminder of all this in its place.
We know all these kinds of fractures by examination on them and by questioning about them with tension, and by removing the corrupted flesh which is on them.
Indeed the capillary species is recognized by this, which is discovered on the bone and abraded and kept on it with pitch: for the fracture appears black.
In the cure of fractures, consider first the symptoms of the disease: if you see from these that which signifies a clear meaning over fear, such as fainting with cholera and enlargement and loss of intelligence and cutting off of speech and syncope and acute fever and outgoing of the eyes and their redness and similar things from among these in various dispositions, there is no doubt that he will not be cured: and if you see non-terrifying symptoms in him, and you hope for his recovery, then begin to treat him.
That is, if he comes to you wounded first with a wound: and this happens in the middle of winter, then one should seek, so that you study in the removal of the bone before the sixteenth day of December according to every disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then one should seek to remove the bone before the seventh day, before that which is under the bone from a flap rusts, and those accidents which we have described.
That is, if the fracture of the bone has already reached the skin touching the brain, and it is with a little, and attraction: then one should seek to hit the broken part, crushed and ground, according to what I tell you.
And it is, as you shave the head of the wounded man: and discover on the bone according to any possible way for you: and according to the figure of the wound, and what is whiter is over the weak.
That is, if it happens to you with the detection of the bone of a flow of blood or hot swelling: then oppose it with that which is necessary. And it is, as you fill the place with cloths soaked in wine and rose oil: and make the wound rest, until the swelling subsides, and be safe from the flow of blood. Then begin with the cure of bones and the removal thereof.
And that is done according to two ways.
The mode which is one, is that you should strike the bone with an incision of a sharp chisel; and this is its form.
Then give another chisel, wider by so much as the first; and this is its form.
Then also give another chisel, wider than the second.
The second mode is that you should have at your disposal a number of chisels of various widths; some of these shall be wider than others, and some narrower: and they shall be on the extremities of their edges, sharp from iron or fuel: and use convenience in striking upon the chisel, so that it does not strike the head and harm it.
If the bone is strong and hard: then you should make a hole around it before you administer the chisel, with a twister, which they call a tweezers, that does not go to the bottom of the flesh towards the bone: because the tip is round on that part which is under the acute head, like the edge, and a little circle prevents it from sinking into the thickness of the bone.
And it will be suitable for you to take from these tweezers a large number, the quantity of which corresponds to the thickness of the bone, until you have all the chisel tips needed: whose acute tip is in length and brevity according to the quantity of its bone thickness.
And this is the form of the three types of tweezers, or trepans.
The quality of the tip that pierces around the broken bone is: you should place the tweezers on the bone and roll it with your fingers, until you know that the bone has been pierced. Then change the tweezers to another place, and place whatever is between all the holes of its width, or around it.
Then cut with the incision what is between all openings from bone: and make it finer than you can on it from the end of levity, as we have said, until you get rid of the bone, or with your hand, or with some other instrument that you have prepared for it: such as tenals and subtile forceps.
And it is necessary, so that you take every precaution, so that it does not touch the temporomandibular joint, or any of the incisors from the syphons.
When you have circumcised the jaw while perforating it, and if it is separated from the syphons, if it is continuous with it, and you remove it, it should be rough, and the same end of it that remains in the bone with another similar incision instrument. However, it should be fine and finer than other incision instruments.
If there remains something of the bones small, and they are soft: then take them easily with you from those that are with you from the instruments. Then care for the wound after that with liniments, and the ointment which we have said.
And another way of doing this is simple, far from fear: which Galen said, and praised him highly: and this is his saying. You must necessarily, first of all, so that you start to grasp the bone's part in which the fracture is more painful and more evident: until when you have grasped that part, and placed under it the end of this lenticular incision instrument, whose this is the form.
And the lenticular part, soft does not incise anything: and the acute part of it on its two sides washing along in length, as you see: so that the lenticular part is placed against the syphons, its acute part facing the bone.
Then beat over the incision from one part with a small mallet, until you incise all the bone with ease, as it rotates: and you are safe from the panic that there does not happen to it an accident, which you are certainly afraid of.
If a person were not foolish, and more ignorant of it, and not sleepy, then if something was left attached to the bone from the pannicle in certain places, he would hit himself with the end of the lens incisor, and free himself easily. For it is freed from him without harm, and without fear.
For if the fracture of the bone does not go through to the pannicle, and what is cut off from the bone is the face of it, and there remain in him roughness and subtle contusions: then he should make smooth this roughness and pluck out these contusions with fine razors which you have prepared different quantities, so that it becomes possible for you to administer them in any place convenient for them, and straightened out their form according to what draws you into the operation, and the broken bone, and its form. And it is necessary that you administer in your ratio, first of all the root of the bone, with a wider blade of these razors. Then use after this the finer edge of the tool.
And it is necessary that you administer in your ratio, first of all the root of the bone, with a wider blade of these razors. Then use after this the finer edge of the tool. And do not cease to make this according to continuity, until you come to administer them, all thinner and finer.
In each and every of the small cracks left behind in the skin, and in the subtle fracture, it is necessary that you administer care, according to what draws you into its rectification.
And this is a thing that does not hide itself above all, which in this art is any study, and stands on what we have written and shown in large fractures.
But if the pannicle is caught, when you cut off the bone: then it is necessary that you take linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and dip it into rose oil, and put it on the opening of the wound. Then take another cloth, doubled or trebled, and dip it into rose wine and oil, and put it on the first cloth: and make it so that you can do this more easily than the other, so that it does not stick to it.
Then apply the medicine above the wide ligament: and do not tighten it, unless only so much as the tendency of the fracture: and let go with this cure on the first or second day, until you are free from the heat of the apoplexy. Then dissolve it and apply the medicines afterwards which are useless without moisture: such as the roots of lilies, and the flour of herbs, and the powder of thorns, and of arisolochia, and like things: and make from these medicines a powder to be applied on the fracture as you do with those which are dry.
And universally apply in it all medicine of its kind, for it will purify and not hurt. And let it be, according to your skill, that the fracture be clear in your cure: and may it not be in it the grease of an unction, nor any dirtiness.
And let it be, according to your skill, that the fracture be clear in your cure: and may it not be in it the grease of an unction, nor any dirtiness. And do not let any pus accumulate at all in it: for when the pus gathers on the skin of the brain, it corrupts and spoils it, and causes a great evil after it: and this already happens in the scalp, if it is cleaned from it by neglect of its cure, especially by blackness on its surface.
Consider therefore then, if these accidents happen to the sick person which we have said, that it is certainly dangerous.
And if the blackness does not happen except from the medicine which is applied on it, and there is in its power that it should cause it: then you must take from honey one part, from rose oil three parts, and with them linen cloth. Then put the fracture on the scalp: then cure it with the species of cure which are fitting, until it is healed.
De restoratione nasi when it is broken.
You should know that the two upper parts of the nose do not break unless at the same time: for each one is a bone: since the lower part is cartilage only, it does not break and does not happen to it except by chafing, and twist, and like things.
If one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary to insert a small finger in the nose hole and equally break the fracture with your index finger and thumb until the nose returns to its natural shape: and do this artfully and easily. And take care not to cause that pain on the weakened one during your operation.
That if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and does not reach that finger: then it should be evened out with the tip of the radius, in which there is a small thickness.
If the fracture is in two parts then make it similar: and proceed with its restoration on the first day of the fracture if possible. And if not, then after seven or ten days until it has healed with the heat of rest.
Then insert into the nose's tip a linen thread if it is broken on one side: or insert two threads if it is broken in two parts: and let it be of such a thickness as to fill the nose hole.
And some old restorers said that they should dip the thread into butter and change it every day. That does not seem right to me, but it should be dipped into the chalk powder when it is finely ground with the flour. Then remove the thread until the nose bone has hardened and the cartilage has become tough.
And when a goose feather is inserted into the nose place instead of the thread after it has been wrapped with a soft linen cloth: and it happens that it holds the fracture in the nose more securely, and does not prevent the weakened one from breathing.
This is not necessary. If you want to do so, then do it: and if you don't want to, then do the thread.
That if the nose should get warm again during the operation while healing: then put a green poultice on the nose: or dip it in rosewater infused with a little honey, or a little bit of dandelion.
If, however, an aposteme is not hot, then one should make a paste of it with sissa flour and a dust of turpentine mixed with alumen. Then place a wooden bandage on top of it, and do not bind the nose at all.
If, however, the nasals are broken or crushed, then one should cut them above and remove them with the instruments that are suitable for this. Then carry out the incision, and take care of the flesh that has become inflamed and consolidated with the plaster that is suitable for it, or with a ointment.
If, however, an ulnar bone is broken between the nostrils, then one should heal it with liniments: and administer a copper tube, until it has healed.
For restoring of the lower jaw, when it is broken.
When the lower jaw is broken and not joined to the ulna: then if it is a simple fracture, and not one that breaks into two pieces, and care is taken of the interior: then it is easy to know.
Then, if it is a fracture on the right side of the jaw, insert your index finger of your left hand into the nose: likewise, if it is a fracture on the left side of the jaw, then insert your index finger of your right hand: and push it with this towards the outside from the inside with your other hand from the inner side of the bone that has been pushed out of place, and so adjust it evenly.
If the jaw fracture has already separated into two pieces, then one should adjust the outward projection of the two parts according to its straightness: until it is possible to adjust it evenly.
If, however, an injury has already occurred to the teeth, or a dislocation or fracture: then tighten them with the help of gold, silver, or silk thread that you hope will remain with them. Then place a poultice on the fractured jaw. Then place over it a double cloth, and place over that a large dish-cloth, poorly made: or a piece of skin of the sole, equal to the length of the jaw.
Then tie the cloth above it, according to how you have prepared your bandage and let it remain in place until it is destroyed: and tell the sick person to use it with tranquility and calmness: and give him a soft food for his digestion.
But if you think that something of the shape is changing with some kind of change: then come close to it and wash it on the third day. Then straightened out what has been changed from it with flour for grinding, mixed with alum or wheat flour, after you have removed the scabs: and place over it a thick woolen cloth.
While that thin plaster remains attached to the wound, and the bone arrangement does not change, let go of it, do not tear it off, until it heals: or tighten the fracture. This fracture is often tightened seven times.
But if during this time there is a hot blister, then administer to it what we have said many times in its sedative, until it disappears.
And if the fracture is with the ulnar bone, consider. I have already said that the fragment is separated from the bone, or from the spondylosis: then in this you are careful, so as to remove those spondylosis with it when it comes to you in the removal of them from the instruments.
But if the orifice of the ulnar bone is closed, then open it with a phlebotome according to the quantity of your need.
Then when you remove those spondylosis, and there remains none of them, then make the orifice of the ulnar bone wider if it is wide: and if not, place over the wound that plaster which comes with it to the wound, and let it grow into flesh until it heals.
As for restoring a fork, when it breaks.
The furcula is broken from the anterior part of the shoulder blade, and the break occurs in one of three ways.
Or it may break and separate into two pieces, except that they happen to be in a state where the bone is still attached: and it is easier to repair it.
Or such that they happen to the bone of the arm: and it is more difficult to repair it.
Or such that it is a break with the ulna bone.
And the operation in it when the break is without an ulna, is, so that you have two ministers who hold one of them to help with the broken furcula, and the other extends the neck towards the side.
Then you make the fingers of your hand even, until it is shaped like this, as follows should be: and there should not be any protuberance or depression in it.
That if you can bear an extension more, then you should put a round ball under the titillium (small of back) from cloth or wool: and let the size of it be according to the need: and extend it, and smooth out the furcula, and clamp the ball with your hand, until the break is even, as follows should be:
That if you cannot draw the tip of the furcula to the outside: since it goes down to a depth: then it is necessary that it should lie on its back on its shoulder blade: and you place under its shoulder blade a ball from wool in size, and press the minister of his shoulder blade downward, until he lifts up the bone of the furcula which is deep: and then adjust the break straight, and make it even with your fingers.
If however you feel a pain from the furcula, and it twitches: then you should find on it, and pull out the alsathaiatum (soft tissue) with ease.
If however it is stuck to the bone, then use your incision instrument which you have prepared for it, after you have placed under the furcula a device that holds it tight: and this device is made of wood or iron. And this is his form.
It is assimilated to the ear which is not congenital.
And its width according to that in which you stand so from the size of the bones, and the height of it. The length as well is according to what is possible for you to operate.
And it has two ends, as you see: and the one end be wide, and the other strict.
If then the rupture of the wound which you split when you extracted the bone-set is wide, and secures from the hot apothema: then add two lips of the wound with a suture.
And if the rupture is small, or if you fear the hot apothema: then fill the wound with linen, and dust it according to the quantity of the wound.
That if it should happen that the apothema is hot, then fill the linen with oil of rose, and vinegar, and wine, and set it on itself.
The stricture of the bone is, when it is without wound, and without section, is, as you put on os an olem made from flour pounded with alabaster dust. And set a block of wood on it. Then set a ball under its tip, if you can bear that. Then take the hematic fluid, which is a ball held by the Saracens, which is long far more than it is wide, and its width a palm or so, or about that. Then set a doubled powder on the block, and the plaster. Then take an arrow from a thin board, whose width is three fingers, and in length similarly. Then wrap it in a cloth. Then wrap the cloth with the arrow in place, on the fracture and spot. Then set the alichemist on the fracture as a bandage, and wrap it around his neck, and under his chin, and over his collar bone, and under his armpit: and let it be tight, so that the stricture does not shift: and this is, that it should not hide from you, and all, so that the arrow does not move from above the bone's fracture. You should look at the sick person every day. As soon as the ligaments have softened and you see that the bone has moved, then straightens it and ties the ligaments tightly.
Then put an anaesthetic poultice on his back, and place a warm cloth under his thigh while he sleeps at night, so that when he rises his relief will be greater. So the fracture of the femur is healed by the elevation of the shoulder.
Or bind his arm to his neck; and do not untie the ligaments unless there is an accident from a sprain or a fall until after twelve days.
Then put on a poultice of mud, if you see that his face is red to it. And add salt, and let him go, until he has recovered and has coagulated.
And the fracture of the femur is bound up and made firm after thirty days; and sometimes it heals sooner in some people.
On the restoration of the fracture of the spatula.
The spatula rarely breaks and at its broad end; it does not break from its broad end.
So if it breaks from one end, and it breaks in the middle, and it is not known until you feel it; then prepare the treatment according to the shape of the fracture. And reduce it to its natural position by all the skill at your command, which is possible for you.
Then put on the wound a poultice of flour mixed with chalk, and a wooden board, and place a warm cloth on top of it. Then put on the person a thin pad of hay from a thin board according to the length of the spatula throughout, or longer it by a little.
If the person is under the pad in any part of the spatula, then equalize it with the wooden board, until the pad drops down according to the equality.
Then, with the help of an alchemist, make a long strip of cloth tight and firm, and fasten it to the body, until it does not move from its place.
And consider the ligature every day. Whenever it becomes soft, tighten it again and if it moves from its place at all, make the fabric equal in thickness and let the sick person lie on his sound side.
And the spatula is to be restored after twenty or twenty-five days.
When this number is complete, then loosen the ligature: and you shall be safe. For this is made of bones whose connection is not feared, and their loosening causes no harm.
But if it proceeds from a bone-fragment, and pierces the skin: then cut it above it, and remove it. And do as I said in the fracture of the fork from sitting on a hot seat, if anything happens from it.
Regarding the restoration of a fractured breastbone:
The breastbone sometimes breaks in the middle, and this rarely happens. Its extremities, however, are most likely to break, and they are destroyed by the accidents that befall it.
When the middle of it breaks and turns downward, there is a painful difficulty in breathing, coughing, perhaps a little blood, and a broken sense; its restoration is that the sick person shall lie on his back: and place the spatula under its bones.
Then press his shoulders and join the ribs on both sides with the hands: and make it equal in length, in whatever way is possible, and let it come together; until it恢复 its shape, according to which it is needed, let it be set in place.
Then place a plaster and a pad on it, and put the board above it from a thin piece of linden or poplar, and something similar for lightness, after you have washed it with a cloth. Then apply a delicate ligature over the broken bone to keep it in place, and sometimes turn it slightly backwards so that it may not move forward; and tighten the ligature as the skin tightens around it.
Then consider the ligature at all times, and whenever it becomes soft, tighten it; and if necessity compels to undo it for any reason, such as itching, or corrosion that has occurred in the place, or pain, or swelling: then approach and loosen it, and remove the plaster, and set aright what has happened during the course of treatment.
Then remove the plaster, if you see towards it: and attach to it the ligature, until it is healed.
For the restoration of bones when they are broken.
You should know that the fracture of bones does not occur unless in the areas behind the back, and from the extremes thereof towards the front part. And it does not occur to them any wearisome thing, except therefore, because they are cartilage-like. And the knowledge thereof is not concealed from the sense during inquiry with the fingers.
And the restoration thereof is done in such a way that the break between the fingers is made even, according to what is possible, so that it may be even in shape; and according to that it needs to be. Then wrap a plaster around the broken bone with a splint if necessary.
And if the fracture of the bones is hidden towards the inside: then a very painful pain happens to the person, and a kind of tickling, such as that which happens to him who has pleurisy; because the bone pricks the wound, and also difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and much blood-spitting: and this is difficult to treat.
And the ancient people have made many inventions for it; and among them are those who say that you should put on a bed that causes inflammation and irritation, so that the belly may become inflamed, and spread out, and push forward the fracture to the outside.
We therefore abhor the formation of a cold poultice, lest it cause a delay in making an warm one if it does not occur. But if it has already occurred, then let us add to that.
And one of them said: Let a warm place be placed there, and then let it be drained with strength, and it is more like reasoning. However, we fear that the warm vapours will attract fluid to the spot, due to the weak condition of the body.
And one of them said: It is necessary that the place be covered with wool which has already been immersed in hot oil: and let feathers be placed between the ribs, so that it be filled: so as to be a loop of equal length when it is turned around by its roundness.
Then let the sick person be cared for with pleurosis from food and medicine.
That if we strap the sick person tightly, which it does not tolerate, and the mouth is pricked by a pin that hurts, and we fear for the sick man: then let us split him on the spot, and let us find from the ribs a broken one. Then let us place over it an instrument that preserves the siffar, whose memory preceded: and we will cut the mouth with ease, and we will cut into it.
Then let us gather together two lips of the wound, if it is large with a stitch: and let us treat him with plasters, until he heals.
That if the warm poultice occurs during this time, then let us approach, and pour feathers into rose oil, and place them on the spot: and let the sick person be treated with it as is appropriate to the poultice.
In the meantime, he shall also lie down on the side where he sleeps, until he heals.
The restoration of a broken spine of the back and neck.
Of the bones of the neck, when a fracture occurs, and it rarely happens that they are worn out: and so also of the spines of the back. So then if it happened to someone and you don't know whether it was cured or not, trust. For if you see his hands already softened, and stuporized, and dead: and cannot be moved, nor extended, nor constricted: and when you constrict them with your fingers, and pierce them with a needle, he does not feel it, and does not feel pain in them: then you will know that it is not healed, and it is deadly in many dispositions.
That if he moves them, and feels constriction with your fingers and the prick: then you will know that the neck of the bones is healed, and that the sick will be healed with cure.
That if it becomes like the spine of the back on him, and you want to know whether it is healed or not, then consider his feet: then if you see that they are softened, and what happened to his hands happens to them: then when he lies down on his back, he moves and has a desire to defecate without volition: and when he raises himself up over his belly, he does the same: and when he raises himself up over his back, and wants to drink, and cannot: then you will know that it is deadly. So do not work on his cure.
But if anything from that does not happen to him, the matter is lighter.
And the cure of him that happens from that is, as you know, a sedative wax: so that you put it on a broken spine with rose oil only: or when you wipe it off.
Place over it the thing a few times in the day until he sits down when he is sedated: then place over one of the places that comforts, dries, and ties to him with a ligament: and order the sick person to use quietly and tranquilly. And do not let him sleep on the side where he feels pain until he is healed.
If it happens that there is a rupture of the bone joint, or something that has already been separated from it: then you should, as it were, separate the wound on the skin and remove it. Then gather together the two sides of the wound with a stitch. Then take care of himself with some ointment, from the unguent, until he is healed.
If, however, the bone is finally broken at the end of the shinbone, and the end is severed: then you should, with the thumb of the left hand, introduce it into the socket of the bone that has been broken, and with the right hand, as well as you can, and by means of a second equating.
Then put it back on itself, and take it off: and take care of the wound with the same cure that preceded it, until it is healed.
The Restoration of Bones.
CHAPTERXI.
Bones of Ankhs rarely break. If they do break, then their fracture is not, unless the break is at the ends of them: and they split along their length, and bend inward: and there results a pain and a bruise in the joint where it breaks: and the leg is lame because it is broken.
And its restoration is such that you should stretch out your hand over it, until you stand on the fracture as in this figure (show).
If the fracture is only at the ends of it, then make it equal, according to the way you are prepared by means of an equating, until it resembles its natural shape.
But if the fracture is along its length, or has already bent inward: then let the sick man lie on his stomach, until such time as its restoration is prepared for you. When you have made it equal, then place over it an emprastum: then place over it a wooden frame, or a strip of skin: and string with a tight bond so that you do not change the fracture, and do not remove the frame.
So he equitably cuts them with him so that he fills it, until he takes it, by the constriction according to the equitability: and order the sick man to lie down on his back or on his sound side.
But if it happens to him that there is a hot aposteme: then cease from extending it, and from his restoration, until the hot aposteme has subsided: and put over him who sits what he sits, according to what preceded, then return to his restoration again: and bind him as it should be.
But if, on the other hand, there is a fracture of the bone, or it has been crushed out, extract it.
On the restoration of a fractured bone, an assistant.
The assistant is that which is between the bed and the head of the spoon.
But if it is broken, then its restoration is according to two ways.
One of which is that you take a flat piece of wood of average size, according to this form, which follows.
And two ligaments are tied at the two ends.
Then hang it from a raised place: and let the sick man sit on a seat. Then he throws his broken arm over the wood, until it reaches its point, at which there is an attachment of the wood.
Then hang him upside down from above him with something heavy, that he may extend himself by the assistant to the lower parts. Then the doctor makes his hands even at the same time, until he has restored the fracture, according to which it is necessary.
And the other mode is that the sick man should lie down on his chest: and he hangs his hand from his neck with a ligament. Then order two of his assistants to hold the one which is above the fracture with their hands: and that the other should hold below him, and each of them extends to its side.
And if it is necessary, so that the extension may be stronger, then bind under the fracture with a ligament, and above it with another ligament: and each of the two assistants extends to the two sides.
If then there is a fracture at the end of the humerus, then it is necessary to put one ligament under the sternum, and another against the fracture towards the cubit.
And likewise if there is a fracture at the end of the cubit: then it is necessary to put one ligament on that place and on the cubit itself.
Then the fractured bone should be straightened with ease without effort, until the fracture is made equal in accordance with what needs to be done and applied with good application: then tighten it, if there does not happen to be a swelling of heat.
If however there happens to be a swelling of heat, then do not tighten the bandage until the seventh day. And place on the bone a wet wool that has been soaked in vinegar and oil with rose water, until when the swelling subsides: then tighten it: and the mode of tightening it is such that you place a plaster on the fracture.
Then put the new solution made of cloth over the plaster. Then tighten the arm with an aid, and let him put his hand open on his shoulder.
And put a cloth, and tighten the arm on the aid so that the arm remains in place with the arms: if it does not forbid you to do so, and does not disturb you with anything from the broken bone.
That if you are in a time when something that disturbs you from the broken bone is allowed, then use plasters: and it is such that you place on the fracture itself a plaster which is broader and stronger than the other plasters. And place between all the plasters the width of a finger: and let the length of the plasters be in accordance with the fracture with the addition of three fingers from any side.
Then tighten the plasters with the tightening which I have mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And let it be tighter on the fracture site than the tightening which you have made. And the tighter the fracture is extended, the smaller is the tightening.
If then you see the length of the plasters and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour when you restore the member immediately, then do so: and if you are in a time of a swelling of heat, then do not tighten the plasters and do not leave them on until the seventh day, as we have also said.
Then consider the ligament for all three days, so that there is no itching, swelling or restriction of food reaching the limb due to excessive tightness. Correct this whole thing according to what we have said.
But if you are really not confident, so that nothing may come from it: then do not loosen the ligaments, unless after three days or more.
And let the nurse sit on his back and his hands on his belly, and place under the pillow a full blanket of wool, equal in thickness.
And consider at every hour of the night or day, so that the fractured limb is not loosed, nor are the ligaments weakened. Correct this whole thing with your strength.
And provide food for the nurse according to the order which we have set out, so that there is a slight food in the first place, until the jaw begins to close: then it should become thicker the food.
For the habit of the assistant and the limb is to be tightened for forty days: then it should be loosed, and a bath administered to it, and it should be treated with an ointment that straightens it.
If the fracture is putrid, rubbed: then do not loosen the ligaments and the splints until fifty days, and until two months.
On the Restoration of a Broken Arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called two fascicles.
Of which one is small; and that is what follows the thumb. And the other is large, and that is what is placed under the little finger on the lower side.
Perhaps therefore the larger fascicle breaks alone, or the smaller one: and perhaps they both break at once.
But when the smaller fascicle breaks above, then the restoration of it is easy, and its cure is easier.
And when the larger one breaks below, this is a bad break, and its cure is difficult.
And it is worse when two bones break at the same time.
But if the bone that is broken is only a little above, then it is suitable for the doctor to restore it with ease until it is equal to the other.
But if the broken bone is a large one, then he should put on a stronger bandage tightly.
And he should put on the shape of the hand at the restoration of it and a long extension over the little finger. And the thumb of the hand should be set higher than all the other fingers; and the lower joint of all the fingers, or any other: and the sick person should sit on a square before himself, and the little finger should face him, or in front of him, at height, so that he does not suffer any trouble.
Then let him extend the arm from the lower part, or with his hand, or with a bandage. And another minister should extend it from above.
Then the doctor should make the bone equal, until he reduces it to the best shape he can get.
If there are any fractures in the bones, then you should strive to reduce any fragment in its place with your power.
But if it seems to you that there is a separation in it, and it stings the skin, and you have no hope of restoring it: then find on top of it, and take it off according to the manner which we have said in those which precede.
But if the fracture is with the wrist, I have already made to this single capiter, so you take the cure of it from there.
If it should happen in the beginning of your restoration that there is a hot swelling, then take a fine cloth made of linen with a green dye, and white wax, and put it between the thickness and thinness: and tighten the cloth on the bone with a thin string, until such time as it sits when it is sitting: then remove the cloth, and put on an ointment prepared from a powder of herbs mixed with white wax. Then put on stars, and let there be a star that is placed over the fracture itself wider by a little, and stronger.
And know that the number of stars of the arm is six in multiple dispositions: whether it be a fracture in one fist, or in two fists simultaneously.
Then put on your restraint over the place of the fracture stronger and more severe, and a little more with the restraint to the upper fracture, or to the lower one: or put on a softer restraint according to what preceded the memory of it at the beginning of the chapter.
And let there be cloths wrapped around the fracture, soft, wet cloths: and let them not be hard, rough. And let there be a cord that is twisted from linen itself, middle between thin and thick, as we have described it.
And consider the member and ligaments after days. That if something happens in which correction is necessary, such as itching that occurs in a member: then it should be, to immerse the member with warm water, until that itch subsides, and remove the member not constricted, until it subsides, and then repeat the restraint.
That if the restraint is already softened, and the bone is already removed, and similar to them: then correct it all with your virtue, and consider again.
For if nutrition is prevented from reaching the member, due to excess restraint: then it should be, to soften it a little, and remove it for a few days, until it heals towards it, and then restrain it.
If, however, nothing of what we have said happens, then it should not be, to be healed, unless after twenty days, or around them.
Then let the member be suspended to its neck. And let the neck be equal, and protected with his virtue from moving movements. And let him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days, or in thirty-two days: and perhaps it is restored in twenty-eight days. All this depends on the arrangement of the layers and the arrangement of the strength.
On the restoration of broken bones Hand.
You should know that it is rare for there to be a fracture in the hand, and that of the fingers rarely occurs. And this does not happen unless there has been much friction.
When therefore there is a fracture of the hand or friction: then it is necessary that the sick person should sit upright in bed; and there should be a seat before him, equal to it. Then put his hand upon it extended.
Then the assistant will extend the bones that are broken, and will make them equal to the surgeon; he will join them together when they are joined in a good joint.
Then it is necessary that an ointment and a poultice be placed on it, if there does not occur a warm ecstasy. Then place the astellan from above according to the quantity of the spot; and you have already wrapped it in a linen cloth.
But if the fracture is in the lower part of the hand around the joint of the thumb, then make a sphere-like form out of a cloth; and command the sick person to wrap his hand with it broken; and then tie it with a long cloth.
And there should be placed an astellan of horn, whereon sits the smooth one, to be applied to the body of the hand; and tie it, according to what is necessary.
But if the fracture is on the outside, then it is necessary that you place an astellan from above and another one below in the hand; and let the hand be opened straight. Then put a strap on it, as the hand is extended; and extend it between the fingers with a ligament.
If there is a fracture in any of the joints of the fingers, then, if it is the thumb, make it equal according to what is necessary. Then tie it with the hand; and, if you are fond of it, place an astellan on it straight, so that the fracture does not move, and does not move.
If however the fracture is in the remaining digits, as in the middle, and index, or auricular, and annular, then it should be made equal, and tied with the healthy digit that follows it: or all should be tied according to the continuity: and it is better. Or put a splint on it, as we have said in the thumb.
And consider in your restoration, and after it the disposition of the apposition of the heat: and oppose with it what is necessary, when anything happens from it, according to what it says goes round its narrative.
Regarding the restoration of a fracture of the hip
The pelvis often breaks, and is felt because it turns towards the inner and rear parts.
And its restoration is such that the ligaments above the fracture are tied, and another ligament under the fracture. And the injured person will stretch out his hand on his face.
Then he will extend all the ligaments to their side according to equality: and this, when there is a fracture in the middle of the bone.
If however the fracture is near the root of the pelvis, then let there be a ligament to the side of the pelvis so that it falls up: and another ligament under the fracture.
And in the same way if there is a fracture near the knee, then let there be a nearby ligament so that it falls down: and another ligament under the fracture.
Then the doctor makes the bones of both hands equal until he reduces them according to their natural shape: and joins the bones with a good union.
Then it should be put on plaster and tightened if that member does not get better. If there happens to be a fever on it: then you should leave it for a few days, until the heat of the fever is driven out, and then return to your cure.
The tightening should be such as this. It is necessary that you add on the fracture a hard piece of wood, that is, a peg: and double it up twice, or three times: and leave the excess. Then wrap the wound tightly, until the heel bone has healed at the root.
And insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg close to the knee towards the bottom, and make the ends of the thread come from the upper part of the two parts. Then bind tightly over the leg and thigh that which is in excess with the bandage.
Then place on the thigh at the site of the fracture itself the stakes, and place one stake from them over the bone of the leg.
Then fill with waddings between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth, so that the pressure is even.
Then begin with the strong pressure from the middle on three or four woundings at the site of the fracture. And as much as you increase in length with the bandage from the location of the fracture, your pressure will be smaller and softer, and gentler.
Then move towards the two ends of the thread that you inserted between thigh and leg. Bind then with each of the three stakes that are above. Then move with both ends of the thread towards the bottom, until you reach the heel of the foot. And also tighten both ends of the thread and the ends of the stakes from the other side: so that the bandage does not move away from its place.
Then remove the pressure on it while it remains like that so that there is no damage to the member, nor swelling, nor inflation, and similar things. What if something of that sort does happen? Then set it aright with the bandage, and repair all of it completely, as we have often said many times.
But if a fragment of bone that hurts has gone into the bone: then it should be, to even out that, if you can manage it. And if not, place over it, and move it: and take care with that which preceded it, until it heals.
And when this fracture of the hip is tightened, except that stakes are added to it, as we have said in the leg and arm.
Indeed, when he was restored in this way from a fracture, there did not occur any limping. And if he is restored alone, besides that another leg is applied to him, then it is necessary that he always limps who has one.
And you know that the hip joint is strained in fifty days, or a little is added, or it is massaged a little: all of this is according to the difference of the complexion and the remaining dispositions.
Regarding the restoration of the fracture of the rotula in the knee joint.
You know that the rotula in the knee joint rarely breaks, but it often happens that it is worn out.
If a fracture does indeed occur in it, then there is either a fracture, or a hole, or a cavity in its parts. And it is with a bone, and without a bone. And he will stand on it entirely with his sense.
And the restoration of it is such that it comes together what is broken from its parts with the fingers, until it comes together and joins according to what is possible from adjustment and ease, and making.
Then put an emplastre of flour sise, or of meal, with egg white: and put on it a round frame, if you can bear it: and tighten tightly to it with a suitable bandage: and wrap it up.
Then consider all the dispositions that we have described in the remaining fractures: such as swelling with heat, and similar to it: so that you oppose any accident with it that is suitable for it, until it heals.
Regarding the restoration of a fracture in the leg.
You know that there are two bones in the leg, one of which is large and is called the femur, and the other fine and is called the fibula.
And it happens to both of the species of fracture that occurs in the two bones of the arm: and because of this, its restoration is carried out as the equal restoration of the arm, and the operation is one.
If two bones break at the same time, the cruciate turns to all parts.
And if a smaller bone breaks, the cruciate turns to the front part.
And if a larger bone breaks, it injures that which is below: and these are the things which do not show themselves to you.
Then administer the extension, and the equalization, and the binding of the joints according to that which is equal.
However, if the fracture of the cruciate is a bad fracture, it has many different things: let there be less extension, and gentler alleviation for you.
And in the cruciate there is something of an operation on the arm: and it is, as when you make the joints equal, and take up all your operation, then take two strips from the wood of pine, which are administered in the making of the sole which is placed under the tables: and they are made of palm leaves: and choose from them which have a small thickness, and there be not any from the minute ones: and may their length be according to the length of the cruciate from the knee down:
Then wrap around on one piece of cloth with two wraps according to its length. And place one end of the cruciate from one side, and the other from the other side: and let them be from the knee down to the foot.
Then bind the two strips in three places from the two ends and from the middle. For when the tightening is finished, the cruciate leans to the right and to the left, and stands in good position.
And now let the strip of wood be administered according to the length of the cruciate, and let it be placed in it, that he may preserve itself from movement.
And much more is necessary, so that you do this to the fracture when it is a true injury.
Then consider the cruciate every day, and strive with it with the utmost effort from inflammation, or swelling, or any other thing. But if anything of these happens, then oppose it with him that which is necessary, until he is healed, if God will.
Of the fracture of the bones of the foot and fingers.
That is not a fracture of the calcaneum, but of the tibiae and fibulae.
But of the bones of the foot does not happen when there is a fracture, and of the fingers little too; but does not happen to them unless there be a wear in many places.
That if there is a fracture of the bones of the foot, and he sees those bones sliding one over another, then let him put his sick foot on the ground prepared, like one who walks.
Then stand you, and put your foot on that which rises out of those bones; then press it, or trample thereon: and make it even, until it comes back into its place.
Then put a patch, and stamp it down; and put under the foot a thin board, which hath two flat heads.
Then bind it with a tight strap, going down with the foot, after you have wrapped it up with rags, and with those wherewith it needs to be bound.
When then shall you loosen the ligaments: for after three or four days, then shall you loosen the ligatures. For thou shalt find bones that are even; or if they be fractured, or dislocated. The operation then is, as you see it.
If any of the fingers be broken, then restore them, and make them even, according to that which thou hast told me in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. Then put your finger on a board according to the length of the finger; and make it a little broader; then put under the foot the same board which thou hast told me, and bind it with a tight strap.
If indeed the bone which is broken be two, or three, or more, then put upon every finger a band of its own quantity, wrapped up in a linen cloth; and bind the board in the lower part of the foot, and stand on one head of the board under the foot, that it may hold by good retention.
It is necessary for you not to forget, but to consider everything that I have told you about the remaining fractures from the accidents which we have mentioned: and oppose every accident with what is necessary.
About the fracture of the vulva of a woman, and of the pelvic bone and of the uterus of man.
When a woman's vulva is fractured, then make her sit square. Then tilt her slightly towards the back of her own body, and hold her from behind.
Then the midwife shall fill the woman' vulva with cotton, until she is filled: and let it be made in the woman' vulva like a sphere.
Then the woman shall be struck, and her back shall be gently raised. For that cotton will exit, until it lies before the entrance to the woman' vulva like a sphere, and the broken jaw returns.
Then place a little ball on her back. When she then wishes to urinate, let the cotton move easily, and then let her urinate: and reduce it according to the mode in which you inserted it at first: and then let it return to her own little ball.
Let that be done for seven days, or about, because the jaw itself is restored.
And if you wish, take a narrow twig, and tie it around the hole with a cane, and insert the whole twig into the woman' vulva. Then blow into the cane with force, until the snot bends inside the vulva, for the fracture returns.
Then fill it with cotton, and let it stand for a few days, according to what we have said, until it is healed.
And when the pelvic bone of man or woman is fractured, then administer to its restoration, and to its adjustment that which we have described concerning the bone of Ankylosis.
And do not conceal the right eye in these adjacent fractures, which are few, especially if it is for some study, or usage.
Understand my book well, for it reveals to you many things that mean much to you when it comes to healing yourself and restoring your health and well-being; so understand this.
When the penis is broken, take the throat of a goose; and insert the penis into it. Then put on top of it a bandage, and wrap it up, and leave it for three days, or a little longer; and he will be healed, if God wills it.
For the restoration of broken bones, when they are joined with a splint.
It is fitting that he who has suffered a fracture, especially if it is a large one, such as the hipbone or other bones that support the body, should be cauterized without delay: if you have the means to cauterize him, as we have mentioned.
If the bone bleeds, then you should cut it, as we have said, so that the dust of it lies on top: if you do not have another at hand.
Then begin to restore the fracture on the same day: and do not put off doing so, unless a swelling occurs.
But if a swelling becomes warm, then put off the restoration until the ninth day, until the swelling subsides. And do not approach him on the third and fourth days at all, for you would bring him bad accidents.
But if a bone that is broken is prominent above the skin: then you should seek to reduce it and make it even with your hands, with ease and a small extension.
But if it is not prepared for extension and for making it even with your hands: then reduce it with a stick. And this is an instrument made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight fingers' breadth: and its width is according to the quantity of the wound. And for this a physician must take three or four, according to the quantity that he needs for the cure of any kind of fracture.
And let it be round: and let there be little grossness therein, lest it should double itself by compression upon itself at the hour of operation: and let the acute extremity be, to which let there be a margin in its extremities. And let it be above it in bulk from its middle to its lower part.
And this is its shape.
It is necessary in this operation that the extremity of it be turned inwards upon the extremity of the prominent bone: and press it with one force together with it until when the bone returns and comes to some degree of equability.
Take heed therefore to make the extremities of the fracture face inwardly in opposition.
If then the extremities of its fracture are thin, and does not take it well with the instrument, then let him strike the extremity of its bone, until the instrument can have power over it.
If then you cannot reduce them in any way with what we have said above, then strike it with him from the incisions which we have spoken of: or saw it with one saw of whatever kind you can get to yourself.
Then rub off what remains in the bone of the roughness and small bark.
When therefore the bone is reduced, and finds after its reduction a painful and lameness afflicting it, then know that the bone has not returned to its place.
Do then this. For you confer a great advantage of being able to walk by restoring the bone which you make.
Then immerse the cloth in black vinegar. And especially if it is in summer. And do not place on the bone of the caesar, or anything in which there is oil: lest it should come to pass that corruption and decay take place therein.
Then administer the herbs in the hour of your completion from the restoration of the bone. And let fall the bandage: that you may strike with the forceps a hole in the second cavity after the quantity of the wound.
And with all caution, do not tie a tendon with a fracture. For many times the foolish physicians have done this: and they have caused to happen to their patients, or death, or corruption, or rot, that is, disease. And your tension be soft, gentle, diverse from the tension of the other broken fractures.
That if a tendon is bad, or is a large tendon, and you wait for some bad accident which we have described, and suspend pain in the place: then it is not right that you should put stars on the tendon. And make them in solução from hard leather in the place of the stars, and tie the tendon with them.
But when it is after one day, or two days, and you see the tendon beginning to grow puss, then take away from on top of the tendon the leather which you put under it with a knot. Then apply vinegar, and the oils with which we are accustomed to treat wounds: such as the oil of four medicines, and similar.
And it comes to you, that you should loosen the ligaments. And consider the tendon every day, morning and evening, until it is healed, and has healed.
And it is necessary that the member be prepared so, that pus might come out of it easily to the lower parts.
That if there pass many days of the wounds and are not healed, nor does pus come away from them: then you should know that there are little bones in it. Why it is necessary that you should inquire about the tendon with a touch. How many of those little bones are separated, take them away, and pull them out. And which of those little bones are not separated, and sting the member, and cause pain, strike it, and take them away in any way that you can do to that for you.
That if an accident happens to the tendon, or ekileten, that is, it becomes stiff, or another species of corruption and putrefaction: then you should oppose each one with him who is charged with its cure, whose previous narration is in his chapter.
And from this, in which it is necessary that my speech stand, and which you should bring to mind when the bone breaks, and emerges over the limb, like the hip bone, and assistants, and the like from large limbs, that is, so as not to suspect attraction from it, for many times death has occurred from it, besides, you should leave it, until it decays.
For perhaps after 20 days, or 30, it will fall by itself.
Then therefore take care of the wound if it remains with you; otherwise, leave it alone.
On the treatment of a nodule in the socket of a fracture.
Many times this Nodulation has occurred in the socket of the treatment of a fracture. Especially, which is near joints: and nourishes from it the form of the limb. And perhaps forbids the limb from its natural action.
Then consider, if the Nodulation is recent: administer to it medicines which have a straitening effect, such as aloe, and olive oil, and Myrrh, and wood-ash, and acacia, and similar things.
So, that you take from these certain ones, or all of them: and bind them with a stifling substance, such as an infusion of aloe, or an infusion of albumin, or vinegar; and place them over the Nodulation in a box, and fasten them securely with the good binding.
And leave the straitening, and do not remove it for many days. Then remove it, and repeat another, until the Nodulation has disappeared.
Or bind over it a strip of lead, bent at one end. For lead is a property to remove anything feared from the limb.
But if the Nodulation has already become attached to a stone, and is stiff, and there is an urgent need to remove it: then find on top of it a sharp edge, and cut off the excess: or saw it off with some kind of saw, until it has gone: and take care of it, until it has healed.
When cure is effected and the member remains after it, not in accordance with its own nature.
When a bone fracture is healed and the member remains after it, feeble: then this does not occur except for many causes. Of which one is, the multitude of the lacing and the lacing not being according to what should be: or because of the excess of the lacing, until the food runs to the member: or because of the excess of the ointment at an unfair time: or because of the lack of blood in the body, and its weakness.
And the healing of it is, to feed the sick, and make the body of him light, until there is an increase of blood in it. And give a bath. And introduce joy and happiness to it.
Then put a wedge on the member: so that it attracts the food towards itself in great quantity. And make his ointment with warm water, until he runs the food, and returns to his own nature.
On healing broken bones when they have curved.
When it happens that a member which has been healed after its twistedness and the prominence of the bone-fracture, or the nodule: and it is fed through that form of the member, however, the member should not be prevented from its natural function: then you should not take its speech which exists, that it should be broken again.
And there have also been many foolish doctors and healers who did this in our land.
This operation is very dangerous, leading to death, or a great fear, as if it were mortal.
But if the claudication and nodding are recent: then it should be ointment with warm water, in which have been boiled softening herbs, such as the leaves of althaea, and its root, and meitolium, and similar things. And let him make a plaster with soft plaster, as with a decayer made from dyachilons.
Or take mucilage of the roots of althaea and mix it with chicken fat or oil of sesamum; and plaster him with it.
Or take young fig tree branches and knead them with clay of columba, and like these that are called medicines which decrease the consolidation.
And when the setting has been dissolved by careful, old, and gentle friction, which is done with wet hands. And let him move his limbs in every direction during all hours.
If however the tortuosity has already preceded and is strong, and has come to rest on a stone, and prompts a need for its cure with an iron: then it should be cut off above the bone, and the continuance of the bone should be solved, and what is superfluous from the setting should be cut away with very small chisels: and ease should be given to him with care and diligence.
On the subject of dislocation.
Dislocation is the exit of a joint from its place. Why does it restrain itself from its own movement, and is fixed in form. And causes great pain to the weak and painful injuries.
When therefore a dislocation happens, then let him hurry to restore it: he should not delay it in any way.
For if he is delayed, the place will become stiff, and with it may come a reduction of the dislocation.
Therefore, it should not be moved, nor be extended in the time of its stiffening. For it often causes a spasm to occur, and painful injuries.
But when that happens, then let him prepare for the bloodletting. Then dismiss it, until it quiets down with the stiffness.
Then the member is kneaded with warm water and oil. Then reduce it with ease.
And heal all members with it, when the memory of the remedy comes to its place.
I have already arranged the chapters on dislocations and also on fractures, from the upper part of the body to the lower.
On the treatment of a dislocated jaw (lower).
The two jaws are rarely dislocated.
And the dislocation of the jaw occurs in only one of two ways. Or they are removed from their places by a small distance, and are slightly softened. Or they are dislocated completely and intact, until they are softened towards the breast, until the saliva of the wound runs away, and he is not able to keep it shut, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue hangs out with a gurgling sound.
When the dislocation of this is small, then it returns to its place by itself with a little difficulty.
If the dislocation is complete and intact: then it should be administered to reduce it quickly, and there should be no delay: and it is as if the doctor holds the jaw with his thumb at the base of the dislocation between his teeth, if the dislocation is from one side only. Or introduce two thumbs simultaneously, if the dislocation is from both sides. And the remaining fingers of his hand are outside, with which he equalizes it.
And order the sick person to clean his jaws, and allow them to chew on all sides. And the doctor equalizes the jaw and pushes it back into place.
If reducing it is difficult, especially if both jaws are involved: then administer a vapour with hot water and oil until the reduction becomes easy: do not delay reducing the jaws at all, as we have said.
When they are closed and equalized, and the mouth is shut, and they do not soften: then place a few cotton pads over them, with a patch made of wax: and rub it with rose oil.
Then bind it with ease using soft ligaments.
Then let him sleep with ease on his back; and let his head rest between two pillows so that he does not move to the right or left: nor let him chew anything; but let his food be soft, until such time as the pains ease, and let the jaws be loosed: then let him eat what he wants, and give it to him easily.
Do not cause pain during the surgery on his mouth or when drinking or swallowing, until such time as the jaws are loosed, and he is healed.
If it is difficult to reduce the two jaws when they are dislocated at some time and do not return to their places: then often fever and sodium result from this; and perhaps the stomach becomes weak, and perhaps pure choler is discharged.
So when you see this: then know that it is a loss, and he often dies who experiences this in ten days.
Regarding the reduction of a dislocated femur and shoulder blade.
The furcata (shoulder blade) does not dislocate from the inside due to its connection with the chest. And it dislocations when it is pushed outward: and gives a sense of pain.
And its restoration is so that he lies sick on his back, and extends his arms. Then, with a strong grasp of your hand, bind the place, for it will return to its place.
Then place a cloth on top, and hairs, and tighten it.
The extremities that follow the bed, and continue with him, do not dislocate unless they are rarely pushed. If it dislocations on a certain day: then it should be reduced and made even as we have said, and you should be prepared.
Then place a cloth on top, and tighten it. He should instruct the sick person to adhere to rest and tranquility until they recover.
And with this same cure, when the extremity of the humerus is reduced, it should also be separated from its place.
De reductione dislocationis Humeri.
You should know that the humerus does not dislocate except by three means.
Of which one is such that it dislocates to the tickling side toward the lower part. Of which second is such that it dislocates to the part of the chest. And perhaps it dislocates to the upper part of the humerus: and this happens rarely.
And does not dislocate toward the back, because of the spatula. And does not dislocate toward the front, because of the nerves.
And indeed it most frequently dislocates and exits to the lower side toward the tickling: mainly in those who have thin flesh. Since it exits them quickly, and enters them quickly.
But in those whom the flesh is abundant, it is the opposite; that is, because it exits them with difficulty, and enters them with difficulty.
And perhaps in some people there is a blow, or a fall, and the humerus is dislocated from the warm; and it is thought because of that, since it has already been dislocated.
It should therefore be such that you experience this, until you are certain about its state, and then proceed with its treatment.
And the dislocation is recognized when it is toward the lower side toward the tickling: and you distinguish between a dislocated humerus and a healthy one. For there is a great difference between them; and in the head of the humerus there is a concavity, and under the tickling at the touch of the head of the humerus it seems to be the same as itself: and the sick person cannot bring his hand to his ear, nor move it in all its movements.
And likewise, if dislocated towards the breast, or upward: then the injury is evident to the touch, and is not hidden.
And of this dislocation it is easy to reduce when it is recent, or when the boy is weak.
And its reduction is, that he should lift his own hand towards the top. Then put your fingers under his nipple, and with force raise the joint up to its place: and the attendant should lift his hand, and extend it upward. Then let him put it down, for himself he will quickly return.
But if he does not return by that which we have said, and there are many days from the time of the dislocation: then it should be, that the sick person bathes in warm water, and an emollient is administered which softens and soothes, such as if roots of aloe, and foenugraecum, and mellilotum were boiled in water, and administered.
Then the sick person should lie on his back: and let there be placed under his nipple a sphere and wool, which is equal to the tenderness and the constriction.
Then the doctor should place his heel over the sphere, and with force should draw the shoulder-blade downward, and should lift the attendant's hand towards the bottom.
And if you wish, reduce it according to this method: and it is so, that the present male who is longer should stand by the side, and introduce his shoulder under the nipple of the attendant: and lift the nipple of him upward, until the sick person hangs suspended in the air. Then another attendant should hold the attendant' hand downward. But if the sick person is light: then it should be, that he be suspended with something else, so that he be heavy: for the dislocation will immediately return.
It is also reduced in another way: and it is so arranged that the wood of a tree which is long and has a round head, like the handle of a mortar, should not be thick or fine. Then put a thin cloth under the body after they have placed it on top of the wood's head: and the sick man should stand according to the length of the wood.
Then his hands are extended to the lower part from one side, and his body is extended from the other side with strength: for the junction returns to its place with velocity.
If his reduction is difficult through all that we have said, then use this cure: and it is so that you take a piece of wood the length of two arms, and its width is the width of four fingers, and its thickness is the thickness of two fingers; and let its head be round, so that it may relieve the entrance to the deep pit, according to this form.
Then thin cloth should be tied over the round head so that it does not hurt the sick wood.
Then the sick person should be placed under the pit so that his hands or arm can be extended over the wood to the lower part; and the wood should be tied to the aid and arm and end of the hand.
Then an arm should be placed on the step by its width, and the hand should be extended to the lower part, and the remaining body should be suspended from one side. The junction enters immediately.
When the entrance has thus been completed in any way possible, then you should place under the pit a sphere of equal size made of wool. Then place a prepared plug made of ground incense with olive oil and white powder on the whole shoulder, as it rises from above.
Then tie the string under the pit with a tight knot: and let it rise above the plug; and connect his hands to his neck, and leave them alone for seven days.
It is necessary that food be given to the sick person until he feels better, because it is faster for him to heal.
Then after seven or five days he should be given more, and then he should be examined with movement. If then it is firm and does not soften, then it is well healed.
If then the joint is dislocated many times, because of the moisture that occurs with it, or for another reason: then it is necessary that cauterization be administered to it with three holes, according to what has been said in the chapter on cauterization.
That if this is done entirely, and the ligament is loosened after seven days, and the joint does not firm up, and the splint and tightness on it are sometimes removed, and it does not harden, and falls, and cannot raise itself to the top: then you should know that the nerves that go to the shoulder have already been cut, or stretched out, or softened: and you should know that the joint is never fixed in its place.
But dislocation that happens toward the chest and nipple, or backward reduction, is made with an impact and extension with the hands: until it returns, and cauterization is administered to it with remaining tightness and care, until it heals.
That if something happens after healing with a heavy weight on the member, and delay in its movement: then the sick person should use baths many times, until that heaviness is softened, and return to its own nature first.
On the treatment of dislocation of the cubitus bone.
You should know that the joint of the cubitus dislocates with difficulty, and in the same way it returns with difficulty, too: and it itself dislocates to all parts, especially to the front, or to the back.
And its dislocation does not conceal itself from you: because it falls with a noise, and with a touch, according to whatever figure it dislocates. And when you join the broken hip with a sound one, let it be manifest to thee. For the joint will be broken, and the arm cannot be doubled, nor can it touch its own shoulder.
And you ought to reduce the dislocation immediately, before a cold apostema comes upon him.
For if a hot apostema comes upon him, it is difficult to reduce; and he may not be cured at all, especially when it is behind. For this is worse in every respect than dislocation, and more painful; and often death comes with it.
And the restoration of it is when it can be reduced, to extend his hand with two hands; and his arm is spread out, and the doctor's fingers are above and below the hip, and he pushes the dislocation with his thumbs of his hands simultaneously, or with the root of his palm, until he returns to his place.
Or rather the dislocation is to the front; then he returns in such a way that he doubles his hand with his own hand until he hits against the root of his palm the hip that is dislocated.
Which if he does not obey the dislocation to reduction, then administer a harsh and sharp extension; and it is as if two ministers extend the arm: and they hold him too, so that he does not move during the extension.
Then the arm is rotated to all parts after it has been turned over a blanket of cloth doubled long, or a wide ligament.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his own hand, he should anoint it with oil so that the joint moves easily with lubrication. Then he pushes the dislocation with a harsh push until it is reduced.
And after its reduction, let a poultice be placed on it, in which there is stinging, and drying with chalk powder; and it is bound tightly going down. And hang the arm from the neck of the nurse: and let it rest for several days.
Then untie it. But if the joint has set in place, then loosen the ligature from it, and let it be.
And if you see that the joint is not well tied, then renew the plaster and the ligature, and let it be: for several days let it rest, until it is tied. Then untie it.
But if the weight comes to him after the joint has been reduced and he is in motion: then administer humidification in balneation, and subtle friction, and pressure, until it has healed, or put something over the joint, that is, nat-o-me-um (a mix of olive oil and vinegar). Then tie it up, and let it be: for a day and a night. Then take it off, and put him in the bath. But when he sweats: then tie the joint with subtle friction. Then repeat over the joint with a single stroke, and another, and a third time with the entrance into the bath, until it has softened.
And if you want: put over the joint dung, moist, heated with butter, and tie over it.
Do this a few times. This softens it, and it returns to its position.
The cure for dislocation by Albucasis.
Mahessem dislocates the hand, that is, the joint which is between the arm and the hand.
And the reduction of his dislocation is easy. But the other joints are difficult to reduce. However, it is necessary that speed be there in the reduction of his dislocation at the time when he dislocates, before the measurement is taken: or happens to him in the case of hot weather.
And the reduction of his dislocation is this: that you put Mahessem's weak hand on a table, and let him stretch out his finger of the hand: and that the doctor puts his palm on the eminence of the joint, and pushes it, until it returns.
Indeed, it should be considered if the palm has already receded to the abdomen of the hand: then place the sick hand of his behind a table at extension and reduction; and if dislocation is going towards the back of the hand, then the hand's position should be intrinsece on the table, that is, the inner part of the hand should be placed over the table so that the doctor's hand falls over this eminence of the joint.
If it has returned immediately, then it is good; and if not, then bind it with a plaster while it sits with an apostema: and let him go, and do not return to it.
For if he does not tolerate it, and you cannot bring it to reduction after the days have passed, yet the joint remains according to its tortuosity: and there is no harm in an infirm man unless his hand becomes soft, and he cannot clench anything: then you should know that the nerves are cut off or rubbed.
Therefore, it is not a talent in this, except to bind it with a suture near its danger. And perhaps it does not yield anything.
So when he does not return to Al-Mahasım, then place on him a plaster which we have described. Then bind it and let it go for five days: then untie it and let it go, and exercise the hand.
But if its movement is prevented, and something heavy happens to it: then soften it with hot water and sometimes with friction, until it softens.
The Treatment of Dislocation of the Digits
When a finger is dislocated from all sides, or from the back of the palm, or from its bottom: then extend the finger, and push the dislocation with your thumb until it returns.
Then support the tip of the finger, and suspend it towards the side to which it is dislocated, and let him go for two days.
Then suspend him and extend him until he is even with the straight line on that day.
And then, when it is night, bind him according to his narrative: and do not cease to unbind him on that day: and exercise him with motion: and bind him at night.
Make it for a few days until he is tied up.
And also do the same with him if his shoulder comes out of place: and bind him to the side that is hurt, and do your work with him until he heals.
And also do the same with him when his shoulder or any other part comes out of place.
§ On the treatment of dislocations of the spine (back).
When it happens to anyone that the spine or the neck is completely out of joint, or that many spines have been removed from their places: there is no cure for this disease, for death approaches the sick person.
And its sign is that the sick person leaves off working willingly, and cannot hold anything: and often some of his limbs become weak from him, or two of his limbs, or two of his arms, or one of them: or one of his spines is removed from its place.
For often one is removed again, since it often happens that they are moved on all four sides.
That which is moved to the back is called  (curved) Hump.
But the cure for that is so that if the   (curved) Hump has happened from infancy: there is no cure for it, and there is no healing at all from it.
But in that which has happened from a fall, or from being struck, or from similar things: the old people have long ago told you about the ways of curing it. For most of them do not return with profit.
I have however shortened that from him, for it does not excuse his being far away from my intention: and my exposure of it and forming an instrument with many different ways out of it, and showing it to himself.
I say then, that in a deformity which occurs from the front part, there is no talent, nor healing from it.
And likewise in that which was made on both sides.
And not to be cured from them, unless that which happens in the back of its own is considered: and it is like this, that the sick person extends over his face on a platform equal near the wall: and he expands under it a damp cloth, so that his chest is not hurt.
Then a straight piece of wood should be placed in the footrest on the ground, at the end of the leg, about the head of it: and another piece of wood should be held around the person's feet at the other end of the leg: and the assistant should hold the wood steady, so that it does not stand firm in the footrest. And the other assistant should hold the other one.
Then he will turn his head with a soft cloth, and fasten it firmly: and he will extend the end of the ligament to the wood that is at the head: and he will tie himself up in it.
Then he will tighten another ligament above his shoulders, and above his knees, and around his loins. Then he will tie all the ligaments together, and tie them to the other wood that is at his feet.
Then the assistant will stretch all the ligaments to the side of the wood, and do not remove the two woods from their places where they are fixed: however, they should not be fixed, as we have said.
And the doctor should place his palms on the spine with strength, until he has straightened out: or he should place them on the board. Then he will attach his feet to the board, until he has straightened out.
If, however, he does not recover with this treatment, then take a board whose length is about three arms. And the wall where we have spoken of, which is near the sick person, should be a place into which the end of the board can be inserted. Then put the middle piece of the board over the spine. And let the doctor put his feet on the other end. And tighten it well until the spine is cinched and return to its place.
Then if you want to operate with a tourniquet that is held by your hand: and it is so, that you set on the ground at the head of the bed two logs whose length sits of an arm: and at the head of those two logs.
And the length that is between all the wood is one palm: and now it is done at every place a hole, where the tourniquet runs: and all the wood is made firm on the ground, so that it does not move at all.
And the round wood is inserted: and the tourniquet is in two holes of the two woods.
And at the end of it is a hole, in which the wood is fastened, whose length is a palm with that which rotates: and in two other woods there is the same.
Then tighten the ligatures that you have tightened in the chest of the patient with the tourniquet that is at his head: and the ligatures that you have tightened in his thighs with the tourniquet that is at his feet.
Then stand next to every tourniquet assistant who twists his hand with the key, with which the tourniquet rotates: and the doctor makes even the spine, according to what we said.
This is the form of the tourniquet, which follows.
Then after the spine has returned and evened out, then it is necessary that you put on dried blood with albumen. Then a pillow. Then put above the blood-soaked cloth a board whose width is three fingers, or about them. And the length of it what takes up the space of the hollowness, and on the side of the spine healthy.
Then tighten with a ligature, which we have said. The sick should be fed with a subtle diet until they are well.
If there remains any sign of a malady at the end of recovery: then it is necessary that the medicines which soften and relieve be given with a bland diet over an extended period of time. And it is given to him in that leaden bed.
And when there happens a malady at the very end of the back spine: and it is thought that by this dislocation, and it is this mouth which now emerges. Why should he not be put to death with such medicine: for it might perhaps cause death.
On the treatment of a dislocated ankle.
You should know that a dislocated ankle, and a dislocated shoulder, do not occur unless there is a complete dislocation: nor does it occur to them what happens with other joints due to a small distance and pressure.
And the joint of the ankle dislocates according to four parts. Because it dislocates towards the front and towards the back.
And indeed it mostly dislocates towards the inside: and little towards the front and back.
And the treatment for this dislocation to the inside is: because when you join the healthy thigh with the sick one, it is longer: and his knee joint emerges more than that of a healthy person, and the sick person cannot double his leg at the hip: and there is a warm place following the hip, so that the head of the hip has already reached it.
And the sign of him who has suffered a dislocation to the outside is, that are opposable signs to these signs.
And the sign of him who has suffered a dislocation to the front is, that he spreads out the healthy thigh according to its complement: however, he does not double it without pain in his leg: and if he tries to walk, he cannot step forward on to the front: and he holds back his urine, and is thrust out at the hip, and during walking he catches his foot on the heel.
And the sign of him who has dislocated his hip behind is that he cannot spread his knees without spreading his hips first, and his leg is shorter than the other, and his hips are softened, and the head of the femur is at the place of the hip joint.
The reduction of this dislocation is that you should consider then, if the dislocation is fresh, which now grows old with one who has it. Then, if you administer the reduction of it, and remains after its own disposition: then there is no cure at all in it. Therefore it should not be assumed that he is completely cured.
But in that one whose dislocation is fresh, and is of the four kinds of dislocations: then approach to this, so that you may loose it, and extend it towards the inside and outside, and move it with your right and left hand: for perhaps it will recover itself, and will not need any other cure.
But if this does not happen in this way, then you should prepare a strong instrument, and extend his leg from the lower part: or with its hands, or with a ligature that binds above the leg: and another minister should extend his hand from above the knee, so that he can put his hands under the skin. Then he should tie with a soft ligature on the root of the hip, and hold the end of the other ligament.
And let his extension be either from the front part of the groin to the side of the thigh, or from the back to the side of the spine.
And let all these extensions be bent at once, until he raises himself up with his body from the ground, and remains hanging.
This is indeed a common type of reduction for all four kinds of dislocations.
But if the dislocation returns with this that I have said, it is good: and if not, then it is necessary for all kinds to say what I mean about their own cure.
For in his own reduction when dislocation is to the interiors, it should be so that the sick person lies on the healthy side of him. Then he places the ligament over the root of the pelvis, in that which is between the head of the pelvis, and the place which is under the groin. Then he extends the ligament to the top from the part of the groin to the higher side of the body, to the part of the fence.
Then another strong minister takes his arm, and diminishes the place of the large pelvis of the sick person, and extends it to the externals with a great extension. For he has already returned to his place.
And this species is easier than the other species of cure, by which this member is reduced.
If, however, he does not comply with you at all in this entry with this species of cure: then it should be so that two nurses are bound together with a strong ligament, soft, over the two heels, and over the two knees: and let the length of each from its comparison be the quantity of four fingers: and let the trunk of the sick person be extended by one more quantity of two fingers.
Then the sick person should be suspended on the head of the wood, which is in the house: and let the length of him from the ground be the quantity of two arms.
Then command a strong young man to support the head of the pelvis: and let another suspend the sick one with his back: and let another push him with strength, for the turning returns to its place with speed.
But in his own reduction, when there is a dislocation to the externals, it should be so that the sick person lies on the ground, according to which we have spoken in having gibbosity. And let a ligament be tied around his own weak pelvis and over his chest.
Then two logs are placed, one at the feet of him, and another at the head of him. Then a log is placed in the middle of the pelvis, fixed securely: over which moist cloths are spread so as not to wound the sick person: and let the wood be between his hips, so that it does not attract towards the lower side by extension.
Then all the attendants should spread out to their respective parts and the doctor should give a careful reduction with his hand.
If he therefore submits to reversion, it will be good.
And if not, place her on the table, and press her equally as we said in the case of a hunchback. However, it is necessary that the sick person lie on the sound side.
And when dislocation is to the front, then it is necessary that the leg of the attendant be spread quickly out; and it is according to this story on a platform: and the doctor should place his hand with his right hand on the knee of the sick person. Then he should tie him up with the other hand, and with that tying place him stretched out to the lower side of the knee.
And if dislocation is to the back: then it is not necessary that the sick person be stretched out to the lower side, and let him sit upright on the ground; but he should be placed on a hard surface, as it is also if his ankle dislocates to the outside, according to what we said about his lying on two ankles: and it is on his face, and the ligaments are extended; according to what we have just said.
And it is necessary that compression with the table be administered also to the place from which the injury comes out, when reduction is completed in accordance with what is necessary.
And the sign of its return should not be hidden from you: and it is so that you spread out the two legs of the attendants; and when you see them equal, and the sick person tightens his leg, and stretches himself out without complaint: then you will know that his member has returned, in accordance with what is necessary; then join together the two hips, and place a splint, and tie it with a cord, so that it does not move to any part: and let the sick person be quiet for three or four days.
Then loosen the ligaments, and splint, and bring together the legs with each other; then if you see them equal in position, then you will know that the dislocation is now healed; so release the sick person to walk about.
And if you see any softening: then return, and patch it up, and tighten it according to your first order: and also release it after three days.
Then remove it and make the wound heal well on its own for a few days, until it is healed.
[On the Dislocation of the Knee.]
[The knee may be dislocated] in three ways: first, by straightening the leg; second, by flex (It may be dislocated) to the outside, to the inside, and to the bottom, that is, to the back.
And it is not dislocated to the front.
[And the sign of its dislocation is that he who has the injury should apply his knee to his hip.] But if it does not attach to the hip: then you shall know that the knee is dislocated.
[And the restoration of all types of dislocation is so that the sick person may sit upright and so that his leg may extend behind it if he can, and fasten his back to his face: and place his foot between your feet.
Then attach the knee of the injured person with your palms, and hold them straight between your fingers over his knee. Then apply your two palms to the sides of his knee with strength. And another person extends his foot, until he brings the knee back to its place.
[And the sign of restoration is that the hip should attach to the knee with ease, not with effort.]
Then patch him up, and fasten the hip to the knee. Then bind them together at the same time with sutures for three or four days. Then remove the bindings.
And do not let the sick person walk for a few days until he is healed.
But if you do not bring him back to you by a strong extension of the ligaments, which is described in the cure of aching joints, until he returns to his place: then bind him up with ligatures, and administer a strong extension with the ligaments, until he heals.
On the treatment of a dislocated calcaneus.
When the calcaneus is occasionally displaced with only a small degree, and sometimes dislocated from its second component. And this displacement of it occurs either internally or externally.
And the sign of this displacement is that you see the calcaneus swollen, protruding toward the side to which it is displaced.
The cure for this displacement is easy; and it is to extend it with ease by the hands, and to make it even, until it comes back.
But in the treatment of it when it is dislocated from its second component, you should make the sick person sit upright: and hold him by the rear part of his back, firmly in the middle of him.
Then take hold of it with your right hand from the upper part of it, and with your left hand from the lower part of the foot near the nail.
Then draw the foot toward you with your right hand. Then with two fingers of your left hand.
Then extend it with your left hand, and press the chest of the foot toward the leg with your right hand without any effort.
Do this twice, as we have described.
Then press the chest of the foot toward the leg in a third direction, and you pull on the nail.
If it then comes back in a single direction or in two directions like this, and you see the foot even, it is good; but if not, then repeat the action on him: for he will come back.
But if it is forbidden to you to reduce it with that which we have described: then let the sick person lie on his back on the ground, and fix a sturdy leg in the ground so that it falls between his thighs; and you may now roll over him the cloth so as not to hurt him.
Then let the servant of the sick person take his leg: then the other servant shall extend it, or with his hands, or with a band that binds around the neck of the foot. Then all the ministers shall stand against the extension of their own body; and the nurse shall stand between the two hips holding him, so that his body is not drawn down to the lower side during the extension.
Then the doctor shall make his hands equal, and the other minister shall hold the healthy leg from below. For the dislocation returns with velocity.
When therefore the dislocation returns, and appears to you that the restoration is sound: then place a strap and support, and tighten it with ligaments firmly, and bind the foot with the ligament to the leg.
And it is necessary that you should beware and fear the nerves which are above the heel at the back, lest the ligaments be too tight on them, and they hurt them.
Then let him go for two days, or three. That if the ligament softens, tighten it again: then حلّه in a third day, or a fourth day: and forbid the sick from walking for forty days. But if he should attempt to walk before that space, there is no security but the dislocation would break again, and be corrupted, and receive no cure after it.
That if he should happen to have a feverish swelling: then you shall administer to him in a sedative that which we have already mentioned in another place from the treatment, and an emulsion, until it subsides.
Of the dislocation of the toes of the foot and their cure.
It is necessary that he should be equal when he is dislocated from them with a little extension without work: and that is not difficult, indeed, it is easy.
But if the dislocation is in some of the joints of the back of the foot: then it is necessary that he should make his sick foot stand on an equal place of the earth, or on a table: and it stands as one who walks.
Then stand still, and put your foot upon that which protrudes from them by the joint. Then press that bone with your foot with strength, until it returns, and the appearance is already equal, and does not appear at all in the place eminence.
Then put under the stomach of his foot a plate which catches the whole foot, which has two heads. Then tighten him with a strap for three days. Then solve him, and let him rest from walking for several days, until he is tightened and made secure by the reduction.
As for the species of dislocation with the ulna or fracture.
When something like this happens and you are concerned about his cure and recovery, often death succeeds: and because of this you should not presumptiously take upon yourself to direct his cure, which is of this kind, unless you be prudent in the art, compassionate, merciful, slow, not bold, and not presumptuous; and use only such medicines as sit on the aphorism's warm sides: and dismiss the sick with divine judgment. Unless you hope for salvation from perdition with gentleness of sickness, and in which there appears some hope of salvation. Consider therefore the reduction of him at once at the beginning of the thing, before a warm aphorism happens.
But if the member returns, according to our directions, then administer a regime which sits on the aphorism; and care for the ulna with him when it suits him from an ointment of dried herbs.
That if the dislocation is with fracture, and things in the bones separate, then consider removal of them, and do in him what we said in simple illnesses because it preceded in those places.
And be careful according to your strength, and guard yourself from the entrance into a path of fear: because my prediction went before you.
For that is better for you with your Creator, and more lasting to your glory, and more safe to your body with them in your time.
