After I have completed to you, son, this book, which is the last of science in medicine with its supplement, and I have finished in it from its expositions and declarations, it has seemed to me that I complete it to you with this Treaty, which is part of surgery, that is, surgery by hand.
Since the operation by hand is laid out in our region and in our time exclusively: until perhaps science of it has perished, and its trail has been lost: and there remained from it, except for a few descriptions in ancient books, which hands have altered: and it happened to them error and hesitation, until their intentions were closed and its will was drawn out: It seemed to me that I could make it clear with the order of this Treaty in it second according to exposition and declaration and abbreviation: and I could bring it into being with forms of instruments cautery and the remaining tools of the work: since it is fitting from its addition and from its propering that what is necessary.
Because because for which there is not a good craftsman of his hand with it in our time: because the art of medicine is long, and the author of it needs to be exercised before it in the science of anatomy which he told Galen, until he knows the joints of limbs, and their forms, and their connection, and separation, and has understanding of bones, and nerves, and snakes, and number of them, and their emission, and throbbing pulses, and quiet, and places of their exit.
And therefore said Hippocrates, whose name is much, and work is little, and especially in the art of hand.
But we have already said about that at the beginning of this book.
Since who does not know that we have said about anatomy, does not expunge, except he falls into error, which people bring about: as I saw many of them, who form themselves from this science, and throw themselves into it without knowledge, and without experimentation.
Which is because I saw a doctor with a dull instrument incise an aposteme of the scrofulous in the woman's neck, and cut some arteries in her neck; why the blood of the woman flowed until she fell dead between her hands.
And I saw another doctor who thought that he would extract a large stone from the woman's bowels, which had lain for a long time; and the stone was large. So he approached it, and extracted it with the help of a hook. Why the man died on the third day.
And I was called upon to extract it too; and I saw from the great size of the stone and the care of the nurse that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who took a staff from our king for medicine; and there happened to be a black eunuch by him, who was wounded in his thigh near the heel; and the doctor tightened the wound with sharp pins, and bound it strongly with strong bandages, and did not cease from his foolishness, and he tightened the wound around the bone with strong sutures, and did not leave off wounding.
Then he finished him according to his wishes. Later on he left him for a few days and commanded that the bandages be not loosened; and so he remained until his leg was withered away, and came to ruin.
So I was called upon to loosen the bandages; and so it was accomplished that he had peace, and was free from his pains.
However the corruption had now become confirmed in the member; and I could not restrain it.
So the corruption ceased to walk around in the member until it died.
And I saw another doctor who pierced an ulcerous pustule; and it was ulcerated for a few days until the malignancy of it spread to his lord with a plague.
Which is because when the cancer is pure from the melancholy humor, then one should not approach it at all with iron unless it be in a member that can bear it, so that it may be cut off entirely from it.
And for that reason, my sons, you need to know that surgery is divided into two sections: namely, the operation which is associated with health; and the operation, where there is danger in many arrangements.
And I have already excited in every place of this book, where came the operation, where there is fear and terror.
Why you need to be careful of that, and to decrease it: so that they do not find a stupid person to speak and dishonor.
Therefore, you accept a measure with care and protection, and bring the sick among you with ease and strength, and use a better way, leading to the grace of God for salvation and worthy succession: and remove the fearful sickness from you that makes you afraid, so that it may come on you a hesitation in our faith and comfort.
For there remains more for the glory of our faith, and more excellent in the world, and finally for the quantities of you.
For Galenus has already said in some of his advice. Do not treat disease with medicine: do not name yourself a doctor of ill.
I have already divided this treatise into two chapters.
First chapter.
Chapter one.
Second chapter.
Chapter two.
Third chapter.
Chapter three.
But before I remember the operation with it, it is necessary that I should say the quality of its tools and the injury to itself, and where it displays it.
I therefore say that the speech on the quality of cauterization and its harm is long and subtle, knowledge and a hidden secret.
Also spoken in it by many wise men, and they differ in their opinions; and to me a little of their words is enough, fearing lengthening.
I therefore say that cauterization is universal to all constitution, which is with matter and without matter; excepting two constitutions, which are hot and dry without matter, and dry and cold without matter.
But in the constitution hot and dry with matter they differ. Some therefore say that cauterization is beneficial in it. But others have said the opposite of it, namely that cauterization is not appropriate in a sickness which is of heat and dryness; for fire's nature is hot: and it is inappropriate, as it heals the sickness of hot and dry, with hot and dry.
And he who says the opposite of it said: That by means of cauterization is a healing in all sickness of heat and dryness which happens in human bodies; for when you compare the human body, and its humours, to the constitution of fire, the human body becomes wet.
And I too say by means of his speech; for from experimentation I have found that it is sometimes.
But it is not necessary that you go into detail about that, unless who has already been tested, and exercised in the exercise of the last chapter of cauterization, and knows the diversity of human constitutions, and the disposition of sicknesses in them, and their causes, and accidents, and the space of time.
Of the rest of the constitutions there is no fear for you; and above all in sicknesses of cold and wet. For all doctors have already met on them; and they do not differ in the healing with cauterization.
And know you sons, that the cure of secret diseases by means of fire, and its goodness, is superimposed on the fire with medicine burning: because fire is simple, whose action does not reach, unless to the limb which is cauterized; and it does not hurt another member connected with it, unless there is a small injury.
But the action of medicine burning is extended to that which lengthens out of limbs: and perhaps it causes to happen to a limb illness difficult to heal, and perhaps it destroys life.
But because of the subtlety and goodness of its substance, fire does not do this, unless it flows over.
Now that has become clear to us by experience, because of the length of use and study with art, and its position on verity of things: and also excused from the length of speech.
And if it were not, because it is not permitted to my book, I would bring you the secret and mystery of fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies by its expulsion, which expulses diseases with philosophical demonstration, which was acquired from the minds of your own,
And know you sons, that they differ at times when it is to be done, and put forward the time of medicine.
And I say that the fire is to be made at all times: for, because the accident happens through time, it is buried in ease, which is drawn with the fire. And above all if the fire is for pains of necessity, strong, feasts which do not suffer delay: because they are afraid of these, that evil might happen, which is greater than little injury, when there is no transgression through time.
And do not say to your sons that they do not understand, unless the general and dull doctors: namely, that their sicknesses which are healed by the fire are not always: and they put forward this consequence, and it is not like what they say: because the fire is not, except in place of medicine, which alters color, and dries out moisture, which are causes of diseases, so that accidents happen.
Indeed, the use of cautery is superfluous above medicine due to its velocity, excellence, and power, and it may be that the disease will depart at some time after the application of the nurse, and the removal of the disease, and its power: and because it is prepared in his body from an excess of collection within him: and because it arrives at him in the acquisition of its own from food, and similar things from causes, unless the disease, in which cautery is administered.
Indeed, a slight disease in some member is superfluous due to the excess of heat and moisture, such as a toothache, because of pain, and similar things: for it is possible that this pain will not depart from him. But that is right in a few.
But the speech of the healing is again, which cautery is last medicine, it is right speech: not to that which they intend in him: for they believe that is no cure that confers with medicine, nor with any other after the occasion of cautery.
But the thing is opposite to his speech, and the intent, that cautery is last medicine, it is not, unless when we administer ways of cure in some diseases, and they do not confer such medicines: then we administer at the end of this matter cautery, and it confers: then from here it falls, that cautery is last medicine, not according to the intent which the common people and many solid doctors understand.
But the ancients said, that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron: and they did not say this, unless for the equality of gold, and its limitation in substance: and they said, that it does not make place for cauter But this is not absolutely true: for I have already tested this, and I found that it does not do so in some bodies without others.
And cautery with itself is good, and better than with iron, as they said. Indeed, when you heat the cautery of gold in fire, it is not revealed to you when heated according to the quantity that you want, because of the redness of gold: and when it is suitable for itself to cool down, and if you add ignition on it, it melts in the fire, and turns into leaves.
Why does the artisan fall from that in work: and for that reason is the cautery with iron with us quicker and closer, from the right to the work.
And I too have already arranged this chapter on the cautery, according to chapters: and I have arranged them from the head to the feet: so that they may please him who seeks it out from it.
Chapter II.
Confirm here cauterization to the lord of humidity and coldness on the head: which two are causes of salt, and multitude of flow of humors from the head to the eyes and ears, and multitude of sleep, and pain of teeth, and pain of throat: and universally all sicknesses that happen because of coldness, such as paralysis, and salting, epilepsy, and apoplexy, and similar to them of illnesses.
The mode of cauterization is that you command the sick person: so that he is discharged in the first place with a solutiory medicinal solution cleansing the head three times, or four, according to what requires the strength of the sick, and his age, and his custom.
Then command him that he should shine on his head with a soft-flecked cloth. Then make him sit between your hands square, so that he has already put his hands on his chest.
Then place the root of your hand on the root of his nose between his eyes. And whatever way your middle finger passes, mark that spot with a brand.
Then set fire to the cautery of oil: which has this form.
Then put the piece on the marked place with the forceps, pull down slowly, and you will turn it. Then quickly open your hand, and see the site.
That if you see now a quantity of hair from the skull has been detected or a quantity of sage, then quickly open your hand. And if not, repeat your hand with the iron or if it is cold with another: until you see the bones that I told you.
Then take some salt and dissolve it in water, and dip the cloth in it, and put it on the place: and leave it for three days.
Then put over the cloth dipped in butter and leave it on the place until the fire is extinguished. Then care for that with the ointment of the four-fold remedy until it heals.
I have said, that as long as a wound remains open, it will discharge pus: why is it better and more beneficial to leave it uncovered.
And some of them said, that the skin should be cauterized down to the bone: and the cauterization should be held until a certain hardness of bone is reached.
Then it should be rubbed after that which is burnt from the bone, then it should be cauterized.
And others say that it should be made to reach the last by cauterization, until it leaves an impression on the bone like a letter: or with an instrument that women put in a small vessel of water: and they calculate that vapours from this place are exhaled after a long time, and the wound remains open for a long period.
Then cauterize it until it hardens.
But I do not see these two kinds of cauterization being used by any humans at all unless it is out of fear.
Then leave it alone, for me it is better with the health of that one.
For the head is weakened by the solution of its own natural continuance; as we have witnessed in other members, and especially when the head is weak and nature infirm: and the species of Cautery, first, is more salutary and better with me, which I use; therefore let us operate upon it when it is sound.
Chapter III: On the Treatment of Head Pain.
When chronic pain occurs in the whole head, and it is prolonged in an infirm person, and he uses hyde, poultices, head-baths, oils, and applications: let us proceed to cauterization. Especially if it has been cauterized once before with the one kind of cautery which we have described, and does not benefit from it: then consider. For if the head is infirm of nature, and not weak, and there is a cold sensation: then cauterize with another kind of cautery under it little by little. Then cauterize the head itself over all its horns with his own cautery, and let not the skin be damaged, and let some quantity be scraped from the bone, which we have described. And cauterize the head itself with one kind of cautery in the nape of the neck, in the place which is called the "was"; and that is the place where a breeze blows: and wet your hand in this, and do not scrape the bone. For the infirmity is caused by the intense pain, and is far removed from the pain of the other parts of the head.
And I will call this cautery by its own name; and it is necessary that there be a kind of cautery with which the horns of the head are cauterized, and that a smaller kind of cautery is used to cauterize the middle part of the head.
Chapter IV: On the Treatment of Headache.
When pain and soda occur in part of the head, or extends to the eye, and is rinsed with medicated water, and the rest of the treatment administered, as I said in the division of diseases, and does not bring it all: then cauterization is according to two ways: either cauterization with sharp medicine burning: or with iron.
But cautery with sharp medicine burning, is, that you take one tooth of another, and bark it up, and cut off the ends from both sides. Then cut the area of pain at the time with a phlebotome on one side, until a spot under the skin is made where the pain is taken.
Then introduce it into himself under the skin, until it is hidden: then tie it over itself with a cloth constricting it, and leave it for fifteen hours, and then dissolve it, and remove another, and leave it for two days, or three: then put on top of it an oiled cloth, until the spot makes pus: then heal the pus with ointment until it heals.
And if you want to make this with some sharp medicines that I wrote about in the twelfth chapter of the book "On the Burning of Medicines".
But cautery with iron, is according to this way: Place on the fire
And it is called a Clauis: for the shape of the head is like the shape of a clauis, in which there is some curvature, and in the middle of it is some small eminence.
Then place the clauis on the spot, and keep your hand: and turn the iron slowly with speed: and let the quantity that burns be of the thickness of the skin, like a half. And move your hand so that the artery, which is below, does not burn, and an outflow of blood does not occur.
Then dip the cloth in salt water, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days: then dip the cloth in butter: then heal with ointment until it heals.
And if you see this half-headache with extreme cutting, second cautery. And because of the incision of the artery in this half-headache, not old in itself.
The method of cauterizing in an old half-headache.
When you are healing a half-headache, with this that we have said before from the treatment preceding, and because we have said in the divisions of illnesses, and the cure is not sufficient: and you see from illness that it does not suffice to him that we have said from the first cautery with medicine, or with cautery with fire, then it should be that you cause the fires of cauterium to cut, until white comes out after the signs on the spot of pain with a line, whose length is half a finger, or almost like that: and you put your hand by force, and squeeze it until you cut the artery, and reach as far as the mouth.
However, you need to cauterize the continuation of the jaw, which moves when it chews, so that it does not burn on the side, or the nerve that moves it, from which comes a spasm.
And this should be over the guard, and caution about the flow of blood of the artery that has been cut off. For there is a fear in cutting it, and above all to him who does not know that which he does, and is not learned, nor expert: and dismisses the operation with him at first.
And I come with a reminder of the regulation of the flow of blood of the accident from the artery according to its way, and in its place in this book.
That if you see from illness that this Cautery does not suffice for him, and you see the body accepting the cauterium in the middle of the head, as we have told, heal a wound, until it is healed.
And if you see this, administer the cauterium that we have said in the chapter on the extraction of the artery with a holding cauterium and two knives. Cauterization is better and more effective in this way.
The method for cauterizing ear pain.
When pain occurs in the ear due to cold, and it is treated with solvents, and the subsequent treatment as we have explained in the division, and if the pain does not go away, then cauterize with fire: and this is what is called a dot, whose form is as follows.
Then the dots with what remains after the fire has gone around the whole ear, as it heals: or around each one, if pain is simultaneous on both sides. And lengthen it slightly with the cauterizer from the root of the ear after you have marked the places with caustic: and let the amount of cautery be ten dots throughout the whole ear, and almost the same.
Then care for the place until it is healed.
The method for cauterizing in torture.
Chapter VII. On the Treatment of Torment and Wounds
Torture treatment with cauterization is only from the causes that occur due to phlegm, as we have stated in the divisions of diseases.
And distant cauterization of the type that occurs due to drying, and spasm of a nerve.
When you treat this type of torture with hyoscyamus, and caput purgatis, and gargarisms, and your treatment does not bring about a cure, then you should cauterize the sick person with three cauterizations: one near the root of the ear, and a second slightly below its opening, and a third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the weak spot. Since softening does not occur unless the visible part appears healthy.
And the shape of the cauterization is so that it cauterizes itself directly at the extreme end of the upper ear above the ear lobe, a little below: and another at the time: whose length should be according to the length of the thumb. Set your hand down with the cautery, until half the thickness of the skin is burned away.
And this is the shape of the cautery; and the kind of the knife whose form is given above: indeed it is not so fine as a little, as you see; and let the knife be a little too thick in it.
Then cure the place with this which went before: until it heals.
The mode of cauterizing in ancient apoplexia.
When a stroke of ancient apoplexia is incurred, and the cure is given with that which we have said, and your medicine does not take effect, and the patient has no fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries on all the corners of his head, and a cautery in the middle of his head, as we have said, and a cautery in the back of his head, according to what went before: and let the mode of the cautery be according to what went before.
Also cauterize with the cautery on the jaw of the stomach: and it is more last.
Then heal with that which went before.
Chapter IX.
It is necessary that he should drink a great deal of wine in the first sickness, and pills to clear the brain.
Then shave his whole head, and put upon the back of his head the syrup described in the book of syrups: and let him have it sometimes.
This is the kind of cautery: and let it be according to that order which we said there.
If then he heals by means of it, it is good. If not: then give him three cauteries in the back of his head, which go down from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the eye: and let there be a thickeness of the finger between every cautery.
Then cure the cautery with that which went before.
But if you see a wound that needs to be added, and he who accepts it is weak: then do cauterization for him in the middle. That if you add to the wound: then cauterize it on top of two horns.
Then take care of the person, until he is healed: and let the cauterization be oiled according to the form that was mentioned before.
The way of cauterizing in paralysis and softening.
Chapter 10.
It is necessary that you proceed in the purification of the head with hyoscyamus, and with what I have said.
Then wipe the head with milk: then cauterize it with cauterium in the middle of the head, and with cauterium on top of each horn of the head, and with cauterium on the rear of him, and with three cauteriums on the spine of the neck.
But if you are weak in the health of the body and many of them, and he who accepts it is weak, and the illness is strong: then cauterize it with four cauteriums on the spines of the back, and the last one with cauterium, until it is burned out from his skin, and wash your hand. Then take care of the person, until he is healed: and in this way let the cauterium be oiled.
The way of cauterizing in epilepsy.
If you see that it needs to be added: do not cauterize the epileptic one, unless it is in him whose epilepsy is from phlegm.
It is necessary that you purify his brain first with hyoscyamus, and with the rest of the cure that I have said in a division: when the sick one is great, or accepts medicines.
But if it is a boy who does not tolerate medicines: then give him gargling and mouth rinses that purify the brain, before those many days of good nutrition.
Then wipe the head of the boy: then cauterize him with one cauterium in the middle of his head, according to that which preceded in the way: and with another cauterium on the back of his head, and on each horn of his head. If the patient is weak but tolerant, then cauterize him with the cauterizations I mentioned in the case of paralysis, and with softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and spine: and let the cauterization be with olive oil according to the method that preceded.
But if the boy is sick, then place the fine cautery, according to this manner.
The way to cauterize in melancholy.
When the cause of melancholy is corrupt moisture and thick phlegm, then cauterize the patient with the cauterizations I mentioned in the case of paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of dew that leads to melancholy and the body is damp, then give him in a drink what will soften his brain, according to what preceded in division: and then shave his head, and afterwards make a torta (a kind of cake) made of linen twisted into a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the head: and the sick person, sitting square, should hold back from all sides.
Then present the liniment. And it is worthy of old butter. And heat the patient over a moderate fire, as much as his finger can bear when it is inserted into him. Then discharge the patient in the middle of his head in a circle, and let him go until he becomes cold.
Do this to the sick person once a week, with the rest of his treatment, until he is healed.
Or if you wish, cauterize him by making small spots on his body, except that you hold the hand with the cautery: but let it smell.
This kind of cauterization moistens the brain with its quality.
Then place on the patient a cloth soaked in butter, or in chicken fat.
The way to cauterize in descending water up to the eye.
CHAPTER XIII.
When you find that there is a beginning of water in the eye through the signs which I have spoken about in detail, then begin and drink an emetic with it when you see that it has cleansed his head.
And keep him away from all moisture, and let him sit in a bath, on a few days' fast.
Then command him to shave his head, and cauterize himself in the middle of his head. Then cauterize him over two timora (times) with two cauterizations, if the beginning of water has occurred in both eyes at the same time: or from one side, if the beginning of water has occurred in one eye: and cut off with the cauterization all the veins and arteries which are under the skin: and let there be long cauterizations in length (size): and prevent a flow of blood.
If you see anything of it, then cut it off immediately with whatever medicine is possible: and I will come with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries, and in their ablation, and in the caution against a flow of blood.
And when he has been cauterized in the scalp, under two bones, with two cauterizations which have been brought to an end later.
The method of cauterizing in tears (涙) on old skin.
When the tears of the eyes are old and constant, and they are on the veins, and the arteries which are on the outer side of the head: it is known that it is from excesses of cold and phlegm: then cauterize with the same cauterization which I have spoken about in the beginning of water, cauterization in the middle of the head, and two cauterizations over two timora, and two cauterizations in the scalp under two bones. And if he is able with addition, then cauterize him in all sides  (parts) with caution about the eye, at the end of the eyebrow with a small cauterization.
The method of cauterizing in the foulness of the nose.
When you are treating it, as we have said in the division, and the medicine is not effective: then approach it, and give three nights of sickbed-fumes: afterwards, shave its head, and cauterize it with middle-cauterium, with olive oil cauterium. Then cauterize it with two cauteries, two drops of the cauldron, a little above the hairline on each side of the scalp.
And guard against falling over it.
And this is the form of cauterium of Clauilis.
The method for cauterizing in softening the eyelids:
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or moisture: then cauterize the eyelid with one drop of lunar cauldron.
And if the eye is dry, cauterize it on each side of the eyelid with two drops of cauldron in all parts: and let them extend from both sides: and let the length of each drop be according to the length of the eyelid: and do not move your hand away from the cauldron, but according to the quantity that is burned, let the third eyelid.
The method for cauterizing the eyelid when the hair are turned inward and pierce the eye:
If the eye is dry, there are two ways of cauterizing it: with fire: or with burning medicine.
In cauterium, however, with fire: require that it has already been washed before it, so that it lets go of its hair, if it is made up of them, until they have grown out and become smooth. If, however, it pierces him at the corner of his eye: then squeeze the eyes together with shut, so that they do not move, until they have healed.
When, therefore, they have healed and become smooth: then place the head in your lap: and then mark on each eyelid of his eyes with encaustic, a sign that it is according to the figure of a leaf: and let the beginning of the sign be near the hair.
Then place the poultice wetted with serum on albumen or on viscous mucus over the eye.
Then heat the cautery, whose shape is this one.
Then cauterize over the figure, which you indicated slowly on multiple spots, until the skin surface, which is like a fig leaf, burns up all by itself.
And the sign of the health of your operation is this: so that if you squeeze the eyelid of the eye and remove the hair near the eye's socket, it will not be injured.
So then, pray extend your hand: and after three days send for him.
Then place over the wound a poultice made with butter until the scab falls off. Then care for the wound with ointment until it heals.
If any of the hair comes out after an hour, and the eyelid becomes soft: then repeat the cauterization on that spot, as you did at first.
But if the hair is on the lower side: then cauterize it until it moves to its natural place: and adjust so that the eye hairs do not sting.
It is as you command to an injured person: that he does not shave his hair until it grows long and even. Make in the shape of a fig leaf using a piece of paper or a cloth.
Then take a well-known soap and some unblended lime from each of the two weights of a pound or almost as much: then rinse it all together with good rinsing at the same time, and make it with haste so that it does not grow cold. Then from that take a bandage and place it over the shape you made like a fig leaf, and place the poultice on one or both eyelids. And place under the eye a poultice wetted with serum on albumen or: and let the head of the patient lie in your lap.
And place your index finger over the medicine, and press slightly on it. And thou shalt cut off his nose wheresoever he shall feel pain in his body through the medicine: for his mordica is like fire.
While the mordication he found himself was persisting, then abandon the medicine, and touch it with your finger. When the mordication has stopped, then remove the medicine, and wash the eye with water.
And consider then, if you see the eyelid rise up, as it were, when it is not contracted with fire, or with incision, is good: and if not, then repeat over the same place from the medicine, where it does not impress, and does not hurt, until your operation is complete, and the eye closes.
Then put on top of him Cotus with butter, until the skin which has become hard is eradicated. Then take care of him with the diaphoric ointment, or another one, until he is healed.
And it is necessary for you by the operation, to keep the last watch, so that nothing falls into the eye from the medicine.
That if the eyelid softens after a few days, and fights with some hair in the eye, then repeat the medicine over that place, which softens from the eyelid itself, as you did in the first instance. Then take care of him until he is healed.
And this is the form of the ointment of Myrtle.
And you should know that the eyes of men differ from one another in size and shape. Therefore according to this, your consideration should be: and may not obstruct the straightness of his sight, which is the object of this art.
The mode of cauterizing in the tear duct.
When you are treating the fistula, with what we have said regarding the divisions of diseases, and your treatment does not help: then you should cauterize it in this way:
Prescribe to the sick person that he puts his head in your lap, and holds it between his hands so that it does not move or shake with his head.
Then put on a poultice of milk of magnesia, or of slimy mucus from the head of a goat, over his eye; then apply cautery, whose form is this.
Then take a piece of twig like the feather of a crow from one end, so that it forms cautery; and if you want to go through with a knife to the other end, and if you want to stretch it like this.
However, this poultice is better for your work.
Then open the wound if it is open, and remove the pus from it, and dry it up: and if it is not open, then open it, and remove the pus from it.
Then apply cautery to it, which burns well.
And hold it with your hand near cautery from the eye, towards the nose, so that your hand does not move or shake: and put cautery into the fat of the eye, and destroy it.
If you therefore place cauterium at the beginning of your eye until it reaches the mouth, it will be good. And if not: then apply cautery once or twice, if you can stand it: and dismiss it after three days.
Then put on a poultice of butter, and treat the eye with an ointment to dry it up, until it heals.
That if after forty days it does not heal: then put on a sharp corrosive medicine over it until the tooth is revealed: and cut it out according to what comes next in its chapter.
And there is another method of cautery with a twig, which some have first said. Then go to the place of the wound, and find it: then put a small hole in it, that is, a small pipe, whose form is this. And pour into it a quantity of liquid lead, and hold the twig tightly in your hand, so that the patient does not move at all, so that it does not run away, or let the liquid lead reach his eye.
It is necessary that you put on the eye a poultice made with infusium in albumen, or in water.
lead burns the place of the fistula, and heals it with a marvellous cure.
If the fistula is healed, along with what we have said from the Canon and the Cure, then it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to open the nasal foramen, and reduce the fistula towards the course of the nose, according to how it comes in its own place.
On the method of cauterizing a fistula in the lips.
Often a crack occurs in the lip, which is called a pilus, and especially in the lips of boys.
When you are treating these cracks, according to what we have said regarding the separation of diseases, and there is no benefit from the cure, then a small fire of the kind described above should be used for cauterization.
And let it be well-prepared according to the fineness of the knife.
Then quickly place the lit fire on the crack, until the burn reaches the depth of the cracks.
Then care for it with a green balm, until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing a fistula in the mouth.
When it happens that a swelling occurs at the root of the gingival tooth, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth: then pus is produced and breaks out: then it becomes hard and the pus flows and forms a fistula: then treat it, and there is no benefit from the cure, then let fire be used for cauterization according to the quantity that enters the fistula. Then introduce the lit fire into the fistula's hole, and hold your hand so that the lit fire reaches its depth, and sears its tip: do this once, or twice.
Then care for it after that, as long as we have said regarding the curing until it is healed.
If therefore a wound is incised and heals, it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to remove the place, and to take away the rotten bone according to what comes into its head.
§ On the mode of cauterizing in gingival diseases, and on soft teeth.
When the gum is softened by moisture, and the teeth move, and does not answer to remedies: then put the injured head in your bosom.
Then take a cannula according to the shape that comes into your head, so as to put it on the tooth: and introduce the ignited cautery quickly into it: and hold your hand rather close, until the sick feels the heat of the fire coming to the root of the tooth.
And wipe your hand: then repeat the cautery from time to time, as you wish.
Then fill the sick mouth with salt water, and let it hold it for an hour: and let him spit it out.
For the tooth moves more firmly, and the softened gum is drawn up, and the corrupt moisture dries up.
§ On the mode of cauterizing in toothache.
When the pain of the teeth is felt, When the pain of the teeth is caused by cold, or coldness itself, or itchiness, and does not answer to remedies: then there are two ways of cauterization: either with butter, or with fire.
But the cautery of his is with butter, that you may take buttyrum and melt it, and bring it to the injured part in an iron vessel, or in a tool. Then take a cloth, and rub it well on the end of the tongue. Then dip the injured part into the melted butter: and put the part quickly on the tooth that pains, and hold it until it feels cold: then repeat the operation several times, until the power of the fire comes to the root of the tooth.
And if you see, immerse the thread, or roll it in cold butter and place it on the tooth that hurts; and place iron that has been heated over it, until the fire reaches deep into the cavity of the tooth.
But if cauterization with fire is intended, in order to address the canal of air or the channel of iron. And sit in his body some grossness, so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the sickly mouth.
Then hold the cauterizing instrument, of which shape is suitable: and place it on that tooth; and hold your hand, until the cauterization cools down.
Do this sometimes, because the pain will be relieved, or on the same day, or on another day.
And it should be placed in impression of the cauterizing instrument, so that the sick mouth is filled with good butter, and hold for an hour: then open it widely.
And this is the shape of the cauterizing instrument.
Cauterize with any extremity of your hand as much as possible: and this is the form of the cannula.
On the method of cauterizing in strophulus.
When strophulus are on phlegm, and from cold humors, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, and wish for quick digestion: then hold the cauterizing instrument, of which shape is as follows.
It has two open extremities, so that smoke can emerge from the other end of the cauterizing instrument: and place the heated piece on the wound once, and again, if you tolerate it, until it reaches deep into the abscess.
Which if the abscess is small: then place the cauterizing instrument according to the quantity of the abscess.
Then dismiss it for three days, and place on the tooth an infusion in cold butter, until what has been burned is removed by the coolness of the butter.
Then take care of the tooth with dental ointment, until it heals with the shape of the cannula.
To cauterize a sore throat and tighten a constricted windpipe.
When there is moisture on top of the lung canal, and especially when it is accompanied by a cold complexion, then it should be evacuated first with liquid medicines.
Then cauterize the throat itself with fire at the root of the cough in a depressed location: and be careful, so that you do not go too far with the cauterization into the cough, nor on the skin, unless there is something of it.
Then cauterize the throat itself with another cautery at the joint of the neck at the base of the spine at the end of it: and let the cautery be a claw, according to the order, which preceded it.
Then take care with this person who is before you, until he is healed.
The method of cauterizing diseases of the lung and cough:
When the cough and lung disease are caused by cold wetness, and the sick person does not have a fever or consumption, and the illness is old: then cauterize it with two cauteries above the joint in depressed locations, gently and slowly. And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts: and let the cautery be a tube, according to the order which preceded it.
And if you want your cauterization to be effective by pricking with the cautery, which is called a "Punctio," whose shape preceded it in the pricking of pain in the ears: and let there be punctures from thirty punctures almost up to the others.
Then take care with this person who is before you, until he is healed.
And now let there be a cautery with three branches: according to this form. Why is the cauterization all right when you do with it one-third of a cauterization.
Chapter XXVII.
When the dislocated head is caused by moisture, and does not return to its own place at the time of its dislocation until it has grown accustomed to returning, then it dislocates with a slight movement, as we have already mentioned, then you should reduce the dislocation first. Then he shall lie down on his sick side or on his sound side. Then you shall gently press with the thumb of your left hand, which is inside and above with the fingers, and if the dislocation occurs inside.
Then having two sharp instruments, one on each side. Whose shape is this:
Then he burns the skin until it enters the other side and the shape of the cauterization is with four cauterizations.
And when the cauterization is made with a cautery having three sharp instruments, because of which there are six small cauterizations: and the sharp instruments are according to the delicacy of the tentacle.
And this is the shape of the cautery having three sharp instruments.
And when one of these methods is added, because there are then eight cauterizations.
Then you shall put on the cautery crushed pepper with salt. Then he shall place the injured part in a peaceful state, so that it does not move at any time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is towards the top, and rarely occurs, then you should burn it on the shoulder with a blade, or with multiple small punctures.
For the joint will be fixed, and the moisture will be removed; and the sick person will heal.
The way of cauterizing the stomach:
When cold and great moisture occur in the stomach, until they have taken the stomach out from under its skin, and multiply the discharge onto it, and persistently carry out the methods of curing it, and do not give: then let the sick person lie down on his back, and extend his legs, and stretch out his hands. Then cauterize with three cauteries, one cautery under the cochlea of the chest in the quantity of one digit with a cautery of the claw, and two cauteries below from the two sides of a cautery, until the shape of the cauterizations becomes triangular. And extend between each other so that they do not join together when they make pustules.
And let the depth of the cautery be the quantity of two thirds the thickness of the skin.
And let the shape of the cauterizations be second to this form without addition: and if you want a large cautery for this cauterization in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and let there be a cautery, with which this cauterization is made, one according to the figure of the circle according to this form.
And let the stomach be cauterized by piercing it with the finger that shudders at this cautery; and it is so, as to the sign, that you make on the stomach according to the quantity, which you want with the causticum: then cauterize the same with a piercing cautery: then cure the same with the cure, which preceded until it heals.
As for the method of cauterizing by fire.
When it happens in the liver that there is pain from cold and moisture, or from a thick wind, until it emerges from its own natural exit by excess waste, and the sick person is treated with the method we have described, and does not benefit from it in him: then he should lie down on his back on a plaster on his back, and the signs be made with the causticum according to this form, and this quantity the same over Spar below from the hypocondriis, where the bed of man reaches; and let there be space between each other according to the thickness of the finger: and let the cautery be second to the length of the body straight: and do not compress your hand with a lot.
And let the quantity that is burned from the thickness of the skin be half the quantity not added to it: and let the sick person stand on his feet.
But if he is not standing, then let him lie down, for he has already extended his legs and raised his arms.
This is the method of treatment.
And you too can do this type of treatment with a knife, when you have skill and caution in the art.
And be careful not to proceed too far with the treatment, and that the skin does not become very dry all over the body, for it may cause the whole body to become dry, and reach the intestines: for the skin is there very thin, so you should know about that.
The method of treating liver stabs.
When it comes to treating a stab wound and you need to know, if this stab wound is in the liver or in its covering: then if it is in the liver, you will notice a dull pain, and there will be no sharpness of suffering; and if it is in the covering of the liver, there will be a sharp pain. And you will see that the treatment of these injuries tires out doctors.
It is therefore necessary that the sick person lie down on his own bed. Then shape the place of the wound with an encaustic, and then light the fire of the cautery to be absorbed by heat. And this is its form. And treat with a single cautery, until the skin is completely burned over, and reaches the nipple, until it comes off entirely: then take care of the treatment of the wounds, until they heal.
And it is not necessary for this cautery to be used except by one who has prolonged study in the art of medicine; and through whose hands some of these illnesses have passed with experience at times: indeed, let such dare to operate on these cases.
But I think it is better to let it go.
The method of treating pleural wounds.
The old people said that they used to treat pleurisy with a root of aristolocheia, cold and according to this method: And it is that you take from the roots of dry aristolochia long roots, a longer root that is found in it, and be as much as the thickness of the finger. Then dip it in oil: and light it on fire. Then cauterize with one cautery in him that is between the continuation of the fork with the neck, and two small cauteries under the guider little declining to the side, which is under the beard.
And two cauteries also in him that is between the fifth and sixth ribs declining to the rear slightly: and one cautery in the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach. And three cauteries from behind: one in him that is between two spatulas: and two cauteries from the sides of the chest, lower cautery that is between two spatulas.
And it is not necessary that you squeeze your hand with the cautery, but let it be in the open skin smelling.
And some ancient men have said that from men who use a cautery of iron like a ray: and they light it up, and put it inside him that is between the ribs until it reaches with it to the apostema, and comes out pus: as we have said in the apostema of the liver.
But in this piercing with the cautery there is a fear that either the weak one immediately dies, or happens to a place of fistula, which there is no cure.
§ On the way to cauterize the spleen Head XXXII.
When you cure the sickness of the spleen, with him that we have said in the division of diseases, and your cure does not confer, then the cautery is in it according to three ways, which are all right.
Of which one is that you make three cauteries, or four in a line according to the length of the spleen according to the figure of the cauteries of the liver, whose precursor is the figure.
And be between each cautery amount of thickness of the finger, or less slightly.
And let there be a standard for cautery, which we have spoken of in the liver cautery equally.
And do not compress your hand with the cautery; and let the sick person lie on his back.
And another mode of cauterization is that which has two flames, which we have spoken of in the chapter on shoulder dislocation; and wipe clean the skin, which is in the direct splenis, where the sick person lies on his left side: and let your elevation be as you wipe clean the skin according to the width of the body, so that the cautery falls according to the length of the body.
Then introduce two hot flames, until you have penetrated through the skin with them from one side; then remove the cautery: so there are four cauterizations.
And if you wish to cauterize with a cautery that has three flames.
Then take care of the cautery after you have removed it, if you wish, to emit pus for many days: for it is more beneficial than that which remains from the previous cure.
The mode of cauterizing in the Hydropsychosis.
The cautery does not fall in the Hydropsychosis unless it is properly elevated.
When you are treating the Hydropsychosis with the methods of cure which we have spoken of in the division, and there is no cure, then you should cauterize four times around the navel, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the spine, and one directly in the chest, and another directly in the stomach: and let the depth of the cautery be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then remove the cautery open, so that it emits pus over a long period of time.
And do not wipe out the sick person from the cure after the cautery with him: for it is necessary that two intentions be combined with him; and he will quickly recover with the help of God.
The shape of the wound from which the incision is made should be closed; according to what preceded in its shape; and when it is on the back, it should be closed with oil according to what preceded in its shape.
关于脚和腿的切口方式。
如果在水治疗后出现黄水，必须在脚背上进行切口，这位于耳朵和无名指之间；用油 cauterize它，不要扭动它：然后，用油治疗手，不要再次治疗。
如果黄水恢复，那么就根据这种形状进行切口。
然后，在腿的两侧各做一个切口，并根据刀片的形状进行 cauterization；在腿上沿着刀片的长度各做一个 cauterization，一个在膝盖上方，另一个在腿底部，大约在腿的中间：在臀部前后各做一个切口；不要长时间等待，否则就会从中流出水，然后照顾伤口，其余部分如上所述。
关于在腹腔溶液中 cauterization的做法：
标题：第35章
如果腹腔有冷和潮湿，直到肌肉的力量和消化能力减弱，它们位于胃和小肠中：给它治疗的做法，如果没有好转，则知道它不会痊愈；你会看到一个充满活力的病因，然后用大刀在胃上进行 cauterization，根据胃部 cauterization的前提来做；在 주변有四个细 cauterization的 navel，有一个小的 cauterization，根据前面的前提来做：以及大刀或两个刀 在下巴上方。
如果你看到充盈的湿气，以及一个容忍疾病的身体，那么在胸部和整个骨干上进行 cauterization；也许在胃旁边增加两个小的 cauterization。
For the cure is perfect in a surgeon whose skill is not at fault.
The mode of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Chapter 36.
When the hemorrhoids are old and many, or one, and they are of gross humors, cold, or corrupt moistures, and they are treated with what we have said in the division, and there is no cure: then cauterize three cauterizations on the lower spinal cord of the back under an almizcle somewhat triangular, and a cauterization under the navel almost like two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is cold, and his food is not digested, and you see his face turning pale, then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cautery, according to what has gone before: and a cautery on his spleen, and another on his liver, with a clove of garlic: and let the cautery remain open for some time: then take care of him himself until he is healed.
Chapter 37.
When you are cutting off the athel, then set fire to the cautery that is being absorbed by a beam of light. Then put the fire itself on to the athel which has been cut off: and last use your hand, until the cautery reaches the orifice of the anus, from which blood runs: do it once, or twice.
If then there are many athelums, then cauterize each one with a separate cautery according to what we have said. Then take care of them, applying the unguent to them, until they are healed.
And if you cauterize him with a large cautery on the upper part of his back, it is more final in its effect.
The mode of cauterizing a fistula in the anus.
Chapter 38.
When the sick person does not submit to the cutting and operation which we have described in its place, and shudders at it, perhaps he will be cured with a cautery.
When then a fistula happens to someone, and it becomes old, pus runs out of it, and corrupt humors. For this is worthy that you should probe it with care when you attempt it with the blade. Then know the depth of it by attempting it.
Then light a caustic fire, which is like a ray. Then insert yourself with the lit fire into the fistula and measure the amount in which it enters.
And repeatedly apply the caustic, until all the corrupt bodies are burned up, once, or twice, or three times, according to the need of your case.
And guard yourself against any burning of the flesh, if there is any such thing there, or great sores: or if the fistula opens into the body of the uterus, or into the body of the intestine, then guard yourself from all these places.
And do not attempt it, unless the fistula is in a fleshy place: and be aware, that it does not penetrate.
Then take care of the place until it heals.
But if the place is sealed, and matter is severed from it, and remains so for a long time: then know that he has already been completely healed.
And if matter is not severed from it, then know that it is penetrat-ing, or that there is a corrupt hole in its depth, or something like it: of which the memory will remain in its own place.
As for the method of applying the caustic to Renes.
When pain happens to Renes from cold, or from gross wind, and it is noon-time because of the care of the sick, then you should apply the caustic to the very top of the kidneys, with the caustic on all the kidneys with the caustic-knife, whose predecessor was the memory.
And perhaps we should apply the caustic to it a second time in the middle of the kidney. Why are there three lines drawn? Thus they will be more final in the incision.
The way to cauterize the vesica.
When there occurs in the vesica weakness and softening from cold and moisture, until it does not retain the urine, then cauterize it in the lower part of the suprasinus above the vesica, where the hair begins to grow on a comb, and cauterize with fire from the right side, and with another from the left: and let the length of that cautery be according to the length of the knuckle of the hand: and cauterize it from behind the lower spine, or two cauteries, if you can bear it: and let it be according to what came before cautery with a claw.
The way to cauterize the womb.
When there occurs in the womb cold and moisture, and it is prevented from impregnation by it, and her menstrual courses are disrupted, and her symptoms are delayed and she experiences pain at the time of intercourse, then it should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the vesica, and cautery on the lower back, or two cauteries: and let it be according to what came before cautery with a claw.
The way to cauterize the anus in dislocation.
When the moist mucus of the anus flows out to the faeces, and there is a cause for its exit from its place: and the sign of it is that it prolongs the skin over one side, when they are facing each other: and the site of dislocation is found in it.
Therefore it should be that the sick one is cauterized over the anus of himself with a similar circle of fire: after you have marked with the causticum around the anus, as it recedes: and let it fall into the middle of the circle.
If you do not have this cautery with you, then cauterize it with three cauterizations, each with a large olive oil cautery: and let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the skin everywhere.
Then take care of the wound, until it heals.
§ The way to cauterize the sciatic nerve.
When pain occurs in the leg, and there is cause for it, cold and moisture: then treat the sick with what we have said in division, and if there is no benefit from that treatment, and it becomes stagnant: then one should remove the sick person from thick humors with fetid pills, or with artificial pills, and others. Then cauterize it.
And the mode of the cautery in it is according to two ways: either with a cautery that burns with medicine, or with a cautery and fire.
A cautery with fire is according to many ways.
Of which one is that you cauterize on top of the sciatic nerve with three triangular cauteries, according to this form. And make them a good depth, or a bad one. And there should be space between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger: and let there be olive oil.
When, however, the cautery is made in the middle on top of the sciatic nerve itself. Why are there four cauteries?
And if you wish to cauterize with a circle, whose form preceded the dislocation of the sciatic nerve, one: so that the circle encompasses all the sciatica.
And burn away the thickness of the skin everywhere.
This is the way to cauterize the sciatic nerve, when pain adheres to the sciatic nerve itself, and does not extend to the hip and leg.
But if it extends to the hip and leg, then cauterize it with two cauteries on top of the hip, on the spot where the pain is, and your own cautery on the palm of the hand slightly on the side: and let there be a knife-like cautery.
And let the depth of the incision be according to the thickness of the skin.
Which if the sick one is hurting that the pain extends up to almost the toes, then cauterize himself there where he is hurting with the cautery of a point, three, or four, or many, if he desires that.
And if he is hurting the pain being under the knee towards the leg, then cauterize himself there with a one-bladed knife.
And let it be for you in all your cauterizations so that you do not finish with the cautery to this way that you burn nerves, or a large artery, and drag yourself through it on ill-will against bad injury, or contraction.
And I have now seen one and another who cauterized above the knee, and finished in the cauterization, and the leg was swollen, until the tumor had followed the foot, and had been perforate throughout, and corrupt throughout: then happened a solution of the blood, and death after that.
Which if the pain is in two parts simultaneously, cauterize each according to this way.
And some wise ones have said in the cauterization of the ankle, whose cauterization is this way. Make a similar shape of the iron, whose diameter is half a palm: and let it be at the opening according to the thickness of the finger nail, or less more: and within that third sat the fourth.
And let there be space which is between each samium according to the quantity of the knuckle of the hand: and let there be open samia on two parts: and let their height almost be a knot, or two knots: and make them handles from iron, out of place in the samiis.
Then let it be heated in fire, until it turns red, and lets off sparks: then let it be placed on a plate of the ankle lying on a sound side. Then cauterize him with three round cauteries in a line.
Then dismiss him after three days. Then bind it with plaster and resin: and dismiss the broken bone after many days. Then care for him with ointment, until he is healed.
Says Albucitas, with this kind of surgery on the son, we use a little because of the fear of his appearance: and therefore, because there are few who wait for him.
However, from good surgery he who endures it, and he remains with him in his place.
But the cautery when you are operating, so that you make two loops of thread through which the cardia of his arm or leg extends from metal or iron, long enough to reach the height of its wall: of which there are two knots, or almost the same as itself.
And there is a space which is between each amount of thickness of the finger, and they are open at the bottom and above: and let it be that they contain themselves in reverse order, according to this form.
Then place it on a bed of ash, lying ill on his healthy side. And press your hand hard on the bed of ash. Then pour between two circles of hot water, which is slightly heated with fire, and hold it for a time: and let the ill person feel the bite of it, and his burn, because he finds the bite like fire, until he is calmed down by it.
Then wash your hand with an instrument and rinse it thoroughly with sweet water: then dismiss him after three days.
And place on it butter, until the burn comes off its blackness: and dismiss it after a few days, and let the pus run out of it. It is indeed the latest in healing.
Then care for that with ointment, until he is healed.
If the pain extends to the hip or wound: let him have a platform in it which holds water, according to what you did with the ash.
And this is the method for hot water: and I have already written about it in my treatise on the correction of diseases. Take alkali and not extinct limestone of both parts one: blend them together, and put them in a new jug whose lower part has a small hole punched into it, according to the quantity that is added to it itself: and put under the bottom of the jug another jug full: and pour water from the sweet well over the alkali and limestone, which submerges both by one finger: then squeeze them with your hand firmly: and remove the jug, until the sharp water comes out on the lower part of the jug.
Then gather all that water, and pour it over another limestone: and squeeze again until it renews.
For this will then be very strong and acute, which is administered in many operations of medicine, and in the cauterization of the remaining limbs. Because it will effect the operation of fire itself.
And from medicines there are, with which they cauterize the wide, also like theriaca, and honey of almond, and lime mixed with soap, so that both are mixed.
And Galenus himself reported, telling of a man from the ancient cure, who was cured of pain in his ankle and sciatica: and he made known that it was very effective. And he said, I did not like any other cure, and I was healed from one leg, until he reported, that perhaps he had entered a hot bath, and came out already healed.
And it is, to be taken from the seed of a man: and if a seed is not found in him, let it be taken like this, fresh: and let it be massaged much with some fat, and let it be put on the ankle where the pain is, or in the hip, or in the thigh: and let it be bound up, and left for a certain number of hours, or for the quantity that he feels the sick person's sedative discomfort. Then insert it into the bath.
When the body therefore becomes damp, then introduce it into the mud. For the pain has subsided, and he is healed.
And you should know that it is not necessary to apply any medication to these medicines unless after evакуation of the body.
And Dioscorides who said that when it is cauterized with goat dung, if it has sciatic pain, it will heal: and it becomes a cautery in this way. A wool is soaked in old oil, and is placed on a deep place, which is between the thumb of the foot, and between the nail, and is closer to the nail.
Then take goat dung as it is, and set fire to it in the fire, until it becomes a coal.
Then place the coal on the wool, and leave it, until it goes out. Then repeat that. So do not stop doing that, until the sensation reaches the ankle by way of the mediation through to the heel, and the pain rests.
And this mode of cautery is called Vaccinian cauterization.
In the cauterization of Dorsal pain.
And when pain occurs in the Dorsal region from various causes, or from injury, or from excessive evakuation, and those similar ones, from a cold infusion of matter, and from moisture: and cauterization does not take place, unless in this one form alone, which is made by an infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary therefore after evakuation of the wound with foetid pills, and those similar, so that they are placed on the Dorsal region where there is pain, three lines according to its length, after having marked the line with encaustro in each line, five cauterizations, or more according to the quantity that comes from the tolerant power of the wound: and it should be done cauterization with a cautery needle.
And if you see, cauterize tribes cauterization, or four, with cauterization closed lateral, according to this form.
The method of cauterizing in incipient gangrene.
This illness often occurs in small children.
And the sign of its onset in children is this: that it occurs to him a stricture in a sighing while being lifted up, and a movement: and an inguinal swelling in the last spine of the back and the knots of it, which has already begun to emerge over the remaining spines.
So when you see this, and if you want to do it, then cauterize him with the cauterizer that is a circle according to this form.
And he takes the cauterization over all the spine equally: and if you want to cauterize around the spine with the cauterizer of two dots or three lines: and let the dots be near each other adjacently.
Then take care of the place, until it heals up with him that we have said.
And let him be careful not to administer the cauterization in the gangrene, which occurs in a spasm of a nerve.
The method of cauterizing in gout, and in joint pains.
When the pains of joint pain are caused by cold moisture that is spread to any member of the body, then when such pains occur in the feet, it is the custom of doctors to call it Podagra proper.
So if the Podagra of cold cause is cured with curing methods, and the pains are not removed, then let the cauterization remove them.
And it is, so that he is cauterized after his evacuation around the joint of the feet, with many cauterizations: and let the cauterization be of Olitive.
And if you are able to endure so that dots on the face of the foot, then do it with a dot cauterizer. If the pains ascend to the knees, or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize him over all the joints, or four from every part, with the same cautery of Clauilius.
But if you need to do this cauterization more often, then cauterize him. And don't submerge your hand with the cautery, but rather place the spittle of skin only around it.
But if the pains ascend to the knees and back: then administer what we have said from the cautery in our book.
That if the pains are only in the hands, then prick around the fire, as the two lines turn.
But if there remains any pain in the fingers, then prick them, over every knuckle a prick, and over the palm of the hand.
But if the pains ascend after days to the elbows, or shoulders, then cauterize both from every part.
And don't break the healthy course of good recovery, from the application of medicines. For if a good regimen is established and the phlegm is discharged, it will be healed with the help of God with this cautery.
On the mode of cauterization in ruptures.
When a rupture has occurred in the groin and has descended into the intestine, or to the testicle, and it is beginning to be close to the neighbor: then you should have the sick person refrain from eating in his own day. And let him use laxatives so that the feces come out of his own loins.
Then have him sit between your hands on his back: and command him to hold his breath until he walks out, or appears the buttock, or the intestine.
Then have him reduce himself with his fingers, and mark with the cautery under the rupture on the ridge of the spine, with the mark whose extremity is similar to half a circle towards the top of the body.
Then the fire cautery, whose form is this, until it becomes white, and let it emit seintillas. Then reduce the intestines, or make a incision towards its end. Then let the minister put his hand on the place so that it does not come out of the intestine: and you have already opened between the ribs and laid thereon a blanket, and one is serving with his hand under it, and another is standing above his chest who holds the hands.
Then put the fire cautery on that mark, with your hand holding the fire steady. And hold him, until you get to the end of it with him: or go round with him, if you are not able to get to the end of it at once up to the mouth.
And carefully observe whether there is an exit of the intestine at the time of your fire-burning, so that you do not burn him, and let it go through it into a sick or death, or great infection.
And know, that when you are not able to get to the mouth with the fire-burning, your operation is not effective.
And it is necessary that there is a gentle fire for infants, according to their measure.
Then care with the rest of the ointment, until it is healed.
And let the sick man lie on his back for forty days, until the wound closes.
And let him have food for the length of his healing time, which softens his gut: so that it does not come out of the intestine at a time of hunger and stool-making.
Then when he should rise after forty days, then give him a loose bandage, and let him keep it for another forty days.
And let him rest from work, and be filled with food and drink, and speak with a hoarse voice.
For when he uses this regimen, so does he heal with an entire healing.
And I shall speak of the cure of ruptures with an incision in its chapter.
When, however, the ruptures happen in the rest of the gut, and are incipient, and if they do not add to each other, then cauterize the rupture with his round fire according to its measure: and let it be what is burned from then on as third one. Then care for yourself, as we have said: and do not be drawn away.
And someone first said that in order to cauterize a rupture with a triangular cautery, according to this form.
After it is signed with the encaustrum, and a line is put which is across from the upper side of the rupture, and another line to the lower side. And place your hand in the middle with the cautery knife.
But the first cautery is easier and better.
As for the method of cauterizing in pain because of injury, or percussion.
Chapter LXXVIII.
When pain occurs in some member through injury or percussion, and that pain persists for a long time, and does not yield to treatment with medicines; then it should be cauterized with the Pointed cautery knife.
And the cautery should be of any member according to its size, and its fitness, and its weakness, and its virtue, and its twist, and the pain from it.
But if he is healed by the first cautery, then it is good. If not: then repeat over the same cautery.
Because from the custom of these pains is that they change from one member to another as it approaches that which concerns it. Why should those who follow be healed with the cautery until the sick are healed.
Chapter On the method of cauterizing for Lepra.
The lepers, however, should be cauterized with a strong cautery knife. And especially the distinguishing features of leprosy, which are produced through the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy; when then you consider the leper's eyes.
If then leprosy is incurable, and you have treated it with the same cautery as we have said in the division, and it has not sunk down, and it does not stand still, but if there is corruption throughout its entire skin: then cauterize him on his head with five cautery knives: one in the middle of his hairline, and a second below that towards his forehead at the end of his eyebrows, and two above his ears, and one behind his ear.
And lastly with the cautery your hand a little bit, until it prints in the mouth a pale impression, and dislocates from him the membranes: so that the expiration of the vapors gross from him is relieved, and the cautery also on the splen of himself, according to what preceded.
But if the Leprosy has already spread over the sick, and is manifest: then it is necessary that you should cauterize with these cauterizations which we said in the head, and cautery on the extreme end of the nose, and two cauterizes on two cheeks, and two cauterizes on the spine of the neck, and six on the spine of the back, and one great on the joints of the legs near the tails and one above him, with which he is bound: and two on the shoulders: namely, one on every shoulder, and two on the elbows, and two on the sides of the chest, and two on the tender parts of his breast: and cauterize him on every joint, from the joints of the fingers of his hands, and his feet: and cauterize him on every heel of his feet, and the knuckles of his hands.
And let you not burn them from the nerves which are above the last heel, so that they do not burn them.
And when the cautery is made with a cautery on the bone of the chest, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And you should know that the more you add cautery, it is a greater help, and gives more support.
And you should know that the sick do not feel pain in the cautery, as they feel it when they are healthy: for this reason, his body is already numbed.
And it is necessary that the cauterizes are of a proper size and length according to the limbs and joints: because they preceded according to the appearance of the tools of surgery.
Then take care of the cauterizes with flour of herbs mixed with honey, and the rest of the cure, until it heals.
To cauterize in stupor.
When a limb is stuporized and does not heal with medicines, oils, plasters, and is not cured, then cauterize the limb that is stuporized with cautery, according to which the magnitude of the limb increases, or its parity.
And let your cautery be placed in the thickness of the skin a little. Then care for the limb with ointment until it heals.
And when at some point it is cauterized during a shock that occurs to the hand, and to the foot, on the spine behind the exit of nerves that move that limb: and the stupor passes away.
But he does not presume above this, unless he is wise in anatomy of limbs, and the exit of nerves that move the body.
Head L.
When Albaras is burned and does not confer any of the techniques of medicine on it: then cauterize it a little deeper on top, according to the thickness of the skin, until the flesh is no longer visible, and its color changes and becomes different.
Then care for the limb with wheat flour, and rose oil with lentil, and leaves of arnica, and pigeon's blood, and duck blood: let one part be mixed, and let it be laid out on a cloth, and let it stick to the place until it heals.
The way to cauterize in Cancer.Caput LII.
When Cancer is beginning, and the eye must be removed from it: then cauterize the eye with a ring of fire, as it rotates.
But wise men have said, that the eye should be cauterized with a last ring of fire in its center.
But I do not know this one: because I am afraid that it will ulceraate: and I have seen it a few times.
And it is better that it be cauterized with a circle around it as we have said: or with many cauterizations.
The way to cauterize the abductor muscle.
If anyone has the abductor muscle and is delayed in maturing, or does it for the sake of doing it, or because of age, when it is old and there is little blood in it, or because of time, and the eye rushes to mature the abductor muscle, then cauterize around it with a few cauterizations by puncturing. Then let go of it. For it will rush to mature on its own.
But if you want to make a hole in it with cautery, then take this kind of fire.
And lay it down in the middle of the abductor muscle until it enters the skin: and place the cautery from it so that it remains weak, so that the course of the blood is eased.
Then take care of the eye until it heals.
The way to cauterize with fire on a corrupt mass.
Chapter IIII On cauterizing with fire on a corrupt mass.Si qu
If the corrosion is not but corruption in a walking member, and it corrupts that very member: as fire cooks dry wood.
But if you see corrosion in a place that accepts the cautery with fire, then take many pieces of the cautery, small and large, and put them on according to what suits that place where the corrosion is.
Then cauterize the mass from all parts until you eradicate the entire corrosion, and leave nothing of it within.
Then let go of the mass for three days, and place sulfur mixed with oil on the cauterized places, until all the eschar is eradicated, and all corruption.
Then take care of the eye with ointments that generate flesh.
But if you see that after three days meat is born healthy, and there is no corruption, it is good.Deinde si corrodens non est sed autem incipiens esse, sicut cum se ignis comendit ligna umida: et si uides, quod ignorans tu captiam
And if not: then apply a second cauterization to that which remains from the corrupted places.
And when the ulcer has corroded, it is sometimes treated with acute medicine. For it itself rises again at the place of cauterization.
However, when the cauterization is with fire, it is faster to heal; and I have already said that I have said cauterization with acute medicine in division: so accept that there when you are ready.
The mode of cauterizing in wounds and warts.
Chap 51.
This illness often occurs in the lower parts of the feet; and it is a gross disease, that affects the foot by filtration.
And there are two ways of cauterizing with fire, and cauterizing with hot water.
But as much as it is with fire, so that the fire-scarification is like the feather of a scythe; which let it be made from iron, in quantity according to what it contains of the nail from all parts: and make the edge slight.
Then put on itself the burned thing over the nail. Then rotate the hand with the cautery around the nail, until it reaches the depth of the nail; and let it rest for three days, until it begins to discharge pus. Then bandage the wound with salve of wild silphium, crushed with salt: and let the plaster rest on the wound at night. For it itself will be根除根除。
Then take care of the place with a soft balm of meat, until it heals.
But if they are not turned to dry, and often happen on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet; then administer to them cauterization with hot water: and it is as you would take a tube from iron, or steel, or the feather of a scythe; and put it on the nail, or let it rest. Then throw into the tube a little amount of hot water: hold the hand firmly, and rotate it slightly, so that the edge of the tube is pressed into the nail root, and may find hot water to the depth of the nail: and wait for a while on the tingling of the water.
Then let go of him, for the root is cut off with its roots.
So do to them as one does to a single man, until you are satisfied with all that they have in the body.
Then take care of them after they are cut off, along with that which generates flesh from the ointment.
In tremor, the following method should be used for cauterization:
When it happens to anyone that there is tremor from cold in a nerve, or from fever quartan, or from other causes: then it should be necessary for him to cauterize four times, or five on the spine at the back, and between every vertebrae one cautery, and in his own belly one cautery, and over his stomach one cautery.
For tremor ceases with the oil cautery, and health of disease of cold speeds up.
The following is the method of cauterization from the book of Albatar:
Head
When there are in the body of the patient pustules that are formed from corrupt dry matter.
Then it should be necessary to cauterize first when they appear, with a fine wood cautery of myrrh, whose tip is heated with fire. Or, when the root of aristea is long. Or, when the lente cautery.
And when they are cauterized with the emetic, first by their own expulsions according to this mode: and they do not increase; and they stop the excess by doing so, and heal from them.
However, it should be necessary for that to be done after evacuation with bloodletting.
The following is the method of cauterization in the flow of blood from an artery in the ulnar:
This often happens with the flow of blood from an artery that is cut in the ulnar, which is external, or at the incision of a pimple, or when cauterizing a limb, and similar things to them: and it becomes difficult to remove it.
When then it happens to any of you, then put your hand on the opening of the artery, and place your finger thereon: and squeeze it much, until the blood is stopped under your finger, and nothing goes out from it.
Then put small olive oil wicks thereon, and many at a great deal: and blow upon them, until they are well lit.
Then take from them one, or small, or great, according to the joint and place of the broken artery, and put the wick thereon, after which you remove your hand quickly: and hold the wick, until the blood is cut off.
If it is driven out with your hand from the opening of the artery, and the wick is extinguished, then take another wick quickly from the wicks which are prepared in the fire.
So do not cease to do this with one after another, until the blood is cut off.
And beware, so that you do not burn the wicks which are there, and an evil misfortune does not happen to another.
And you should know that when blood flows from an artery, then it is impossible to stop it: above all when the artery is large, unless with four fingers. Or with a wick, as we have said. Or with extraction, when it is not extracted. For when it is extracted, its ends are drawn back, and the blood is cut off. Or is bound with a strong knot of thread. Or are placed on the top of medicine for its property, whose effect is to stop the blood, and is squeezed with a cotton reeve.
Whoever performs the ligation of it with a ligature, and the constriction with a cloth, or the placing of burning things thereon, and similar things, does not give it a deep cut, except rarely.
If then it happens to anyone of this, and there is no present doctor for him, nor medicine: then let the tip of the index finger begin to be placed on the opening of the wound himself as we have said, and squeeze it much, until the blood is stopped from the upper part of the wound, and placed over the artery. And let the finger not be moved away, but above it with cold water of the cold always, until the blood is congealed, and swollen, and cut off.
And in the meantime consider in him, what he needs from the poultice, or from the medicine.
On incision, perforation, and bleeding in wounds and similar things.
We have already said in the first chapter about all disease where fire is used as a cautery and medicine, and its causes, its instruments, and forms of cauterization.
And I placed there from the vertex to the heel.
And I will proceed in this chapter as well: so that the quester of the sought thing is eased.
And before I begin that, it is necessary for you to learn, O son, that the fear mentioned in the first chapter about cauterization.
And for this it is necessary that there be more caution in it, because in the operation which is in this chapter, often drops of blood fall with it, and with those drops life is lost at the opening of the bowels, or incision on a blister, or opening of an exit, or cure of a wound, or extraction of an arrow, or incision on a stone, and those similar things: from all of which tremor and fear are associated, and falls in many of them to death.
And I warn you so that does not fall on you that hesitation, because sometimes they fall to you in this art of men with different kinds of sickness. From them indeed is one who becomes angry with his sickness, and is light-hearted towards him about death: because of the fear of it which he finds from his disease and length of evil. And when the sickness is from fear that signifies death.
He who gives you his hand, and leads you, hoping for health, but his illness is harmful.
Therefore it is not necessary that you should agree to him who comes to you from among them, whose way is such. And be on your guard with greater caution than with your greed and your avarice. And do not presuppose anything about anyone from him, unless after knowing it certainly, which proves to you that his success is praiseworthy.
And practice the cure of all your sick, through prognosis and indication from him to where the health is appropriate.
For in him there is an aid for you in acquiring fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you, O sons, with his understanding, and may he not take away from you guidance and inspiration: for it is in his hand.
And I have arranged this chapter distinguishing by chapters, according to which it precedes in the chapter of Cautery from the navel down to the feet: that you may be relieved in what you want from him, and in what you need.
On the Cure of Water which is added to the heads of boys.
Chapter I.
You should know that this sickness often happens to boys at the time of birth: or when the midwife tightens the boy's head without lightness.
And whenever it also happens for an unknown cause which is not known.
And I did not see this sickness in any other than in boys; and I wished to see all of them die, therefore for that reason I discontinued the operation in it.
And I saw among them a boy whose head was filled with water, and his head became magnificent every day, until he could not sit on himself by himself, because of the size of his head: and the moisture increased until he died.
And this moisture, or it is collected between the skin and bone: or it is collected under the bone above the soft part.
And the operation in that, if there is moisture between the skin and bone, and the wound is small, then you should find a crack in the middle of the head in width: and the length of the crack is almost like two knots, until the moisture runs.
And this is the shape of a spikelet.
But if the moisture is increased and the wound is larger, then you should put two cracks, following this form.
And if the moisture is under the bone, and the sign of it is that you see the combs of the head open from all parts: and water is depressed when you compress it with your hand towards the inside, and it does not hide from you: then you should find in the middle of the head three cracks, following this way.
And after cutting, remove all the moisture. Then tightly close the cracks with rags and powder. Then dip it in wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then dissolve the ligaments, and take care of the tendon with bandages and ointments.
And do not stop tightening the head with equability. And feed the sick with dry food of little moisture, until their member is comforted and healed.
Another way to cut is to consider where the appearance of the wound is large, and the collection of water.
Since when it is more in the back, or in the forehead, or on the right, or on the left.
So rise up with the cut where it appears to you that there is a blister and a collecting of water: and tear it apart according to what you can do.
And observe, so that you do not cut the artery, and do not happen to the flow of blood, and the sick one dies from that flow with the evacuation of moisture.
Of the incisions of arteries which are behind the ears.
Chapter 2.
When a catarrh occurs to the eyes or chest and becomes chronic and does not respond to medication, then the last resort is to make an incision in these two arteries.
It is necessary therefore when you are to incise these eyes, that the sick man should not have his head shaven. Then cover the place with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear. Then the sick man should tie his own neck with any kind of cloth. Then consider where the pulse is beating. And the places are those which are behind the ears: and they seldom occur except in some men.
Then mark with encaustic on each: and cut both with a chisel sharp on both sides, incising towards the nose: and let it be made through the breadth of the head.
And if you wish to cut the eye, introduce the chisel below the artery and make the incision upward.
And let the length of the incision be almost two fingers joined together.
For when the eye is incised, blood flows outward with the pulse, which rises frequently to the inner parts.
But if the artery does not appear to the touch, then you should measure from the ear the quantity of space of almost two fingers. Then mark with encaustic and find until the nose.
And that which should be emitted from the blood, is six minutes, and perhaps you emit more or less of it. All this depends on the quantity which appears to you from the eye and the filling of the artery.
Then consider towards the eye. Then if there remains at the nose from a sieve any residue, then cut it so that it does not occur an ulcer hot: and tighten the eye with a linen thread.
Then take care of the eye with ointment, until it is healed.
As regards the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Chapter III.
When a person has an old headache, or acute cataracts because of acrid humors and heat in the nostrils, or old soda, bitter and similar things: and he is treated with the methods of medical treatment, and this does not help him: then we have become skilled in these illnesses by removing the arteries from the nostrils, or by cauterizing them, as we have described.
And the method of operation in extracting them is, that the sick person shaves the hair which is in the nostrils, and directs it toward the apparent artery in the nostril. For this reason he shows himself to you from his pulse, and rarely hides unless in a few people, or when there is sudden coldness.
If it hides itself from you, then the sick person should tighten his head with any of his clothes: and then he should fear the place with a sharp cloth. Or he should warm the place with hot water until it appears to you in a manifest way. Then take a toothpick, which I have made slightly sharp. Then scrape with it the skin easily until you reach the artery. Then throw it in there with a hook, and draw it upward until you have drawn it out of the skin, and make it bleed from the shirts which are under it on all sides.
If, however, the artery is thin: then turn it around with the end of the hook. Then cut from that part secondarily according to the length of its ends, and turn them inward, so that no blood flow occurs. For if it does not cut, and if it does not separate, then the blood will not rise deeply.
Then make the blood flow from six to a quarter of an ounce, up to three.
For if the artery is large: then it should be tied to it in two places with double rope, strong and silk: or with animal sinew, so that it does not undergo decay before the wound is healed, and blood flow occurs.
Then incise the excess, which is between two ligaments. Do that at that time, or after another hour.
And if you want, cauterize it with a cautery until the mouth, with a surgical knife: until the ends of it are incised, and let it stand in place of that work.
And this work is better if the person has a fever, or if his skin is hot. For the cautery comes from those that remain to finish the moistures. Therefore it is better to bind up.
And after the extraction of the arteries, so that the place may be filled with old dry meat: and let they be placed on top of it feathers that have been made to drift.
And after the solution with dry medicines, which make the flesh grow, and with liniments, until it heals.
Which if meanwhile while you are working a flow of blood comes from an artery, then properly approach to cut it off with a cautery, or so that you fill up the place with gore: and clamp your hand tightly, until the blood is cut off. Which if there is nothing from them for you at present, then put your finger on the place, until the blood has congealed. And dip the place in water that gurgles with coldness, until the sharp pain subsides, and clamp it according to what is necessary.
And from that which is lighter and easier to extract the artery, it is, so that a cautery with two knives has been used: and the sharpness of the two knives is like an almond. However, they are much less sharp in sharpness than the two knives. Which if they are sharp, like the two knives, it is better that both have coldness: and do not incise the flesh with speed. So if there is some roughness in them, it is better that the heat of fire be held in them, and the flesh is cut off quickly: so that this work is better than any other, lighter, and easier.
And this is the form of the caustic.
And let there be a space between the two razors which is of the size of the thickness of the finger; after you have marked the two places with the caustice: and put on both a long time, until they come to the mouth, and fall a little in both places: that what is between the extremities may be increased. For with this caustic they do not solidify.
Chapter IV.
De cure of the course of tears, sharp, acute, from the eyes:
When the tears are persistent, and there is a course for them from the top of the head; and she does not impart to them any benefit from medicine, but the eye becomes red, and feels a pulsing in its forehead, as if it were the pulsing of ants: then the eyelids become warm through the keenness of the tears: then the ancient ones had a habit of applying this cure with the Ense (a type of caustic), and called it treatment with the Ense.
And is, as you command, for the sick to shave the hair on their forehead: Then cut in the forehead three slits equal in distance from one another according to the length of the forehead; and let the length of the slit be almost that of two fingers, and let one slit be equal in length to the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to a slight increase in length next to the movement of the nostrils, and the third from the side of the other: and take care not to cut the arteries which are on both sides: and extend your hand from the continuation of the two jaws, and let there be between each incision a space equal to that of three fingers joined together: and have ready for you a sponge fragment prepared, or many dry pieces of cloth, with which you shall squeeze out the blood.
Then insert a spit between the two sharp extremities, whose following form is: From the incision which is from the temporal side, to the second incision: and scrub with it all the skin between the two incisions, with the caustic, which is on the bone. Then also cut from the middle up to the second incision. Then also remove this nail, and introduce into the first incision again a different tool called an acute chisel from one side, soft not acute from the other side. And this is its form.
And place its acute side against the flesh attached with skin, and its soft side against the bone; and push it until it reaches the middle fissure: and cut off with it all the tools that descend from the head to the eyes: except that it continues the incision until that which appears out of the skin.
Then also make this incision in the middle fissure up to another fissure.
And when an equal quantity of blood has run out, express the places from the clotted blood.
Then also put into every fissure a black from old dough, and put on them wicks soaked in wine, oil, or vinegar. And check so that there does not occur an ecchymosis warm.
And on the third day resolve the ligaments, and administer a strong infusion with lukewarm water. Then also care for this with basilic ointment, and with the others which are treated with wounds: until it heals.
Head
¶ Of the cure of acute lacrimation and cataracts on the eyes from inside the head.
When acute, bitter, and insistent cataracts occur in someone's eyes, and their eyes appear thin, pale, and already weakened in aspect: and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hairs fall out of them, and a sharp pain is felt in the depths of the head, causing sneezing: then remove these accidents, that those materials, and the cataracts do not come, unless they are removed with many tools.
And the best cure for them is this. And it is, so that the sick person shaves his forehead. Then cut in it one fissure in the middle of the forehead, or another slightly by width, and begin with the fissure from the left time to the right time: and let the incision go down to the bone: and stretch your hand away from the cheeks, which move at mastication: until when it is detected the bone: and you shall dry all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate the two lips of the fissure with boiled leather, or with linen liniments. Then tighten from above with powder: and dip the powder in wine and oil, so that there does not occur a hot ecchymosis.
And when you dissolve it, and you see that the hot ecchymosis is about to appear: then it is necessary that you cut the bone, until there begins in it the growth of new flesh.
Then the care of the patient with the drying treatment that makes flesh grow: as if you take two parts of wheat flour, and four parts of colophony: and prepare from them an ointment, and apply it for the birth of flesh in these wounds.
Chapter VI.
Of the care that falls on gold.
All that falls on gold is of four kinds: or is mineral rock, or similar rocks, such as iron and lead; or it is a plant, such as chickpeas and beans; or it is a fluid substance, such as water and vinegar, and like things; or some kind of animal.
When therefore gold falls on a stone, or a kind of stone that does not add to it, and does not grow in gold, expose the gold to the sun: but if you see a stone, then distil into gold some of oil seasoned, or sesame seed. Then administer the extraction of it, and let it be snorted with condiments, and paint the nostrils at the approach of sneezing, when you put on around the ears twine made of linen, or wool, and extend the gold towards the upper part.
Many times this care is needed.
But if it does not exit, then administer extraction with the Gestis, that is, the subtle Pizigari: whose shape is this.
If then it exits with the Gestis, it is good.
And if not, then administer extraction of it with a small, subtle, double-pointed hook.
If then it does not exit through that, then make a tube of brass, and insert the tip of the tube in the hole of the ear much, and the dregs which are in the circumferentia of the tube with the soft brass with oil, so that there is no way of wind except the tube: then extract with your strong attraction.
Many times this care is needed. But if it does not exit in this way: then take from the helkalimbat, or from the water, that is, the gluten prepared, with which they are tied, a little piece: and put it on the tip of the radius after you have turned it slightly out of place: then insert it into the ear hole with ease, after you have dried the ear with moisture.
If then it does not exit with all that we have described, then approach to cut off, before a hot apoplexy or spasm occurs.
And the way of the incision is so that the phlebotomes take away the blood from the head first: and extract it according to the measure of its usefulness. Then make the person sit between your hands, and turn their ear upward, and find a small hole in the base of their ear where there is some fat: and let it be a lunar shape, until you reach the stone: then remove it with that, which is possible for you from the tools.
Then pursue the hole from your time with speed, and take care of this, until it heals.
What if something falling into the ear is from one grain, which grows, and swells: then administer extraction of it.
If he does not obey you at the exit, then take a rod with your hand, subtle, in this form.
And administer with it the ablation of this kind of grain that falls on the ear, and do not make it, when you think, that this grain is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, until you put many whips: then remove them with a hook, or with a subtle gesture, or with suction, as we have said, because the extraction of it is soothing.
But if the water is poured into the ear, it should be used by the sick with sneezing when he is first dressed: and he has already filled his ear with some cooked elderly water: and he lies on that ear where the water is. If then he goes out through it, it is good.
And if not: then take many stones, according to the length of a finger, fine, soft, and heat them slightly with fire, and introduce one from them into the hole of his ear: and let it come out on the foot of him on that part, and hit it with another stone against the stone in the ear. So he will not stop doing this with stones and stones, until all the water goes out.
And the water goes out so that you take it from the pot, or from the bucket, and insert its end in the ear: and light the end with fire, until it is burned a lot. Then repeat the bucket, and do this many times, until all the water goes out: and remove it with a tube according to what has been said in the stone.
In the extraction, if there is an animal inside it, if its body is small, like a flea, and similar to it, take care of it as I have said in division.
But if it is a body of great size, which seems to the sense: then administer the extraction of it with gestures and hooks: and its nature is easier for all those who hold it in the ear.
When you are extracting the hair from the ear, and you treat it with the method we spoke of in the dissection and the distillation treatise, your treatment will not be effective: then you must see the ear in the sun. If however there appears anything of the hair there, then extract that with the gesture, or with a fine hook.
If however there appears nothing of the hair there, then take a tube, which has this shape, narrowed at the bottom and widened at the top; and introduce its thin end into the ear according to the quantity that it tolerates it: then suck with it strongly. Do this repeatedly, until all the hairs come out.
If they do not obey you to the exit, then cover the tube around with ceruse, as I said on the stone.
That if they do not go out with it that I said: then administer the distillations which the ancient people experienced in the infection of the hair: and you will find it in the treatise of the distillations.
And let your flow be as it is poured oil and medicines into the ear with this instrument, which shape is depicted here. As you see do it yourself of silver or brass, narrowed below, in which sits a small hole, wide above.
Then let it be made as it drives what is in the anxiety of the tube, sitting of brass poorly done. And if you want, take the ray, and rub it with a cotton ball in the solution slowly: then pour oil, or juice, or what you want from these medicines into the tube: and let it be in the ear: then introduce the ray with the cotton wet, and throw it out with your hand slightly compressed, until it drives out oil in the anxiety of the hearing, and feels it inside: and let that which is infused into the ear already be warmed a little with fire: and let not remain anything that distills therein coldly: for medicines do not tolerate that.
Chapter Seven.
Of the cure and treatment of ear accidents.
When certain children come out of their mothers' wombs not pierced.
And also it has happened to certain men that the ear has been injured by an arrow, or flesh born in it.
And this injury to the ear, when it has occurred in a deep cavity, does not respond to cooling: and when it happens on the outside of the cavity a little bit, and results in cooling it.
That therefore which has happened in a deep ear, and which does not comprehend the aspect, is in many aspects difficult to heal.
And in that which results in cooling, you should put gold ointment on the ear, and examine it: then if you see an apparent injury, open it with a thin spatula, whose shape is this one which follows, let the end of it be where there is some small width, of which some part is sharp: and the other spatula of the two sides should be soft: so that it does not hurt the ear.
If therefore the injury is from flesh born in the ear's cavity: then hold it with a small hook, and cut it with ease of cutting, until all the flesh is taken away.
If however the injury is in a deep ear': then take a small ray of wood, and heat it slightly with fire: then put it on the ear cavity.
If therefore you feel an injury with it, that with which there is a heaviness of hearing, try to open it with ease: and carefully, so as not to hurt the ear nerves.
Then put in the ear liquid silver according to the quantity of the cavity's width, which you have made up with Egyptian ointment: let it be for a few days, until you are sure about the healing of the wound.
Or take silver and pour it into rose water, and powder it over it, and use it.
If you see an ear already suppurating: then it is necessary that you remove the pus and let it be with the poultice of another one, which you will rub in a green color that has been made with rose oil, until it is well cured: then take care of it until it is healed.
If however there is a flow of blood: then dip a sponge, or a cloth in cold water and place it on the ear; and use the remaining cure, which stops the flow of blood as described in the book on distillation.
The care for the eyelids of Al-Thabi.
Head VIII.
These are the ailments of the eyelids of the eye when they are moist and when they are dry.
Therefore it is necessary that you hold them with tenails: or with an unguentary, and rub them from their roots. Then place on the affected areas ground turpentine.
If however blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a fine lens cautery.
And cauterize them, it is better after the incision. For often they return when something remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
The care for the eyelids of the eye of the grandine.
Head IX.
Often there is something in the eyelids that becomes hardened with the strength of grandine, and for that reason it is called grandine; and it is an accumulation of moist grossness in the upper eyelid, and the lower eyelid.
Operation then on them is to consider if there is grandine coming from it which appears on the eyelid and moves to all parts, and its treatment is easy.
Then find over it a gap across its width. Then remove the skin from all parts easily until it bleeds. Then hang it on a hook and cut it off.
If you don't prepare it for you with a ligature, unless after you have penetrated the eyelid with an incision just a bit, then that will hurt the sick person a little.
Which if the wound is large: then gather it together with sutures: and care for it, until it heals.
And if it is small, then do not cause yourself any harm from it. The ointments will restore it, and make the flesh grow back.
And if the breach is large towards the inside of the ear against its surface on the inside, then turn the eyelid upside down, and secure it with a ligature: besides that, you will have to make an incision, and press it from all sides.
Which if the eyelid is made long by the incision, then that will not hurt that in any way.
Then wash the eye after the incision with salt water: and care for the place where it is growing back, until the sick person heals.
¶ Of the care of the eyelids.
Chapter 10.
Axirnath is a grease that grows on the eyelids: and it often happens that young people have it; and it hurts their eyes, and causes cataracts in the morning, and they cannot see the light of the sun, because their tears flow towards them, and because of that their eyes are always resting on their cheeks, and under their eyebrows, which are wet with the swelling: and the appearance of Axirnath is evident to the eye, and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel Axirnath between them.
And the way that it works is that the sick person puts his head in your lap.
Then take a piece of linen cloth, and prepare it with incisions, and make a circle out of it for the amount that contains Axirnath completely. Then put it on top of it, and press it with your fingers from all sides, so that Axirnath gathers in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle of his humidity with a sponge incident fissures by width, and not there is a greater fissure which makes in phlebotomy in deep.
Or it is necessary that you find the skin all, until you reach the axilla for many indeed in many dispositions proceeds the axilla from a fissure according to form of pale white.
Extract therefore her with cloth whom you infiltrated between your fingers to the outside: and you roll up your hand to right and left, until it is scattered: and carefully, do not add to the fissure, so that you do not find with a sponge to the eye, and you leave him.
But if appears to you the axilla at first of the fissure, you add to the fissure a little with ease, until it proceeds the axilla. Then extract her, as we said.
Then dip the cloth in vinegar and water, and place them on the place, and squeeze him with flour.
And there are who rub salt, and put it in the concavity of the fissure, that the remaining of his humidity is liquefied.
Then care for her, until she heal.
But if it happens in the place a boil hot, then care for him with plasters soothing, until he heal.
De the ways of Ataxmir eyes, that is, when the eyelid softens eye, where it is from he wrinkling like not should.
Chapter XI.
When they grow in the eyelids of hair added besides the course under the natural hair, and antedate: then they hurt his eye, and make happen of the ways of diseases, such as frequent tears, and softening of the eyelids, and whiteness, until it is from this cause destruction of the eye.
And Ataxmir indeed eyes are cared for according to four ways. Or by cautery with fire. Or with acute medicine, according to which is premised in the chapter of cauterization. He [the surgeon] cures Ataxmir with an incision and suturing. Or through a tube, as I will explain.
It is necessary that you put the head of the patient in your lap. Then, with your left hand, close the eyelids of the eye.
If it [the eye] has been closed, then good. And if not: insert a needle into it, where lies the hair from the lower part of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with a thread from above, and let the thread be close to the hairs themselves, that is, close to the edge of the eyelid, where the hairs grow: and pull the thread upwards with the eyelid, and close it with a ring.
Then find on the inner side of the eyelid, under the hairs added with a needle incident from the larger tear to the smaller tear.
Then pull out the thread, and place under the eyelid a small piece of cotton or cloth: then seal on top of the eyelid with caustic, which is like the figure of a leaf of Myrtle.
However, it should be made according to the size and elevation of the eyelid: for this varies greatly among men.
From them is he who wants an incision from the eyelid, according to the quantity that softens it from the eyelid.
Then find on the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the larger tear to the smaller tear, and let there be a single slit close to the natural hair, as is the thickness of a toothpick.
Then insert a hook into one or two angles of the skin. Then scrape all of it off. Then join together with a suture the two lips, with an aiguille and a thin thread: and wipe away the blood, and let adhere whatever excess hangs from the hairs above the two eyebrows, with some viscous substance if you want to make it hold: and if not, then do not worry.
Then let go of the stitch and thread for three days, or four: then take care of that.
And if it is a wound, let go of the stitch and thread, and take care of it with that, which dries up and tightens. For the eyelid should be removed at the wound's sealing and aggregation: but a better one is to come.
Such a method of treating was taught by the ancient Ataxmir.
However, there is concern about the sick person, and it is from a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And another way of Ataxmir'S is also: and that is, as a sign on the eyelid, figure like a fig-leaf, as we have related.
Then wipe the eyelid with three separate or gathered hooks, according to this form which follows, then cut off what is superfluous with small scissors, according to this form, with an equal incision.
But if you cannot hold the hook, and it does not fit: then take a sharp one in which there is a thread, and insert it into the middle of the figure: and insert another thread near the tear, and a third near the smaller tear: and gather the threads between your fingers with an equal length.
Then wipe your hand with an equal wiping: and wipe the skin over that which is marked with a dot, as we have related.
Then gather together the two lips of the wound with a stitch: and take care of it, until it heals.
But if a puss occurs at your incision, or a crack: but that puss with white, and these similar ones, sit on unguent-plasters.
And when it happens that the eyelids also turn their hair.
It is necessary, therefore, that you use on this what we have said about the incision: but the stitch is more artificial. Of the care of Ataxmir with the hooks.
It is necessary that you open your eyelids and cut the crease that is inside, as I have described. Then, using the technique of the two canes or thin sticks, their length being according to the length of the eyelids and their breadth being less than the width of a toothpick: and you have already marked out on the outside extremities where the sutures are to be made on either side.
Then join together with care each of the two sticks on top of what is in excess from the eyelid of the eye, and tightly tie the two sticks on either side with a strong knot, and leave it for a few days. For the skin is tight and will die, and will be destroyed, and will rot, until it falls away of itself.
If then there is a delay, then cut it with forceps. Then take care of it until it heals.
When then it has hardened, the eyelid is raised up: and there are no hairs that prick.
This is the form of the two canes, which you make according to this figure, and the quantity in length and breadth.
Chapter XII.
As for the raising of hairs that prick in the eye with a needle.
The operation in this is, so that you may hold a fine needle, and introduce it into the eye with a fine silk thread. Then join together the ends of it, and tie each end with a fine knot, and make the length of the threads be the width of one fingernail.
Then join together with a silk thread under the eye another fine thread, and tie the ends of it if you wish.
Then put the weak head of the patient in your lap, and bring it near to the light so that the operation may be seen: for this operation is subtle, or minute.
Then introduce the needle with the silk thread into the root of the eyelid, and let it enter rapidly into the eyelid until it comes out again by a natural hair.
Then put the bolt up to above the anus: and insert into the anus that bolt; if it is one, or two, or three, not more.
Then take your hand with it, until it comes out with the anus on the eyelid with the natural thread.
If however the anus is pulled out and does not come out with it: pull out the anus towards the bottom with the thread that you have put in it until the anus comes out from the upper opening, and close your eye: then pull out the anus and the thread as well: and take them both out, and shut your eye: and let him stay closed for two days or three, until the thread adheres to its place, and grows over the anus on the flesh.
That if the thread is short, then either fasten it to a long thread from the natural threads, and let it go with it: or let him go, until it grows longer in space, and then let him go.
Chapter XIII.
When this happens to the eye, it is called Leporina.
And this Al-Khazani is either natural or accidental.
So the accidental one is made from the congealing of blood, or from a section, or from a caustic, and like these things.
And the mode of operation in it is, that you may find that congealing, and that you separate its lips, and put in it what is between them from linen, and bind it, until it heals.
And it is not necessary that you use in it those things which dry and tighten: for if you do so, Al-Khazani will come back worse than it was: but use in it those things which soften, such as fenugreek: and dip it with water, in which there is boiled althea, linseed: and anoint it with dyaquilon oil, which melts when mixed with some of the oils: and wrap it up with linen thread, and cure it with it.
Your repository of knowledge is so that you may seek with all your intellect to prevent it from being solidified according to the form that it had in the beginning.
And this very operation which we have spoken of is nothing but a certain correction of the work of Albucasius so that it may not return to its original form.
Regarding the cure performed by Albucasius on the lower eyelid, which is a wringing or contraction upward to the right and left.
XIIII.
This which is done below by Albucasius is what is truly called Albucasius. And it is natural and also accidental.
And the accidental one is made by a wound, or a crack, or cautery, and those similar things.
And the way of this operation is that you should take a piece of thread, and touch it to the flesh, and make it penetrate from the left tear gland to the right until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh upward with a sharp instrument, and cut it with a chisel. If then the form of the eyelid returns as it should, it is good.
And if not, take a ray, and place it in the crack, and turn it with it: and find two cracks on the inner side of the eyelid, and are the ends of the two cracks from two angles of incision, until they meet and form a corner: until, when they are gathered together, is formed this figure, and it is the letter "Ω" in Greek.
Then remove that flesh by the quantity, which is the acute lower side of it, from where it follows the eyelid. Then gather together the separate parts: and sew them with a thread of wool.
Then care for them with that which we have spoken about, regarding soothing medicines, and liniments, until they are healed.
And if Albucasius has happened by a crack, or suture, or cautery: then you must find a flat crack between the lashes of the eyelids, also according to what has preceded. Then separate between the two lips with a knife, according to what we have said.
And the summary of the speech about the cure of Alxasar, when it is above or below, is that it should be prepared according to the form of Alxasar so that the operation proceeds on it.
For itself it is very diverse in form: and the prudent artist prepares his mind with whatever method is possible for him, until he sets out on the way to restore the shape to a natural state, or close by it; and himself also, when sick, according as it suits him from operation and instruments in many dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Regarding the adhesiveness of the eyelids of the eye with the conjunctiva or cornea.
So that this consolidation happens to many people so that the upper eyelid is consolidated with the whiteness of the eye and prevents itself from its natural operations.
Therefore it is necessary that you introduce the tip of the knife under the eyelid and raise it up; or that you extend it with a hook: then cut the adhesion with a very fine scalpel so that it does not cut the sharpness of the scalpel, but rather is slightly blunt; so that the sick person is not disturbed in his operation, and moves the scalpel, and injures his eye with its sharpness; and let your incision be almost like you remove this adhesion with ease, until when it returns the eyelid according to its natural form, and heals all the adhesion.
Then pour into the eye a saline water, with which to wash it: or distill it into it from an essence made from dissolved zinc with water.
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a fine knife; and put on the eye wool immersed with albin (a kind of white substance); and after three days use the essence, and with consolidants, until healed.
Regarding the incision of the nail and the eminence of the flesh of tears.
Chapter XVI.
You know that the nail is according to two ways. It is nerve-like: and it is similar to the hard sifaca, delicate. Or it is not nerve-like, similar to the frost of white snow: which when it touches iron, or gets held by a hook and pulled away, does not stick to it, and the hook does not stick to it.
And both species do not begin, unless from the larger tear, until it is slowly seen, until it has grown wet, and stops the light, and the eye's movement.
And his mode of operation in incising it is: that he may put his sick head in your lap. Then open his eyes, and spread his eyelids with your hand. Then take a little hook with a small tang, and extend it toward the top. Then take a little nail with a small tang, and extend it toward the top. Then insert a pin from the horse's hair, or a nail: and fasten the thread firmly, and double its end a little, and fix it in the middle of the nail: and pierce it with the needle, and bind the thread to the nail, and extend it toward the top: and scrape it with the hair on the side of the nail that follows the pupil, as if you were holding it with the hair until its re entry.
Then cut away the residue in the root of the lacrimal bone with a sharp chisel, or with small tweezers: and remove the natural flesh of the lacrimal bone so that its usual course is not interrupted by the incision.
And when the nail is extended with a hook alone: or with a thread, as we have said. Then scrape it with a sharp chisel, whose shape is as follows.
And be careful that the chisel does not touch the horny tunic, and that it does not tear it, or pierce the pupil.
Then, after the incision, put a little crushed salt in the eye, or make a paste from zinc, and leave it until another day. Then care for him with what is necessary until he recovers.
If the nail is not a bruise and you cannot get into it now, nor does it cause a wound, then this species of the nail, with medicines, should be cared for often, and he recovers like those who are narrated in the division.
If you must cut into it, then open the eye of the wound, and take a thin, soft, sharp awl, according to this form. And shave the nail from above with subtlety. If you see that it is getting thinner and tighter, and it presses on the nail, then distill from your own hour in the eye made of fine sand from amethyst or red powder, or salt ground: and cover the eye until another day.
Then repeat this operation on him again until he is completely cured. Unless it is against you in the eye a warm pucker: for then let go of it, and care for the pucker, until he recovers.
Then repeat the operation on him with the razor again, until he recovers.
Except for the membrane of the eye, if it hurts greatly in the eye, then suspend it with a hook, and cut off a piece from its end: and do not make the last cut, so that the course of the tears does not run.
Then distill in the tear a red powder, or made from amethyst, until he recovers.
Regarding the incisions of the alguardence, and with flesh born in the eye:
Chapter XVII.
It grows when there is red flesh in the eyes of men, whether mixed with white or lying on top of it, until it covers the pupil, or approaches or tightens the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelids outward: and it is absorbed into the rose-dawn.
And the operation on it is also that he puts his sick head in your lap. Then open his eyes, and take him by the flesh all round with a suitable hook; and hold it with one forceps, or grasp.
Then cut into his flesh first, until you have finished off all of him with a scalpel. And be careful from his eye so that you do not wound him at the operation: and let your incision be whatever it is that you incise, or with a chisel, which we have spoken of in incising the nail: or with small forceps, with which Abael is caught up, according to how his form comes after this chapter.
When your incision is complete, and all the tissue has been removed, then fill his eye with crushed salt: or distill into it red powder, and such like from his medicine corrodents: and put over his eye a cotton wisp with alumen: so that it is secure against infection from the hot air.
If there remains any of the algardenici, and the warm blood masters you, and you are afraid of a hot pustule: then discharge his eye, and tend him with care as he sits with the pustule.
Then repeat the operation on him again, until he is healed.
And likewise do with the flesh that has been added which happens to the eye of this kind.
However, it is necessary that you keep your hands off all these operations unless you are operating with a iron instrument: and do not put your hand into any of these operations, until you know, for that member is tolerant of that operation.
Collection of Sebel from the eye.
Chapter 18.
Sebaels are little red spots that grow on the eye, and prohibit the vision of his operation: and weaken the eye with the passage of the days.
Therefore it is necessary for you first, that you should consider, if the eye in which Sebel is has strength, and there is no disease in it but Sebel: then take Sebel out of his.
And it is as for you to instruct the sick person, that he may put his head in your lap.
Then hang those feet with a hook, one or two according to your prudence: and may the hook be thin of double length, according to this form, or there be two hooks gradiated in the body, according to this form.
Then with delicate forceps collect those feet with care, and wipe the blood every hour, until you have removed the nail from the eye, and it has healed: and do not leave the eye open with the tips of the spatula.
And let your surgery be in the middle of the day before the sun, and be firm in your surgery muchly: lest you fall but those feet.
And when you have rinsed out, then pour in the eye slight viridescent, or red: that its acuteness may corrode what remained of the sebum.
But if you are not able to collect all that in that hour, then patch the eye with that, that it may soothe the pain of the eye: and leave it for a few days, until the pain of it subsides: and keep it away from the heat of the sun: then repeat over it after the same manner, until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps.
De the reduction of a nose
Head
The doctors call a tube, which they put in care of the cautery, or with acute medicine burning, according to what preceded its narrative.
And if it does not heal, then there is no skill in it: unless you discover the opening of the bump at its birth, and take out all the moisture that is in it and pus, until you find the hole.
But when the hole is discovered, and you see corruption or blackness in it, then grind it with an instrument, whose form is this.
And it is called the grater of the head.
Let iron be forged into a rod, and let its head be round like an ax, that it may be pierced with the edge of a file or with fine fileing; and set the bar in place on the damaged bone site.
Then turn the bar between your fingers and press your hand lightly until you know that the corruption is now well-sharpened; and do this a few times.
Then restore the site with dried-out styptic powder.
If then the site is consolidated, and a bone comes up from within, and the wound heals together: and remains for forty days, and does not re-open or ooze out or suffer any accident: then know that it has been healed.
And if not, then there is no skill in it, except to reduce the tube into the naso-frontal passageway, following this form.
And is, that you may extract the second bone with iron, or with sharp medicine: and when you have located the bone, then take a second tweezers following this form, its end being round of shape, like an awl; and let its wood be like a pyramid extended to the tip, as you see it.
Then set it down on the bone itself: and let it be near the lacrimal bone: and extend your hand from the eye a little way. Then turn your hand with the tweezers, until it enters the bone, and feels weak: by this you will know that warmth is coming out of it when it holds its hand over its nose.
So then restore the site with dried-out styptic powder, as I have taught you.
When then a bone comes up and the site hardens: then the substance which had flowed out to the outside returns to the nose: so it is lighter over the weak point.
As for reducing the prominent eye.
Chapter 20.
When the eye goes out with all its contents, and no accident happens to the vision, nor any decrease: then you should open the eye socket: then apply a bleed; afterwards place wind-vaporous things on the socket without skin-cutting, but with suction.
Then put a lotion on the eye that is made from acacia, and aloe, and olibanum, and sarcocollus. Then tightly close the eye above with a paste of many powders.
And the quantity of powders is this: that you take soft fabrics, many and double, all four together: make them many: then put them one on top of the other, according to the amount that the eye needs: then tightly close them with a hard fabric, strong tension.
And then wash with water without scratching.
Then remove the washes, and release the eye bound during the day and night.
But if the bond becomes soft again, then it must be tightened a lot: then remove the bond after day and night, as we have said.
But if you see that the eye is already healing with the new bandage, it is good: and if not, then again apply the lotion, and the tightness, and the washes, until it heals.
Regarding the incisions of the bandages.
Chapter 21.
When a rupture has occurred in the membrane of the eye, then it is cut and removed outside the eyelids like a grain of wheat, and nourishes it into the form of a human being, and pierces it: then the operation is carried out according to what it is like: and it is like to stick it in the root of the eye from below to above.
Then insert another one where there is a double filament on the side of the lacrimal, and let it penetrate: and then remove the first one according to its position.
Then cut the spot where there is a double filament, and tie that part of the eye around the needle: and tighten it a lot.
Then remove it now, and put on the eye wool dipped in alba: and release it, until the filament drops with the eye.
Then care for the eye with it, which comforts it, until the wound heals.
And sometimes when he is drawn up from all parts with a circle of cloth until he adds an eye with great prominence.
Then pierce it with a sharp scissor so that it penetrates to the bottom of the eye, and the moist albaughin comes out and the eye sinks in and enters at once: then bind it up until it heals.
¶ Of the Treatment of Albucasis.
Head XXII.
This disease which is called Alcomnatus, is not anything but the formation of a film on the eye, similar to the water that drops down and it itself is not.
And the method of procedure in this is, that you cause the sick person to sit on a prepared chair, or directly.
Then take his head in your hands from the two parts, and move it so that you see the film coming down to the bottom of his eyes. Then plug it up so that it does not drop down, and restore the light: and let the sick person see things as they are. And if it does not drop down below, you shall know that it is water.
If the descent of the film with him is not prepared as we have said, then cause the sick person to sit between your hands. Then take a sharp scissor, and find it with him slightly above the connection of the skin film with the corneal envelope on the edge, until the film goes out.
When it has gone out then distil into the eye a hot water with which you have mixed honey: or water with which you have already boiled wheat-grass and honey: then take care of the rest of the cure, until it heals up.
Of the treatment of water that drops down into the eye, or a cascade.
Head XXIII.
We have already spoken about the types of water and what is suitable for piercing, and explaining and demonstrating: then take the same water according to the health.
Then you should cause the sick person to sit between your hands in a square position, opposite the light, near the sun: and bind his sound eye, and bind it tightly: then with your right hand close the eyelid of the eye from which the water comes, if the eye is left-eyed: or with your left hand, if the eye is right-eyed.
Then take with your right hand the almond, if the eye is on the left: or with your left hand, if the eye is on the right.
Then place the tip of the almond close to the eye's crown by its thickness in the same color as the lacrimal gland apparent: then press the almond with force: and you roll it with your hand, until it penetrates into the eye's white: and you will feel that the almond has already reached the tear-producing part.
And it should be such that the almond' s path to the depth is a measurement of space which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness: and this is the crown of the eye. You will see it in the same pupil of the eye by tears, because of the clarity of the cornea' s membrane.
Then place the almond until it is in the spot where is water. Then press the very one down with a gentle pressure after another.
If then the water immediately goes down, then at once one will see that it opens its own eye' s vision immediately, and the almond in his eye.
Then you rest a little bit. If then the water goes down again, then put it down second, except that the almond comes out.
When then does it set, and does not go up again: then remove the almond with ease: and you roll your hand slowly.
Then dissolve in water some of the clear salt from the jewel: and rinse with it the inside of the eye. Then place over all the eye' s whole patchwork, or a wool soaked in rose oil, and in the white part: and bind it with that to the healthy eye.
But we, and those who are our time' s, put over it a finely-ground powder of the white part mixed with oil.
That if the almond does not yield to you at the entry into the eye because of its hardness, since it is from a man whose eye is very hard: then you must take the "Alberid" branch, which this name has, and whose form is as follows.
So pierce it then with that same thread, and do not put your hand into the hole; and there is no need but to make a small hole for the needle.
Then introduce the almond, as we have said.
And near the end of your operation, prepare for the sick person a room in which he may lie on his back in a dark house; and prohibit all movement and coughing; and place before him food by which nature feeds him; and do not let him move his head to the right or to the left at all.
And let the ligament rest according to its position until the third day.
Then loosen it in that dark house, and test his vision; and make him see objects at a distance. Then reduce the ligament until the seventh day.
And it is not necessary that he should do this at the time of his cure, or immediately after the incision; but let him do it when he is far from home; for water quickly rises by the feverish look.
If, however, a feverish blister appears: then it is necessary that you should loosen the eye before the seventh day: and straighten out the blister with him as he sits; then restore his vision, and let him lie on his face for several days while he remains in that dark house.
Then let him go out of the house gradually, and let him turn in bed.
And know that a student is not excused from vision while lying in bed; then he should be able to hear about the operation.
And indeed one of those from Al-Ayrab has already come to us; he said that it was done in Al-Ayrab with an almond through which water rises.
But indeed no one in your country has ever done that; and it is not written in any of the ancient books: but it is possible that it is a new thing.
And these are the forms of the speculum from gold, so that it remains on top of him who knows not.
Let them be made of fine silver: and let their ends be with this same subtlety triangular, and the acute end.
Chapter XXIII.
On the treatment of birthmarks on the nose.
When and if they arise in the nose, various meats are added from which something is absorbed that resembles a scorpion with many feet: and from it is that cancerous flesh, stone-hard, of pale color: and from it is that mild flesh, not pale-colored.
Now then, if there is that kind of meat from these, which is mild and not deceitful or cancerous, you should make it sit between your hands opposite the sun, and open its nostrils, and thrust in the hook: then draw it out toward the outside, and cut off what you have grasped with a sharp, fine hook on one side, until you know that all the flesh has been taken away.
That if there is anything left of it from which its removal is not possible: then you should rasp it with a single sharp instrument with ease until nothing remains of it. If, however, your blood rules over you, or a feverish blister occurs: then oppose it with what is necessary: or if it comes from malicious blisters, then approach it with cauterization, until the blood is stopped and all flesh is taken away.
Then let it be thrown into the nose after a caustic has been cut, and water, or wine. If, however, the nose is opened, and moisture proceeds from it all the way to the palate, then you know that he has already recovered his health.
If, however, the moisture does not penetrate, as it should, then you know that within the upper bones of the nose there is a birthmark to which the knife does not reach with an incision.
Then it is necessary that you should insert a thread with some grossness, and spots of many in it: and place between each spot a quantity of a finger, or less: and let him cough up one end of the thread into the nose by radiation, or by whatever means he can after he has done so himself like azur: and take his sniff, until it reaches to the throat, and let it go out onto his tongue.
And indeed, often do these boys make like this Atomo in school: and it is a easy thing to him that will.
Then put two ends of the thread, one end that goes out on the nose, and the other remains in the nose. Then tighten the knot of the thread with the nodes that are in the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh is already tied up with the thread.
Then remove the thread: and put in the nose after the withdrawal of blood the liniment that you drank in Egyptian ointment: do this for three days, or more, until the ointment has eaten up all that remained of the flesh.
Then put at the end of the matter a plumb-tipped cannula in the nose for a few days, until it heals.
But if it requires healing that it dries up, use this.
For the lavage at the head, when oil is distilled, and other medicines in the nose, make it of silver, or of brass: that it be similar to a small lamp, opened like a shell-fish: and its channel also.
And if you want to make a closed cannula, like a reed.
And the shell of the instrument for lavage at the head be full, and closed: which has a handle at the end, so that you hold it, when you heat oil in it, or whatever fluid you use, and flowing things.
Head 25.
Frequently, a nosebleed arises at the end of the nose, and it increases, and becomes more noticeable over time, until it is a kind of black spot.
And for this, at the beginning of its appearance, you should cut it off completely. Then put over the spot, or a cautery, or a burning medicine that is placed in its place.
But if the cutting off of it is delayed until it increases, then examine it, if it be hard, red in color, dull in feeling: then do not touch it with an iron: for it is a kind of cancer.
For many a time he saw an apostema on his patient, and it happened to him that a great malignancy arose from it which touched the man himself who had it.
And if the apostema is mild, and not discolored, and you see that the incision is possible all over it, then wash the sick one, and incise himself without fear, without dread: and attend to the place with it, until it heals over.
Chapter 26 on Head.
Regarding the sewing of the nose, lips, and ears.
You should know That when it happens that the separation of the continuous cartilage is little in it, the operation is not very effective unless in certain humans.
Therefore, when it happens to someone that something of it is in need of repair, so consider, if the wound is recent with its own blood: and then add some grief to the wound with the incision: and then attend to the man, until he heals over.
And if the separation of the continuous cartilage has already separated the lips, and some part of it is whole: then it is necessary that you cut off all its apparent skin, until it bleeds. Then add the two lips with an incision, and tighten them, and sprinkle on the man dragon's blood, and ground olive, and put over the powders a fragment of plaster of Paris, and some other of consolidated plaster: and let the man be bound with two days, or three. Then solve him, and change his medicine: and let the man go, until the threads separate from themselves. Then attend to the man with ointment, until he heals over.
The way of the incision is that you add the solution of the continuous cartilage, or with the bone, as we have told you about the incision of the eye: or you add the solution with a thread, as I told you.
Chapter 27 on Head.
On the extraction of the nodules from the lips.
Many people happen to have hard-like bumps on their inner lips: and some of them are small, and some are large.
Therefore it is necessary that you close the lips, and find on all his nodes, and hang him with a hook, and throw him down from every part.
Then fill the place after incision is dried three times until the blood is cut off.
Then soak it with vinegar and treat the spot with it where there is a stasis until the wounds heal.
Head VIII.
Regarding the incision of the flesh that has grown on the gums.
Often a tooth grows out on the gums, which the ancient call abuluss.
Therefore you should hang it with a hook: or hold it with tweezers, and throw it down at the root, and let the blood run, or let the blood flow.
Then put on the place that has been dried three times, or other stinging powders, drying agents.
Which if this tooth returns after treatment, for it often returns again, then cut it a second time, and cauterize it: because it does not return after the cauterization.
Head XXIX.
Regarding teeth grinding with iron.
When they are gathered together on the surfaces of teeth from the inner and outer parts, and between the gums there are rough,鋭く、そして時には黒ずんで、黄色に変色し、まで腐敗して根元に及ぶと。
Then cut off the sick hand between your hands, and hold the head in your lap, and grind the tooth and bone that show you the tissues, and such-like sand: until there remains nothing of it, and likewise deal with blackness, yellowing, and sourness, and until they are all cleansed.
If then that which is taken out of them from the beginning of grinding is good, and if not, then cut them again on another day, a second time, and a third, until you come to the last study in it that you wish.
And know that the tooth requires various shapes of saws and many figures: in order to prepare your operation; for the saw which cuts the tooth from the lower part is different from the saw which cuts between teeth according to other shapes.
And these shapes of saws are prepared in you, which you see.
Chapter 30.
On the extraction of pain from teeth.
It is necessary that you heal the tooth from its pain with all your skill, and delay in eradicating it. For the tooth is not so soft as to be eradicated: since it is substantial; until there is no excuse for the eradication of it, then you should consider when it is weak to eradicate it, so that it hardens and is certified with you, the aching tooth.
For often the pain deceives the weak, and he thinks that it is in a tooth and eradicates it himself: then the pain does not retreat until the aching tooth is eradicated.
We have already seen this from the operation of blood-letting.
When the aching tooth is certified with you, then you should cut into the surrounding of the tooth with a spatulum, in which there is some strength, until it has healed the gums from all parts: then you should move it with your fingers, or with subtle forceps first little by little, until you dislodge it.
Then, when you have located the place in it of good size, and the head is nursed between your thighs: then you hold it well so that it does not move: then you draw out the tooth with care according to its straightness, so as not to break it.
If then it does not come out, then take some of those instruments and introduce it beneath it from all parts with ease, and try to move it, as you did at first.
If then the tooth is pierced or corroded: then you should fill it with cloth: and you should hold it with a small end of the forceps, so that it does not break at the time of your contraction on top of it with the forceps.
It is necessary that you should cut very carefully with the scarifier around the gum from all sides.
And guard your strength well so that you do not break it and a part of it remains and returns to the ill from that which causes him greater pain first.
And let them not do that which the phlebotomists do in their haste and audacity to eradicate it, except that they give it what we have said.
For they often bring about great ailments in men, of which it is more difficult to break and all the roots remain, or some of them: or to extract it with certain bones of the jaw: as we have often testified that.
Then let it be washed after its eradication with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
That if a flow of blood should come from places (for often it happens) then let them dry some of the wound, and fill it with it: and if not, cauterize it if it does not give you a wound.
The forms of the forceps are subtile that move the dens in the first place, have long extremities, short manubria, thick, so that they do not double when pressed on the tooth with them: they are as you see the thick manubrium, until when you squeeze them together, they do not bite themselves, and do not double: the short extremities, and let them be made of iron bar, or from a cast-off piece of iron, straight extremities: and in their extremities are teeth, some of which enter into some, and squeeze by constriction, firmly.
And when the extremities are made as the form of the ear that is called a ciconia, and they are strong constriction.
Chapter XXXI.
Of the eradication of teeth, and extraction of the bones of the mandible fractures.
When a tooth remains after the eradication that breaks something, then it should be placed on the cot with butter for one or two days, until it softens: and then introduce to it the claw or forceps: their extremities should be like the shape of the ear that is called a ciconia. Form a h e c i s f o r c i p u m .
The form is thus of the forceps. They are to be made as if for cutting inside out: or as aliskilfegi.
But if he does not obey you at the exit with these forceps, then you must, in order to cure, cut on the root, and peel off all the flesh, and insert the instrument which is called a small palanca, whose form is thus.
The end should be shorter by about an inch; and not to be immersed, lest it break.
But if the root comes out through that, it is good; but if not, you must use other instruments, whose forms are these.
The form of the first triangular end, in which there is some groosness.
The form of the second triangular end.
And with other instruments and tools which have preceded in the text about the teeth.
Also to be used with this instrument which is like a large hook; of the form of the second triangular end, twisted, in which there is some groosness, so that it does not break: and not to be immersed.
And you should know that there are many instruments for the teeth; and likewise other instruments are not to be counted, and the skilled artisan discovers his art by himself alone; according to which the operation is of great benefit and effect upon the disease itself.
Since from diseases are those for which the ancient instrument did not speak, due to the diversity of the forms of these.
But if the jaw is broken from the molar, or from any other bone of the mouth, then to examine carefully upon it at its own place with that which belongs to it from instruments and forceps which I have spoken of in extracting the root, and to move with the gesture, whose form is thus.
It should be some groosness gradually so that it holds fast, or it should hold with the jaw, and not escape and move, until it comes out from the jaw; and restore the place with suitable remedies for it.
If however there is decay in bone, then cut off that part which is decayed, and cure that part, until it has healed.
Chapter 32: On proper locking of teeth upon others.
Of the proper locking of teeth upon others.
When the teeth do not grow at their proper angle, they become decayed because of their shape, and above all when this happens to women and girls, that is to say, those who are teething.
It is necessary for you to consider. For if one tooth has come after another and does not fit in, nor can it be locked or trimmed: then cut off that one; and if it is joined to the next tooth, then cut it out with this instrument, whose shape it is.
It is like a small chisel, and is made of iron, and has a sharp extremity.
And your cut should be deep, and because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that it does not move another tooth.
But if it is exposed by its own trimming: then trim it with a sharp chisel made of iron, whose shape is like this.
It should all be made of iron, and its little tip should have a sharp point, like an aiguille; with which trim the tooth slowly day by day with ease, so that it does not move any other teeth and falls out: then smooth down the tip, and cut off the very end with some small razors.
That if a tooth has broken off and hurts the tongue: then it is necessary to trim that too, until its roughness has been softened, and it has become smooth: and it should be made flat, so that it does not hurt the tongue or spoil speech.
Chapter 33: On retaining teeth with gold fillings.Si dens
On retaining teeth with gold fillings.
When the anterior teeth are struck or jolted by a blow, and cannot be held tight to prevent them from falling out: and if the treatment with sharp medicine does not help them: then invent a way to hold them with gold wire, because gold turns green and decays after some time: but gold never changes.
And let it be placed in medio-ness between subtility and coarseness according to the quantity that it takes between teeth.
And the form of the retention is so that you take the string and put it between two healthy teeth: then you sew with its two ends between the teeth, whether one or more, until you reach the thread up to a healthy tooth of the other side. Then repeat the texture until you reach the part from which you started: and with your hand tighten the string with subtlety and wisdom, until it does not move completely: and let your tightening be where you tie the string, next to the roots of the teeth, so that it does not move.
Then cut off the excess ends of the string with pincers: and gather both together, and twist them together, and hide them between a healthy tooth and a tooth that has moved, so that it does not hurt the tongue: then let it be relaxed as much as it can remain strict.
If it becomes loose or gets cut, tie it with another string, and it will stand with it in this way for a long time.
And this is the form of teeth, and the figure of retention of two healthy teeth and two teeth that have moved, as you see it.
And sometimes one tooth returns, or two after falling and receding to their places, and remains as we have described, and does not do it unless the artisan is skilled, prudent, and expert.
And sometimes a bone is broken: and it becomes like the form of a tooth, and it is placed in the place from which it has come out, where it is secured and tied, as we have said: and it remains, and is held with it for a long time.
Chapter 34
Sometimes this ligament that is under the tongue is either natural, with which man is born, or accidental, from an arrow that has already been healed.
And the operation is, so that you open his jaw at the head of his throat and relieve his tongue; and then cut this nerve ligament across its width until the tongue is released from its hold.
If there is any stiffness and tension there, and if it is due to a wound that has healed; then cut into the hook and finish across its width until you cut through the ligament, and thus relieve the tension.
And be careful not to make a wound deep into the flesh, and then cut into the artery there, and let blood flow.
Then wet the incision with rose water, or vinegar, or cold water.
Then place under the tongue a piece of linen that holds the injured together all night, so that it does not solidify again.
But if there is any bleeding, then put three pieces of cloth over the wound site. But if the blood injures you, then burn the site with a wart-burn, which is suitable for it; and then care for yourself with the rest of the cure, until it heals.
Chapter XXXV
When there is a little blister under the tongue that absorbs a small wound, it prevents the tongue from its natural function: and perhaps it increases so much, that the jaw is filled up.
And the operation is, so that you open the jaw away from the sun: and observe the blister.
But if you see that the wound is of a dark color, or black, and hard, for which the injured has no feeling: then do not touch it, for it is cancer.
And if it falls to whiteness, and has moisture: then cut into it with an hook, and free it from all parts with a fine scalpel. If the blood injures you during your operation, then place three pieces of cloth over the wound, until the blood stops; and then return to your operation, until it is completely extracted.
Then clean with vinegar and salt: and care for it with due care for that one, until well.
In the cure of abscesses of the two amygdaloids.
Chapter XXXVI.
When abscesses or swelling occur in the throat, that is, glands which resemble abscesses and occur due to infection; they are called the two amygdaloids: when you consider their cure with respect to what we have said in the division, and they do not heal, then reflect.
If then the abscess is hard, red in color, few in sensation: then do not touch the abscess with iron.
And if its color is red and its root is thick: then do not touch the abscess even with iron, fearing a flow of blood, else you shall not only cease, until it has healed. And then either you shall pierce it: or it will burst of itself.
And if its color is white, round, and its root is thin: then the abscess should be opened.
And the operation on it is such, that you consider beforehand its operation, if the abscess of his own accord has become warm and quiet complete, or is about to decrease in some way: then make the sick one sit before the sun, and place his head in your lap: and open his mouth, and take hold between their hands, and rub their tongue with an instrument whose this is the form.
Let it be made of silver, or of brass, that it may be sharp like a knife.
When you press it with the instrument and an abscess appears to you on your tongue: then take hold of a hook, and fix it into the amygdala, and extract it toward the outside as much as you can, except that you tear away some of the skin.
Then cut it with an instrument whose this is the form which follows. It is joined with a twig: however its ends are curved so that the opening of each of them is on the other's acute angle: therefore care that it be of forged iron, or of pewter dipped in lead.
If, however, this instrument is not present, then cut him with a scalpel, which has this shape. But if it is acute on one side and not acute on the other.
And after you have cut one amigdal, cut the other according to this same form of cutting.
Then, after the incision, rinse the sick person with cold water or vinegar and water.
But if he bleeds, rinse him with water in which crushed cherry bark has been boiled: or leaves of myrtle and similar things from astringent; until the bleeding stops: and then take care of the patient, until he is healed.
And when, besides the two amigdalar, there arise in the throat other apophthems. Then cut them as I have said for cutting the two amygdali.
And I have already healed a woman from an apophelm that was born between her throat, which made her breath labored and weak, so that she could hardly breathe; who had closed her throat almost completely: and the woman breathed with difficulty through my mouth, and she no longer drank liquid, nor ate food, and she was close to death, if she remained for one more day, or two days.
And the apophelm had risen so much that it had thrown out two branches, until they came out of two holes of the nose.
So I hurried and fixed my scalpel in one of them. Then I pulled him out, and a large part came with it.
Then I cut it off where it was caught in the hole of the nose.
Then I did the same for him as he came out through the other hole of the nose.
Then I opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; then I fixed my scalpel in the apophemma: then cut off a part of it, and there was little blood; so I began to heal her throat, and immediately she started drinking water, and afterwards she ate food.
Therefore, I have not stopped applying pressure from that point for a long time; and the pressure spot succeeded that which I was pressing until it was too much prolonged and with that it was that.
I therefore made this spot sensible, and cauterized between the nostrils.
It therefore remained stationary from the addition; then I walked away on one side, and did not know what God did with it after me.
On the incision of the wound.
Chapter 77.
When the discharge descends to the opening, and is long, then it is called a vertical; and if it is thick and round, then it is called a wound.
When the cure is applied to it as we have said in the division, and does not bring about a cure; and you see that the pressure spot has become cool from it, and thin: then you should apply pressure to it.
And what is gathered from it is round, and has no length, and is bloody or fustian color, or black, and does not have a feeling: then you should make the wound in it. For fear is in the wound on the sick.
So you should, when you see it in the second way as I have said from whiteness, and with its length, that you set the sick person in front of the sun; and press his tongue with an instrument which has gone before: then fasten a hook on the wound, and pull it down: and cut it with one or two instruments which I have said in cutting the two nostrils.
And you should not apply pressure from it, unless that is added to the natural limit without addition.
For if you apply pressure from it too much, you wound the voice and speech.
Then after the incision use what we have said in the incision of the two nostrils: and take care of it, until it is healed.
If however the sick person shudders from the incision; then you should use your wit in cauterizing it without fear and anxiety.
The way to perform cauterization is not in it, except with sharp water; and it is as if you put the head of an nurse in your bosom. Then press his tongue with the instrument which we have said. Then take from the water which I have told you to take in the chapter on cauterization, and add it to this calcein which is not extinguished, and place it neither thick nor thin, and fill it with the concavity of this instrument, whose this is the shape.
Sit at the end of him where the medicine is applied, as is the concavity of the radius screw.
And place the instrument with the medicine on his wound: and the sick man let him lie on his side, so that he runs a salve from his mouth by the inner medicine, so that it does not go down to his throat anything, and hurts him.
Then take your hand with the medicine. And you from the first put on him a half-portion of the medicine for an hour, until you see it is now worn away, and then to lay the medicine with a tingling sensation.
And if you want to take a coat and wrap him over the end of the radius, and pour the coat with the medicine, and insert the radius with the coat into the tube from above, until it adheres to the wound.
Do this many times, until you get what you want about cauterization. Then let him go: for he will heal himself and fall after three days, or four.
That if you want to apply the medicine again, repeat it: and after cauterization wash around him a new coat with butter-milk, and clean up with it what is around him from the medicine: and then wipe with cold water.
And heal outside with broths, and inside with gargles, until he is well.
This then is the nature of surgery to be healthier than incisions and farther from fear.
And sometimes it is also used with a vaporization, since it is finer than cauterization and incision: it is used in this way. Gather up thyme and hyssop and oregano and rue and sage and chamomile and abbots' moss and similar herbs; put them all together in a bowl, add some vinegar and let it boil: and the bowl should be covered well with a lid: and there should be an opening on top of it where the instrument is inserted as follows.
Let it be made of silver or bronze: and the extreme end, in which is the needle, should enter the opening of the tube until the vapor rises towards the bore hole, until it is obscured much.
Then repeat this many times, until it has dried up.
And do not make this cure at the beginning of an apoplexy. Indeed, you should not add it during an apoplexy: and it is not appropriate to do this if the apoplexy is due to a hot cause.
But if you do not have this instrument with you, then take a pipe and fit the end with a piece of wood so that it does not burn the tube's opening: because the wood prevents the vapor from burning the opening: and this is a good cure with health.
Regarding the extraction of spines and bones from the throat.
Chapter 38. On the Extraction of Spines and Bones from
Often a bone would adhere to the throat, or a fish spine, or something else..
Then it is necessary that you should extract whatever appears to be stuck on top of what makes the throat close up, after you press the language with an instrument against the sun, and tell me what is stuck in your throat..
And whatever does not show itself to you and hides in the throat, you must make a sick man before he digests food in his stomach.. Perhaps what is annexed will come out through the vomiting..
The sick person should swallow the end of a rope made from the roots of a nettle, or the radices of a lettuce, or the end of a dry bread loaf; or he should take the end of a sea sponge that is dry and soft: and he should tie it with a thread, then he should swallow. And when he has reached the place where there are spines or an ear, and it is taken out, then he leaves.
But if he does not leave with it as I said above: then use the instrument made from lead in this form.
Let it be larger than the radius by a little, and at its end let there be a slenderness, which he may introduce into his throat with ease: and let him hold his head elevated.
And let him avoid touching his epiglottis, so that he does not cough and push the food out with it, or insert a spine, or introduce the doctor's hand.
But if the sick person inserts (it), which is better: through his knowledge of the site of the injury; and he pushes down or holds his hand up with the instrument, all of it according to the quantity prepared for him, until it leaves (his throat).
Regarding the extraction of blood:
Chapter 39.
When the leech is treated with a medicine that I mentioned in the division of healing with doctors, and does not show, then consider in the throat before the sun, or by the sun after you have pressed its tongue with an instrument that I have told you about.
But if your yawning falls on the leech, then extract it with a small hook, or with subtle gestures, without making yourself known.
If it is not possible with them: then take a tightly made tube, and insert it into the throat as far as the throat; and then insert into the tightly made tube an ignited iron with fire. Do this many times: and let the sick person refrain from drinking any water all day.
Then he should take a full treatment of cold water and open his mouth to it; and he should put his own mouth on it and not swallow anything from it; and he should moisten the water with his hand after one hour of the other. For a swallow drops its food as soon as it feels the water.
But if he does not leave with it what we have mentioned above, then he should smoke the sick one with herbs, or with a pipe instrument that we use for smoking in the case of a cough.
Do this many times, because he will drop it itself.
And the method of operation in smoking is that you take a bowl, in which are placed the seeds of violets with fire: and the bowl is covered with a lid, and the end of the instrument is placed in it: and the other end is placed in the mouth.
Then throw the smoking, and let the sick one put his mouth on the end of the tube, and shut his mouth so that it does not exit the smoking until you know that the smoke has reached the swallow. For a swallow drops immediately.
That if it does not drop, then repeat the smoking many times.
And let the sick one endure hunger, and eat salt, and other things, and not drink water.
Therefore it is necessary that he leaves with this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument from which the swallow is taken out of the throat when it drops on it itself.
It is similar to forceps, as you see: but because there is a smallness that enters into the throat. And its end is similar to an ear (a little ear), which has a sharp edge of the file: and when it embraces something, does not let it go at all.
As for the opening of the apulum and its sectioning, and care in general.
Head 40.
There are many species of apulum, many forms, according to which the memory comes to it, that is, one and the same in this book: and they are diverse in their perforation, and in the division of them from two kinds.
This is one who has a pustule that is open and contains moisture.
And the second mode is by reason of places where it occurs from the body.
Since the pustule occurs in the head, it is different from the accident of a pustule in the anus; and since the pustule occurs on tender skin, it is different from the accident of a pustule at the joints; and each has its own judgment according to operation.
And of the pustules there are which do not need to be pierced except after the blood has been hardened in them and its complement; and of these there are those which need to be pierced when they are raw and have not reached maturity according to their complement.
As for the pustules that are near joints.
Since the pustule occurs near a joint and lingers until what is in its circumference perhaps rots the ligaments or nerve of that joint: so it is the cause of closer contraction of that limb.
Or is a pustule on a main limb; for if you delay piercing it until it has healed over, it will hurt or damage that main limb or its members.
Or is near a joint, then pierce it when immature: and it is not necessary to pierce a raw pustule, which is incomplete digestion, unless it is near a joint so that it does not rot deeply and lingers towards the innermost part of the body and becomes a fistula, or remains at the edge of it where it does not heal.
You should know the time for piercing the pustule, which has healed over according to its complement: and it is during a lack of pain, a retreat of fever, a diminution of redness, pulsation, and sharpness in the head in the pustule; and other signs.
And you should make the same piercing in a lower place of the pustule, and more prominent: and let the piercing be made by cutting along the length of the body, if the pustules are in the parts of the hand and foot and places of the back and neck and nerves and arteries, and to the last in all equal places, where there is no reflection.
In those that reflect, go with the puncture to the second member.
When however there is a swelling in the fleshy parts: then it is better that you should cease from puncturing it, until its digestion has been confirmed as we have said according to the second supplement.
Since if you pierce it before that, the course of the virus extends from it, and it is full of decay and decay, and perhaps it hardens its lips, and its depth.
And some swellings are pierced according to the width of the body at necessity: or according to that in which the member lacks.
And it is necessary that you administer a small puncture in small swellings and a wide puncture in large swellings: or sections according to the similarity of the size of the swelling.
And there are swellings from which the skin must be tightened: and it happens when it has already become like a cloth, and has reached its limit, since it is already dead: such as happened to many, as it bleeds, and boils.
And among them are those that cut off a section with three angles. And among them is one which cuts like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
As an swelling of the groin.
And among them are those in which a round section is administered, and a lunar section: and similar ones from sections.
That however to which there is no head, such as are the gentle surface swellings, it is necessary that you pierce it with a superficial puncture, or just flat.
And it is necessary that when the swelling is large and has already collected a lot of fluid, and you pierce it so that it does not go well and does not pour out all the pus at once: but extract a part from it. Then apply ointment to the swelling until another day. Then extract some of the pus again.
Make it many times according to the graduation, until it comes out: especially if he is weak and feeble of virtue, or a woman pregnant, or a small boy, or an old man decrepitous: for the spirit of the animal often resolves from the animal with the exit of the fluid: and perhaps the weak one dies, and you do not perceive it.
Hence this chapter with great prudence.
And after you have made the incision, from which you make the stitches, it is necessary that you should wipe away the wound: and consider. If then the wound of the stitch is small, or is a flat section, then administer wine from linen, or old oil. And if the wound of the stitch is large, and there are many grooves of the incision, then it is necessary that you should introduce linseed into all the grooves, until they are completely closed.
And if in the wound you have cut off a part of the skin, or have circumcised it: then it is necessary that you fill it with old oil, or as when the cloth is tightly sewn together, or is rubbed with linen wool without moisture: and tighten it until the third day.
Then throw it off, and care for that with him what needs to be done from ointment, until it heals.
But if blood flows during your operation, then administer cold water and vinegar after it has been soaked up by the cloth: and place it on the spot of the flow many times.
But if the flow of blood persists, then it is necessary that you should administer a course of treatment and cure, and powders, which are mentioned in various places in our book here, and from a division.
But if it is in the season of winter, and the wound of the stitch is in many places sore: then it is necessary that you should introduce powders with wine and hot oil: and place them on the spots.
And if it is in the season of summer, and the places are fleshy: then it is necessary that you should place powders soaked in water, and oil, or with wine and oil, and all that is cold. Until the third day, as we have said, then it is necessary that you should remove the stitch, and wipe away the wound, and administer to it what is suitable for its cure, until it heals.
This is why it is necessary to know the cure of all kinds of wounds.
Accordingly, I have already said regarding all types of wounds, which one explains separately; it is the way to a specific cure.
Head.
De the separation of wounds that occur on the skin of the head.
Small wounds on the skin of the head are of two types: nodules, which are surrounded by a membrane that serves as a sack for them; like the hen's own eggs.
And there are many types of these nodules.
Of them there are some thin ones; and of them there are those that contain a similar moisture; and of them there are those that contain a similar moisture, like the friskies and the puddings; and of them are hard pebbles.
And when separated from all of them, and their extraction is not dangerous, if one does not separate the arteries from them.
And the operation of separating them is such that you experience it with a tool whose shape comes after this, which is called the "intromission", until you know what it contains.
For if that is what contains moisture, then dry it by cutting it at a second length parallel to the first: in this form.
And begin with the separation from line B to line G. But when the moisture is emptied, then remove the skin that contains it; and do not leave any of it inside.
For many times if there remains any of it.
Then dip the cloth in Egyptian ointment if it is present; and if not, in water and salt; and fill it with oil, and leave it for another day. For this corrosion of what remains from the skin will be.
Then repeat the application of Egyptian ointment to the cloth a second time, and a third time; and if you tolerate it, until you are confident that nothing remains from the skin; then, for the sake of your tolerance, continue to apply the oil with the ointment, until it is cured.
If the abscess contains a pinguid nodule, then dry it up according to this form, having the form of a cross: and cast out the hooks between the clefts of the section, and scórify it from every part: and prepare your strength in the extraction of the tunica which contains it.
But if it contradicts you with an artery, then do what I will tell you after.
And also do the same in an abscess, if it is hard, from the section, and the cure in the same way, as we have said.
And the section over a hard abscess is easier: because there is little blood and moisture. And when some of these abscesses are in the head of some men, where there is no depth of moisture.
That is: because I followed over an abscess in the head of a married woman, and found an abscess like a solid stone and hard, sharp, white, which could not be broken: and if it was hit with anything, it hurt the flesh.
But in other abscesses of accidents in the head, except these abscesses which happen in the heads of boys, and near the roots of the ears, all their sections are superficial sections.
Or put a hole in them always from their lower part, that the course of the blood may go down to the lower parts.
Then care for them with what suits them in the cure after it has been cured.
On the Section of the Strophuli in the Neck.
Chapter XLII.
These abscesses often happen in the neck, and under the chin, and in the groin: and sometimes they happen throughout the body.
And over these which happen in the neck, there is one common and many: they spring from a single spot; and all the strophuli come from within their own tunica, as we have said.
And the kinds of strophuli are many. For these are the leaves: and these are those that contain moisture; and these are the ill ones, which do not yield to cure.
For these are the leaves: and these are those that contain moisture; and these are the ill ones, which do not yield to cure.
And it is on guard, lest the venous should be incised or a nerve.
And let it not be acute and sharp, so that it does not give you your hand with an incision, or disturb the sick, and you fall, which is not necessary.
But if you cut a vein or an artery, or stops you from the operation, then put in a tree tratum, or some powder which cuts off the blood, and tighten the tree, and let it go, until the sharpness of the apostema subsides, and the tree softens: or it begins to rot.
For the blood is cut off by the treamentSo put your treament in readiness for your operation, until you are finished.
Then ask with your index finger if anything remains of the Staphyls others small: so cut them and clean them out.
That if there is a large Staph in the root: then it should not be cut by the root itselfStaph: but it should be bound with a strong double thread, and let it go until it falls on its own without doing any harm.
Then fill the tree with old cloth, which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then care for the wound.
That if a whole Staph is cut, then you should collect the lips of two wounds: and clean them immediately after you see that there is no superfluity.
If, however, you see that the excess remains because of the size of the stump, then it is necessary that you understand to cut off its root and remove it: and administer the stitch which we have spoken about.
And which of the stumps contains moisture, pierce it with a superficial puncture: so that you see the site of maturity of it: and place the puncture away from that which follows below the body, as we have said.
Then, after the puncture, apply a paste with ointment, and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of corruption, until when you see the scar already healed: then care for it with a generating ointment of flesh, until it heals.
Head 43.
§ On the section of the epiglottis from the tonsils within the throat by accident.
The ancient ones said that this section in the epiglottis, and there was no one in our land who did it: and this is a record of their words.
In those who have a syringe, the section of the epiglottis should be removed: with the exception of the following, because all the nasal passages and lung are weak.
In those, however, who have a hot swelling in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both mandibles, when there is no illness in the canal, it is necessary to use the section of the epiglottis, in order to escape from the destruction which is done by pre-condensation.
Therefore, when we wish to open the epiglottis, let us pull the epiglottis under a circle of the epiglottis, or four, with a small section across the width, in that which is between the two circles by measure, that it may be a section in the sifac, not in the cartilage: and this place is suitable for the section, because it is private from flesh, and the blood vessels are far away from it.
If the doctor is timid, then it is necessary that he should stretch the skin of the throat with a hook. Then find the skin, until it reaches the canal: stop the blood with a cloth if you see any blood in it.
Then wipe off the skin that we have described: and show on the section of the canal from the phlegm that is discharged with it when it is stopped and when the wound is cut.
And let the wound be left open for a certain time.
When therefore the fever abates at a certain hour, the two lips of the wound are to be joined together and to be joined only by the skin itself without cartilage.
Then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it heals.
Says Albucasis. Says Albucasis.The summary of the above speech, which we have described, is that when any of these wounds has begun to heal, and the sick person begins to recover from his illness and his fever declines: then he should stop bleeding and cut off part of his tissue to help him breathe more easily and save him from death. And for this reason they recommended leaving a wound open, until the evil of the disease is gone, and this evil is three days and almost four; then he should close the wound, and care for himself, until he heals.
And this which I saw with my own eyes is that a female servant took a knife and put it into her throat, and pricked it with it, and injured a part of the lung canal.
And I was called to treat her, and I found that she was breathing like a dead person.
Then I removed the wound, and I found blood flowing out from the small wound. I was therefore certain that she had not cut off her hair or combed it out: and a wind came out of the wound.
So I removed the wound and cared for him until he was well; and nothing happened to the servant except that her voice became hoarse: and she recovered after a few days.
Thus I say: for there is no fear in cutting the epiglottis.
On the sectioning of the hernia throat.
Chapter XLVIII.
This hernial mass, named the hernia throat, is a large one, of the colour of the body; and it is common in women.
And it has two causes: either it is natural or it is accidental.
Certainly there is no art in the natural one.
The accidental one, however, has two causes; one is similar to pimple-like nodes, and the other... And the other mode is similar to an aphumatous ulcer, which is formed from the nodulation of an artery. And there is a fear in it; and you should not make supposition about it with iron, unless it be small; and you should test it and investigate it with the probe. If, then, you touch the hernial mass, similar to a pimple-like node, and it is not suspended with any veins: then you should dry up the mass, as you do with the nodes; and you should take it out with it if it is contained in a sac, and if it is not, then you should examine all of it. Then care for the place with what is necessary to promote healing until it heals.
Chapter XL.
On the sectioning of nodular species.
There are many species of nodes; and I have already spoken about their classification; and it is necessary for me to describe the difference between nodes and ulceration, while making a hesitation.
I say, then, that with ulceration there is heat, and fever, and sharp pains; until an efflux of pus is suppurated, and putrefaction is completed; for then the fever and heat subside.
With node, however, there is no heat or fever or pain; and they are contained in a sac of their own, which is similar to the body colour; and it forms like beans, and resembles a sponge, and is larger or smaller.
And they are of two kinds: either thin: or dry up moisture. And the colors of moisture are many, as I have said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to treat a wound, you should first test it and ask about it in the first place with the instrument called the introducer, as its shape will be described after this.
And the method of inquiry about wounds and all kinds of nodules is that you should take this instrument and introduce it into a moist place where you have made the wound: and you will move your fingers with it little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the skin. Then put the last hand of yours according to the size of the wound.
Then remove the introducer and look at what comes out into the opening.
But if moist matter is running out, whatever its color may be: then dry up the flesh with a superficial cut, as I have said in the other wounds.
And if no moist matter is running out in the opening of the introducer, then you will know that it is fat: so dry up on top of the flesh with a cut in the shape of a cross, according to this form, as I have taught you: and suspend it with hooks, and scrub the skin from all parts easily: and guard the crucium if you can above it, that you may take out the same healthy with the nodule.
But if the crucium is broken during the operation, and it is not possible to take out the healthy one, because this often happens: then take it out in a hurry, until nothing remains of it.
For if there remains of it a little bit or much, the nodule will return according to most accounts.
For if it has wounded you, and there remains of it a little bit: then fill the wound with certain powders that are corrosive and sharp: and tighten the bandage, and put it above the wound that sits hot, and take care of the wound with the rest of the cure, until it heals.
If then there is a large knot, then cut his two lips and care for him with what is inflamed.
If on the other hand you have a fresh sore that throbs, or one that does not throbs: then make it close, and fill the space with three-day-old flesh, and leave him strict for two days, or three, until the knot putrefies, and the fever subsides: then return to cutting out what is left of the knot.
Chapter Xliv. On tools from outside the body for cutting and piercing
Regarding instruments from outside the body for cutting and piercing.
From these are the forms of intrusions, and they are of three kinds.
For out of these is the great, and out of these is the middle, and out of these is the small.
Let there be made from iron an octagon with rectangular ends that slants inwardly so as to facilitate entrance into the socket.
These are forms of piercing, and there is one kind, that is, the perforator; and they are of three kinds.
For out of these is the great, and the middle, and the small.
Let them be made to project from them apertures, and exits, and tubes, and abscesses from this one who is between them from the bones.
And others are round, and sharp, and smooth, like the large needle with which cushions are sewn on; made of citron or of copper, or of iron, or of silver.
And better ones are those made from citron.
And there are also forms of black lead, which are made to project so that through them the tubes are experienced; and they have reflections with which they gently reflect against them.
And again they are of three kinds. For out of these are the long, and from these is the medium, and from these are the short ones, according to the quantity of the width of the tube and the tightness of its constriction.
Form of the ring, and they are of many kinds.
For they are simple ones, that is to say, those in which there is one curvature: and they are of three kinds, as you see, great, medium, and small.
And from these there are blind ones: and they too are of three kinds.
And from these there are those that have two curvatures, and they too are of three kinds; and from these there are those that have three curvatures, and they too are of three kinds; and all of these are necessary in their own place.
These are the forms of Scalpel, with which they cut and ablate nodes and pustules; and they too are of three kinds: for from these there is a great one, a medium one, and a small one.
Their extremities with which they make the section are acute, other extremities are not acute: and they are not placed thus except that with them is made an incision of a wound or of a nerve; and so heal it peripsus, and find some quiet from the burn as does by excoriation of pustules.
These are made of brass, and they are similar to the "ray" with which alcohol is made; and in its upper end there is a hidden point called "spatumilis": and in it runs to the inside, and to the outside when you look at it, as you see.
The shape of the  "spatumilis" that is hidden between the fingers at the perforation of pustules; and they do not feel it when you touch it; and they are of three kinds, great, medium, and small.
The forms of the "ventosa" with which is cut off the flow of blood; and they are of three kinds, great, medium, and small.
Let them be made of brass, or of yellow bronze, round, to some extent, like what you see; and let them be of some fineness.
And let these species of   "ventosa" be with you great and small; so that you cut off blood through them when there is a need, and then when there is no medicine present with you.
Indeed, you should not use them for the ablation of blood in any part of the body, and you should not use them unless in meaty places: such as the legs, hips, upper arms, nipples, wrists, groins, and similar places, from the meaty parts, moist.
And when they are made from them small instruments like the blades of a knife, according to their shape: which cut blood when it flows from the place of phlebotomy, or at the incision of a vein, or an artery: and when they are made from them round ones according to this form.
Chapter LVII.
Regarding the care of the nipples of men which resemble the nipples of women in shape.
When the nipples of some men are inflated at the time of sleep until they resemble the nipples of women and remain hard to the touch.
Whoever wishes to avoid this should dry the nipples with a lunar section, according to this form from the line, b to the line, g. Then scrape the whole nipple. Then fill the nipple with a medicinal ointment. Then join together the two lips of the wound with a stitch, and take care of it until it heals.
If, however, the nipple turns downward and becomes soft due to its size, as happens to women: then it should be found in its two sides at the top with two sections similar to the lunar form, each containing the other at both ends, until it is joined by a larger line containing a smaller one, according to this form from the line, b to the line, g. Then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the nipple, and administer what we have said about the stitch and powders, which is necessary in the cure, until it heals.
If, however, you do not wish to cut it as is necessary to cut it due to a tremor or a flow of blood: then fill the nipple with a cotto unguentum corrosivum, and let it go, until it corroded what remained of the nipple. Then care for himself, until he is well.
For a hole in the anus that happened during the time of Thylicus.
Chapter 58.
These hemorrhoids that occur during the time of Thylicus are of a hard kind, which has a skin and from which emerge moisture.
Since, then, of those that contain moisture, it is necessary to cut with a lunule, according to this form, from the line B to the line G; and when all that is in the hemorrhoid has been drained out, then fill it with old ointment, and let it go until another day.
Then the ointment is to be removed, and care is to be taken with a suitable ointment for that, until he is well.
If the hemorrhoid is of the kind of knots of Strophulus, then cut it from above, as we have said in the section on Strophulas that are equal.
But if a nerve is stretched out in this place so as to emit pus, then administer cautery to it, according to what we have said in that which is preceded.
Chapter 59.
Chapter On the section of a hemorrhoid that occurs because of an artery and a vein.
When an artery is interrupted and the skin that is above it becomes hardened, then often a hemorrhoid occurs from there; and also because of the veins, since they also cause hemorrhoids and swelling.
And the signs by which it is known that a hemorrhoid and swelling are because of an artery and a vein, are these: for when a hemorrhoid is because of an artery, it is long and agregated in the depths of the body; and when you press the hemorrhoid with your fingers, you feel as if it were striding.
And that which is because of a vein, is round in the manifest of the body.
And the section on this hemorrhoid is an error, and above all because it is under the armpits, and in the groin, and around the neck, and in many places of the body: and it is great and very painful. Therefore, so that his care may be known by iron, and since it is also in the extremities or in the head, let it be known.
On this, therefore, that from them is from the expansion of the opening of the artery, find in the skin in length in a section. Then open the section with the hook, and then the artery: and free it from the tunics, until it is detected.
Then introduce under it a point, and let it penetrate until another side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I taught you in the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
Then pierce the place that is between the two ligaments with a hook, until all the blood that is in it comes out, and dissolve the hematoma.
Then administer the cure that generates pus, until the ligaments fall: then treat that with oils that are suitable for it, until it heals.
That if there is a hematoma due to a section of vein, then you must hold your hand so that you can take it away from the skin. Then introduce a point under the place that you held with your hand, and let it penetrate: and let it remain in it a double thread, until you bring it out from the other side. Then bind the hematoma with that good ligament: according to what I told you in the binding of a vein, from two parts with two extremities of the thread.
If, however, you are able to extract a thread, then introduce a point with another thread under the hematoma completely at the incision of the hook: press, and tighten your threads in four places.
Then dry up the hematoma from the middle, until when it comes out what is in it: then make an incision of the skin, and let go what is bound from it.
Then put on that little flock that you immersed in wine and oil. Then administer the cure, which is done with oils and oils, until it heals.
Chapter L. On the case of a torn nerve.
On the case of a torn nerve.
As happened to an artery or vein, so it happened with nerves: what has happened to them is perforation or has occurred from excessive work, and similar: and it is gray in the places of help, or calcaneal, and in all places where joints move: and it is a dull wound.
Its color is similar to the rest of the body, and it is in multiple positions without pain: and when it is pressed with shaking, it feels in it a similar stupor.
And it is not an aggregated wound in the depths of the body, but rather under the skin, and it itself moves all over, and does not emit to the front, or before, nor to the back.
So what is the case with joints, it should not be injured with iron. Perhaps, however, a contraction may happen.
But in that which is the case with the head, or forehead, find skin with a scalp. If it is then a small dull wound, then hold it with forceps, and cut it off at the root.
And if it is large, then hang it by a hook, and scrape it off: then take it away, and join the wound with stitches: and care for it, until it heals.
Chapter LI. On the section of dull wounds, which occurs
On the section of dull wounds, which occurs in the belly.
Some people often have a lot of dull wounds in their bellies, and in the rest of their bodies, which they call "Fungii," because of the similarity of these to fungi.
The root of these is fine, and their heads are thick, and their lips are wide apart. And they are some: and there is one that grows very much.
And I have already seen a man, and in his belly there were two Fungii, which were more like than other similar fungi: there was no difference between them, they were white, had small roots, and their lips were wide apart, and they ended, and moisture always ran from them.
So cut them and find in weight one as X and VIII uncia and in another almost VI uncia And the operation is to incision of them, then consider at that time, if infirmus is humid, and color thelil is albus, humidum, subtilis radicis: then incise it with a wide chisel, and let cauterization be present in you in the fire.
For often blood is discharged from him at the incision; so if blood conquers you, then cauterize it.
If you see him weak and frightened from the incision with the iron, then take a twig made from lead badly done, and bind it to him with a thistle: Whose mode we have said, and let go of him for two days.
Then add to the constriction of lead. So do not cease to constrict lead, when it presses on the lil, until it is cut off, and falls by itself without work.
But if the lil is gross at the root, then in the incision there is some fear and trembling: especially because it is in the abdomen.
But it is possible that you cut half of it. Then cauterize him so that he does not return.
Then take care of the wound, until the flesh is healed.
And do not suspect that you cut the lil which is of a dark color, has little sense, and an appetizing appearance: for it is an appetite-like cancer: and I will come with a reminder of Cancer after this.
Head XXII.
§ Of the care of a prominent umbilicus.
The برجسته umbilical can be caused by many things. Or out of the fissures of sphaig, which is over the belly: and comes out from it a little blood, or intestinal matter, according to what happens in other ruptures. Or from the blood that flows from a vein, or from an artery, according to what has been said above. From the windiness he cut off.
If however it is due to a crack and the discharge is dirty: then its colour is like that of the body and it is soft, without pain: and it appears in different places. And if it is due to the escape of the intestine, then its position is with that which we have described, more severe in different places. When you press with your fingers on the part hidden: then it returns, and perhaps there is a sound with it: and it sounds much at the entrance to the sweat, and makes a noise when working.
But if it is due to moisture, it is soft, then does not hide when pressed with your hand, and does not become tighter, and is not added to.
That if it is due to blood, then with these signs an eschar appears to turn black from the crack.
But if it is due to born flesh: then it is a grey, thick, hard eschar, and becomes solid according to the quantity of one unit.
But if it is due to windiness, then the touch of it is soft.
And the operation on it is that you must refrain from curing it if the eminence of the navel is due to blood of an artery or vein or windiness. For there is fear and horror, as I taught you in the chapter where I said that eschar is due to an artery and a vein.
That if the eminence of the navel is due to intestine or bowels: then you should order the sick person to hold his breath and stand with his body stretched out. Then the signs with cauterisation around the navel throughout the whole body. Then order him to lie on his back between your hands. Then with a smooth stone around the navel from side to side over the place you marked with cauterisation. Then extend half an eschar upwards with a large hook. Then bind him firmly around with thread, or with a silk cord; and let the knot of the binding be placed on the lateral joint.
Then open the median aperture, which is extended above the ligament. But if you have already found him captured by the ligament: then remove the alenchatous, and introduce the index finger into him, and press the intestines toward the insides of the abdomen: but if you have found the hernia, then seize it with a hook, and cut off its surplus.
But if the opposite artery is for you, or young: then bind him around very much. Then go back to your operation. And take two akosi, and introduce into them two strong threads: and introduce two akosi around the one you have made around the hernia in the shape of a cross, which you make to penetrate.
Then tighten the hernia in four places around the akosi; and if there is a need, remove the akosi, and leave the place until the extended flesh rotten: and it will fall by itself: or cut it when it becomes thin and rotten.
Then take care of him with the ointment that is needed, until he heals.
But if there is an eminence of the navel out of flesh or out of moisture: then it is necessary that you make the hernia tight, as we have said. And extract the blood, or the moisture which you have found in him.
Then take care of him with the ointment that solidifies the place.
Chapter LIII.
Of the cure for cancer.
We have already spoken in the division of the species of cancer, and as to how it is cured with medicines; and that it should be carefully guarded against cure with iron, so that it does not ulcerate: and we have spoken of the caution to be taken in curing cancer that has grown in the mother.
The old people say that sometimes cancer is in a place where it can be eradicated: such as cancer in the breasts, or in the thigh, and similar places, from the body where it can all be removed: above all when it is starting to form.
When it is very old and large, one should not approach it.
For I could not heal from it anyone; nor did I see any other come to it who had healed from it.
And the operation, when it is situated as we have said, is, so to speak, ahead of you, and sometimes it heals the sick of black cholera. Then the bloodletting itself if it is evidently filled with blood.
Then prepare the sick with preparation, in which the operation is situated.
Then throw on the cancer nails that belong to it. Then wrap him up all over with flesh, according to the examination, until there remains none of his roots; and let the blood flow, and do not tear him off quickly, except that you express the places, and wipe away the gross blood with your hand, or with whatever means is possible there.
But if the opposite happens to you and the blood flows from the incision of an artery or vein: then cauterize the vein until the blood stops flowing. Then take care of the man with the rest of the cure, until he is healed.
§ On the cure of hidropsys.
Chapter LIIII. We have already spoken at length about the division of hydropsys into its species, and how water is aggregated; also regarding the signs of each species, and the cure with medicines.
And those who are cured with iron, there is only one kind of it; and it does not approach the iron of the temporal lobe: nor does it penetrate deep into the hyposarcomatous kind; for that is deadly.
When you have already treated this species of hydropsys with medicines and it has not responded to your treatment: then consider. For if the sick person already has weakness, or there is another kind of weakness besides hydropsys; such as if he has a cough, or diarrhea and the like: then be careful not to treat him with iron: for that is a fear.
If, however, you see a person with a vibrant virtue, and there is no illness other than hydrops: nor is he a child, nor an old man; then the mode of operation in him is that you lift up the sick man between your hands, and the minister behind him squeezes his hand, driving water to the lower part of the ribcage.
Then take a spathula-like spatula, shaped like this. Set two acute parts, long, the acute end like a Spathula. However, in him sits something that gradually widens, so that you do not intrude upon the intestine during the operation, and you let go of it.
Then consider. For if it is a generation of hydrops from the part of the intestines, then you should extend it with a section three fingers wide from the navel directly to the lower side below the ribcage.
But if it is a generation of hydrops due to liver illness: then your section should be three fingers wide from the navel on the left side.
And if the generation of it is due to the spleen: then your section should be on the right side: and it should not also be that the section is on the side where you want to place the sick person, so that fluids do not flow to that weak spot.
Then pierce with an instrument all the skin. Then insert into that section and squeeze with the Spathula, as if you were scraping it out: and let the quantity scraped be the size of a nail, or around that.
Then pierce the skin, until the Spathula reaches the dry spot: and there is a place of water. Then pull out the person, and insert into the opening an instrument, which has this shape. And it is like a tube: it is made of silver, or brass, or gold, smooth, round: and in its lower part there is a small opening, and on its sides there are three openings, two from one side, and one from the other side: and the end of it should be incised, following the pattern of a calamus, as you see: at its upper end there is an armlet.
When the instrument has reached the water, then at once it descended on the instrument; therefore I drain off from the water in an average quantity of time.
For if you should drain off from it more than is proper, in an hour perhaps the sick one will die through the resolution of his animal spirit; or else something happens to him that approaches death.
But drain off from it according to the strength of it, and according to what you indicate to you about the dispositions of sickness out of the pulse of its strength, and out of its goodness.
Then take out the instrument, and retain the water.
That is, because it is retained immediately by the skin which retains the hole that is on the Sifac: of which I told you, that you do it according to that mode.
Then go around the instrument with the other hand, if you see the sick one bearing up to it; and take out also from the water an average quantity.
Make it on days a few without fear, and guard yourself from error: until there is not left in the water except a little.
But if you are over the sick one, and let go a lot of water: then guard the sick one with a grave in warm sand, and with a sweat a lot in a bath and in the sun, and wait for hunger: and guard the sick one with dried-up doctors, until he is healed: and cauterize over the stomach, and the spar, and the spleen, after having drained off the water: following which I told you to do beforehand.
Of the care of infants that are born in places of their urinary channels not pierced.
Head 51.
When someone comes out from the womb of his mother, and whose head is not pierced, or has a hole that is tight, or is not in its place:
It is necessary therefore to help with the piercing of it immediately when it is born with a delicate thread and gently, according to this form:
Then put into the hole a tiny clamp made of lead, and tie it up: and hold it for three days, or four.
So when he wants to urinate, let him move away and stand up. Then reduce the wound.
And if you don't put lead on it, then it is possible that the urine which has run over the place does not allow the wound to close up.
But he who has a tight anus, it is cured with lead as we have said, after many days, until it broadens up.
But those in whom the anus is not in its place are injured. That is, because from those who are born, the anus is at the end of the penis: so that he cannot urinate in front, until he raises his penis by hand to the top. And there is no generation in him, therefore semen cannot reach the womb according to its straightness: and it is a foul disease very much.
And the mode of working in that is, that he should lie down on his back. Then extend his penis with your left hand by a sharp extension: like the cut of a calamus, or like you cut something, so that it comes to resemble the head of the penis: and let the anus fall into the middle as is required.
And cause yourself not to have a flow of blood during your operation. Because that often happens. So he went with me when he cut off the blood, and looked after the wound until it healed up.
Regarding the wounds that occur on the foreskin and the head of the penis, and discoloration, and adherentium.
Head
These wounds often occur on the penis, and there is an abundance of foul flesh.
And from it another kind of evil is malicious, and another not malicious.
So you should hang the not malicious one with a small hook, and cut it off until you have removed all of it. Then put on it an egg- yolk in Egyptian ointment. Then care for the wound afterwards with the oil of daphine, until it is healed.
That if the albather be maligne and of a foul colour, then thou shalt administer to it after the incision a cautery and a rasion of itself.
If, however, the albather be caught in the foreskin and is not circumcised, and a part of it be within the foreskin and a part without: then thou shalt remove the albather that is within first, until when it hath been hardened, then care for the outside: for if thou hast cared for it at once, the foreskin is not secured save that it may be rent.
And also there come into being on the testicles, and on the foreskin a blackness and corruption. Then thou shalt take care of all that which hath been darkened, and that which would corrupt, or hath already been corrupted:
Then put on a line over the wound after the said honey which is now bruised with flour of the coarse grater and herb of three-fold sifting.
Then care for it with the rest of the cure, until it is healed.
If, however, there come a flowing of blood: then administer to it a cautery with lunar cautery, after this form.
For the cautery is of two dispositions at once, namely towards a flowing of blood, and towards a corruption when it is healed up:
That if it hath been corroded the head of the penis, and hath destroyed all in an hour: then thou shalt put into the meatus a canula of lead, that it may be vomit upon it.
But to the adhesion of the foreskin with the head of the penis, and this kind of adhesion doth not come about, unless in that whose foreskin is sound, and is not required over it circumcision: and when soever comes about an adhesion on account of a wound or a swelling: then thou shalt cut away that by means of a dull Spatulium, until the ligames are loosed, and the head of the penis is freed from all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish them carefully, then one should cut something from the head of the penis and from the foreskin. That is, because the prepuce when it is thin, perhaps pierces quickly due to its slenderness.
Then separate between the prepuce and the head of the penis with a thin linen cloth that has already been soaked in cold water so that it does not stick again.
Then treat with stiff wine until it heals.
Chapter LVII.
The purification of infants and the cure for errors due to accidents.
Circumcision is not a solution to continence, as are the other wounds; nevertheless, since it is the result of our art, desire, and use in boys, it is necessary that we indicate in it a better operation, and a more gentle one leading to health.
I therefore say that the ancients did not write about circumcision in any of their books: for they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it through experimentation.
That is, because I have discovered more of the arts and phlebotomy for purification by circumcision with new instruments, and with forceps; and they use ligatures with thread, and incisions with nails.
And I have already tried all these methods, and I did not find a better purification than circumcision with forceps and a ligature with thread.
Since in purification by scalpel there often escapes skin. Since the skin of the foreskin has two clothes; then perhaps one may be cut on the top, and it may be covered by the lower shirt; therefore one should consider cutting the other, and there will be pain. And with purification that is done by the finger, as the surgeon does, there is no security in the incision at the end of the male member; since perhaps it enters a hole.
In the cleaning of a nail with a nail file, perhaps you've lost your way and ruined your work; and the skin of a child is by nature thin, and they are often born in this way so that they do not need to be cleaned: I have seen it already.
But in the cleaning of a nail with a file, and with a thread and a knot, a good experiment has shown to me; for the files are proportional to the incision: because the sharpness that is above is like the sharpness that is below. When then you press your hand, two sharpnesses are proportionate and work at the same time in one way; and a compression of the similar figure is formed, containing the skin of the wrist from all parts, with which there is no mistake at all.
And the mode of operation is its own, so that you can guess at it, especially if he is from those who understand a little, which you do not do unless you tie the thread in his wrist only: and let him go until another day.
Then let him be happy and rejoice in every way as much as possible for you, since he receives his intelligence. Then let him stand between your hands which are prepared to sit, and not sitting down; and hide the files in your sleeve or under your foot, so that he does not see them at all, nor any of the instruments.
Then introduce your hand into his wrist, and blow on the skin, and pull it up until the head of the wrist leaves. Then clean it from that which clings to it in dirt.
Then tie the marked place with a double thread. Then tie the lower part with a little bit of the second ligature. Then hold it with your index finger and keep the lower ligature in good grasp, and cut between the two ligatures. Then wipe the skin quickly upward, and remove the head of the wrist. Then let the blood run slowly (for it is better) and put on the powder from above: and over the powder a cloth in which the skin has been expanded, dried in water rose with good oil roscent: and leave it on itself until another day: and care for it with the remaining cure, until healed.
But this is how the forceps are used for cleaning.
But there shall be two ends to it, and they shall be set; let no clavus come into them: and the length of the two points shall be like the length of the two hands, equally.
But a fall in cleaning is an error: for perhaps it escapes all the inner skin, or a part of it near the incision.
Therefore you should stretch it out from your hand before the place is infected: and let it fall according to equality.
But if you cannot hold it with your finger, then take it out with a forceps and let it fall.
But if they have passed over three days, and what is under the swelling has remained red, and the skin has been inflamed, then let it go until the heat of the apostema has subsided, and the rash has scarred easily, and let it fall according to how you have prepared it: and caulk your head from the top of the branch. For that will not hurt him.
Care therefore for that with the powder which hardens the skin, which we have described in the book on powders: and if it is cut from the skin above the mark, and grows upward, it does not harm him either.
Care therefore for that with what we have said, until it is healed.
Head LVIII.
On the extraction of the wryneck from the urethra.
Retention of urine in the bladder, is caused from an inflammation made by a stone, or congealed blood, or pus, or meat born: and similar things which we have said under the division of cures.
If the wound does not heal and you see that it is due to the stone which is now in the neck of the esophagus, then he should be laid on his side with his head lowered. Then they should put his feet on his back and extend his abdomen from the upper part of his back and squeeze the weak person's breathing as much as possible. So it is considered with the esophagus to expel the stone to the rear: why does Vrina heal?
If it doesn't heal with it as we have said, and the trouble is deep within the weak one: then you should administer the extraction with a tool, which is called a syringe, whose form is: made of silver, and be delicate, smooth, and fine like a feather's tube in its subtlety, long like the palm of a hand and half that length; and have a fine tube at its tip.
And the way out of Vrina through itself is that you take a double thread and tie it well at its end with wool or cotton: and insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the syringe: and cut it with scissors if there is any excess from the wool, but insert it into the tube with care, as if it were lifting.
Then dip the syringe in oil, or butter, and white of egg: and make the weak one sit on a chair, and insert the esophagus, and his thread with damp oils, and olive oil, and warm water.
Then insert the syringe into the thread with ease until it reaches the base of the penis.
Then double it over above the navel part.
Then push the syringe inside until it reaches the bladder, and feel that the weak one has already come to the voiding place: and this does not happen according to this order unless the opening, in which you insert, is in the bend.
Then extend the thread with wool slowly. The wound follows the thread.
Then, having cut away from the hair, and making the wound run along the way of the urine, and again tightening the skin and not ceasing to do this, until the bladder is emptied, and the relief of the pain is felt.
¶ On the quality of cleansing the bladder with a clepsydra.
Head 69.
When a wound has occurred in the bladder, or blood has congealed within it, or pus is gathered therein, and water and medicines are to be distilled into it: then do with the instrument which is called a clepsydra, and this is its form.
For it is silent, that is, closed. And within it are three holes, two on one side and one on the other, like eyes.
And the place of escape, in which is the thing that pushes out, without addition, until when it is drawn with it something, from the moisture is attracted: and when it is pushed out, away with it to a great distance: second, because it makes the clepsydra, which throws naphtha, that is, Greek fire in battles of the war.
When therefore the water is to be thrown into the bladder, introduce the end of the clepsydra into the moisture, and draw it along with that which pushes upward; for the moisture is drawn into the chamber of the clepsydra.
Then introduce the end of it into the penis, according to what we have said in the syringe. Then push the moisture along with it which pushes: for the moisture immediately reaches the bladder, so that it is felt weak.
Form of a thin clepsydra, whereby the bladder is to be cleansed.
Let it be made of silver or brass: whose head is higher than the rest, and under it a pocket between which a ligament hangs down.
Then take the bladder of a sheep, and place in it the moisture with which you are to cleanse the bladder: Then bind it between two sinuses with a strong knot with double thread: and apply to it a little moist heat over fire.
Then introduce the end of the clamp into the penis, then grasp your hand over the urethra with moisture applied to tighten it, until the patient feels that sensation, which means that the moisture has reached the urethra.
But if you don't have a present urethra, then take hold of a piece of parchment, and make it into a circle, and pierce it through from all its roundness. Then insert a strong thread into those foramen, as they rotate. Then bring together the circle, as it is brought together also by oil: when you have put into it what you want of moisture, and oils, and water.
Then bind the thread into the instrument: and do with it as you did with the urethra by means of your hand, until the moisture has reached the urethra.
Chapter 60.
Regarding the extraction of a stone.
I have already spoken at length on the classification of stones, and their treatment with medicines; and I have distinguished between a stone that is generated in the kidneys, and one in the bladder, and described its signs; and I have explained at some length the way in which operation is performed with the hand and section; and this is a stone that is properly generated in the bladder: and this is one that is formed in the urethra: and I am now narrating it with a clear and concise statement, and omitting nothing.
I say, then, that a stone generated in the bladder often occurs in boys.
And of its signs is this, that the urine passes from the bladder like water in its transparency: and white sand appears in it; and it chafes the penis of the patient, and causes him pain, and often hangs down. Then it rises up, and passes with it the anus in many cases.
And the cure is easy for boys so long as they do not attain the age of fourteen. It is difficult for the elderly. For youths it is medium (medium), because it lies between that which is large and that which is small; and if the stone be larger, the cure is easier; but if smaller, the cure is unavailing.
When we proceed to the cure, first of all we must make the sick person defecate with a douche, that we may remove the whole dung that is in his intestines: for this sometimes prevents the discovery of the stone by examination.
Then let the sick person be taken with his feet towards below, so that he may move to the lower parts: that the stone may go down into the rectum, or sometimes jump out from its high place.
Then let him sit with his hands prepared between your hands, and his feet under his buttocks, so that the whole rectum may be drawn down towards the lower parts.
Then examine him and touch him from outside.
If you feel the stone in a space, then at once bring it forward with the cut above.
If it does not come out under your touch at all, then you must wipe the index finger of your left hand with oil, if the sick person is a boy; or the middle finger if he is a full grown man: and let him insert himself in some part of his anus, and examine for the stone until it comes out under your finger: and turn him slowly towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press on it with your finger, and drive it towards the outside against the place where you want to make the section; and order one minister to press the rectum with his hand, and another minister to stretch out his testicles with his right hand upwards: and let him remove the skin which is under the testicles in the part where the section is to be made.
Then insert the probe, whose shape is as follows. And find in it that which is between the anus and the testicles, and not in the middle, towards the left side: and let the section be made across it so that the stone may come out easily from it; making the section from outside to inside wide, and narrow from within, according to the quantity which will permit the easy exit of the stone.
The finger, which is in the anus and has been cut, is removed without difficulty.
And you should know that from the stone are the angles and edges, so it is difficult to remove because of that.
And from it is smooth, similar to a gland, and round; and the exit of it is easy.
So then those who have angles and edges, put them into a crack.
That if it does not come out in this way, then one should use a device on top of it: or you should tie it with an awkward gesture, the tip being like the moon, which ties over the stone and does not slip off it: or as you put a thin tool under it, with a curved end.
If, however, you cannot go on top, then slightly widen the hole. That if something hurts you from the blood, cut it off with a cut.
But if the stone is more than one, then push into the first large hole of the anus. Then cut on top of it. Then push a little after it: and do the same if there are more than two of them.
That if it is very large, then ignorance is how to cut over the stone with a large incision. Since it has happened to a sick person of the two things, or that he dies, or because his urine distills frequently: soon, since the place does not consolidate at all.
But administer the expelling of it, until it comes out: or devices in the fracture with forceps, until you pull it out roughly.
But when you have finished your operation, then fill the urethra with thyme, and aloe, and dragon's blood: and tie it up, and put a wet cloth over it oil and wine, or rosewater, and cold water: so that the fever may be cooled.
Then re-wrap the sick person around his neck, and do not separate the ligaments until the third day. And so when you have loosened him, embrace the place with water and oil.
Then, care for the wound with unguent of dill and basil, until it heals.
But if it happens that the wound swells hotly with added heat and rust, and has similar symptoms: as if blood congeals in a vein, and urine is forbidden to come out of it; and it is known from the exit of blood with urine. Then insert your finger into the wound and extract the blood. For if it remains, it incites to the corruption of the vein, and the decay of its substance.
Then wash the wound with vinegar and water and salt: and oppose to it any kind of thing that is fitting from the cure, until it heals.
And it should be during the hours of sleep, that two knees and joins are bent, because medicines laid on the place are taken up.
If it is a hard stone and sits in the meatus of the urine, and clogs it up, and prevents the exit of urine: then care for him with that which is fitting before you make a section. For many times you will excuse yourself from this cure, because I have already tried it out.
And is, that you take the chirurgical implement from the iron nail, whose this form is: a triangle, pointed, fixed in wood.
Then take a thread, and bind it with him under the stone so that he does not return to the vein.
Then insert the piercing iron into the limb with ease, until it reaches the stone: and remove the Piercing iron from your hand slowly on it: and cover its piercing, until you make it pierce from one side to another.
But urine is immediately discharged.
Then press your hand on it that remains from the stone from the outside of the limb. For he will break, and go out with urine, and heal the wounded one.
But if this treatment is not prepared for you, because of something that prohibits it from him: then tie the string under the stone, and a different string above the stone. Then cut off above the stone on the same branch between two knots. Then extract it. Afterwards, loosen the knot and clean up the frozen blood that has formed in the wound.
And it is not necessary to loosen the knot of the string under the stone, unless it returns to the wound: and the other string above, unless it returns when the stone is removed from above, to the skin at its place, and covers the bone, as we have said. For this reason you must tie the upper string so that the skin is raised above, so that it returns to your colleague, and covers the bone, as we have said.
Chapter LXI:
As for removing stone from women's wombs:
Stone does not grow much in women's wombs.
But if any of them has stone, then the treatment is difficult and prohibited for many reasons.
One of these is: that the woman might be a virgin.
And the second is because you will not find a virgin woman who hides herself from a doctor when she is chaste, or one who has a husband.
The third is because you will not find a woman who knows this art well, especially the operation with the hands.
And the fourth is because it is far from the stone's location: for what reason it needs deep cutting, and there is fear in it.
That if necessity compels you to do this, then you should take a woman doctor who knows this well: and it is hard to find one.
But if you are concerned about this, then seek out a male doctor who is subtle and well-versed in the affairs of women, or a woman who has an interest in this art, part of it: so do this with her present, especially to him, that he may do all that you command him in the inquiry about the stone.
First of all, it is necessary that she [the woman] should look at whether she [the doctor] is a virgin: then it is necessary that she should introduce her finger into her vagina and feel for a stone.
If, however, it is found to be a stone: then she should wrap her hand with a cloth and, having placed her left hand on the woman's pubic region, should compress it firmly and ask about the stone, after which she should massage the area with her right hand and feel for the stone.
If, however, he finds a stone: then it is necessary that she should move it gradually from the urethra to the bottom with all her strength, until it reaches the root [of the urethra] at the base of the pelvis.
Then she should wipe it dry at the point of opposition of the mid-urethra to the root [of the urethra] at the base of the pelvis, from whichever side it comes out, and feel for a stone in that part: and her finger should not be moved from the stone, being pressed down on it; and a small section should be cut off first. Then she should introduce the ray [of light] over that section.
Then she should introduce the ray [of light] over that section. If, however, she feels a stone, then she should add to the first section an amount proportional to the quantity of stone that comes out of her.
And you should know that there are many types of stones. For among these there are some small ones, and big ones; some smooth and some rough, some long and some round, and some have branches.
You should therefore know the kind of stone, so that it may be shown to you in relation to what you wish to see.
If, however, blood makes you weak: then add a third of the quantity to the place where the stone has come out, and hold it for an hour, until the blood stops flowing.
Then turn your attention to your work again, until the stone has come out: and prepare yourself with the instruments I told you about for taking stones from the bladder, so that they may help you in your work.
If the blood doth flow from thee, and thou knowest that the blood comeeth out of the artery which is wounded: then put dust upon the place, and bind it with the dust of constriction as it goeth down; and change not that; but let the stone be loosed, and bring it not forth. For peradventure the woman shall die of weakness. Then beware of the wound.
But when the acuteness of the blood hath abated after days, and the place hath turned into decay: then thou shalt return to thy operation, until the stone be gone.
Chapter LII.
As for the section over Hernias with water.
The ram's water is not, except that the aggregation of moisture in the sheep's skin contain one or more balls: and it is called a sifac.
And sometimes it is in its own pouch, which nature hath prepared for it in a part where it may be put: that is another thing, and it is the skin of the testicles between the sifacs, which we have said before: and this is not done but rarely.
And the generation of this ram is of a weakness which hath happened to the testicles: wherefore this matter is spilled into them. And sometimes it comes from a blow on the testicles.
And this moisture hath many colors. Or else it is the color of a russet, or of a crimson, or of a fawn, or of blackness, or of whiteness: and that which is more is called yellow.
And the signs wherewith thou shalt know where the aggregation of water is, are these. For if it be in a sheep' skin, which we have said before, then the apothecary is round of an even length like a ball: and the testicle doth not appear, because moisture containeth it from all parts.
And if there be moisture in its own pouch, then the apothecary is round with a part of itself, and therefore a man shall estimate it that it is another thing.
And if there is moisture between the skin and the spermatic cord and white pus, then it falls down.
When, therefore, you wish to know the colour of moisture, then experience the colour of moisture in the apartment with the square-shaped instrument, whose form preceded. Accordingly, since it is moved out of the insertion, judge from that what is between itself.
When we came to the cure with iron, then you should order the sick person, if it is possible, to bleed him, and you will see his body full of blood.
Then he should lie down on his back on a high object, and put many blankets under him.
Then sit on his left side and order the assistant to sit on his right side, who will stretch his testicles towards one or two sides of the skin of the testicles, and towards the miraculum of the scrotum.
Then take a wide spatula, and dry the skin of the testicles from the middle along its length, up to the chest: and make the section according to a straight line that divides the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white pus enclosing it; and examine it carefully, or be cautious about it, as you would cut it off: and sit your scarification so that it cuts off him from the side that hangs with an egg more: and scrutinize carefully with your scarification according to the quantity that is possible for you.
Then pierce the white pus with a wide water-perforation, and extract all the water.
Then separate the two lips of the section with a hook, and extend the white pus towards the upper part, and do not touch the skin of the testicles enclosing it: and cut the white pus in any way that is possible for you to cut it, either completely, or only partially, especially the side of it. For if you do not examine carefully, there is no security in cutting it, except that water returns.
But if the egg comes out of its skin at the time of your work: then when you have completed the section of the white pus, reduce it. Then, two layers of skin are sewn together around the testes.
After that, treat the wound like any other surgical wound, until it heals.
If the testicle is damaged and has turned black, then the surgical wounds should be treated with care to prevent further blood loss.
Then cut off the testes along with its spermatic cord and remove the testicle; then treat it as we have said.
If, however, water has accumulated on both sides, then you should know that there are two branches; so dry one half as you have done with the other half.
And if it is even to you, so that there is only one operation, then do so; then wash away the blood. And introduce a woollen cloth soaked in oil or rosin between the testes; and place another woollen cloth that you have soaked in wine and oil over the two testes, and press the testes together: and put a double cloth on top of them, and it should be smooth: and tie them together with a knot, which is sixfold according to this form.
Then take two cloths and tie them together and fill them with carmine, according to this similarity: and let the ends that are pressed by the thongs or wet wool be placed on the back of the arms; and let all the ends be brought together with a knot at the hip: and let one end rest on some flesh until it reaches the spine, and the other end rest on the cheekbone: and let two ends rest on the two hips below, and let another end rest on the two genitals, and let all the ends be gathered together in a knot at the hip.
And when this awl is used with a caustic to cut the section of skin together with an iron tool: and it is like taking a fine scalpel and cutting away the skin of the testes; and it burns, according to what we have said: until such time as it turns yellow, and you take the caustic, in this form.
The Greek letters are assimilated.
And then pierce with that other sihac, and it is ignited, until all the moisture has gone out.
And then extend that sihac with a hook, and scrape with a thin knife on fire, and cut it as well as you can, until you have entirely removed it.
And let the ovum not be touched by the fire.
And you shall know that this operation is healthier, and further from the flow of blood, and better than the operation with section.
But if the opposite to you makes in the hour of section, or in the hour of cauterization with hot water, or a flow of blood, or something else: then you should do what the opposite does for you with the cure that is appropriate to it, according to what has been said.
But if he is shy and does not wait for this operation, because of its horror: then administer the piercing according to what I have told you above: and it is done.
When you are certain of yourself with that which we have said about the signs, that the ramus is aqueous: then it is necessary that you should make the sick person sit on a raised seat.
And then pierce the apostema in the lower part of his body with a flat blade: and place the piercing according to the length of the body, and keep the opening wide, until all the water has run out.
And then place a cloth over the spot, and tie it on, and let him go away so that he can run off with the remaining water: and then care for the wound, until the sore is healed.
But if the opposite is for the exit of water in the hour when you pierce it: and that is not unless because of this, since the white cloth makes an opposite to the opening of a wound, and prevents the exit of water: then you should insert a feather into the wound, or an instrument from which water is drawn out, whose form precedes it: or add something to the operation of the wound.
And know that water returns, and gathers after six months, or about them. When it has gathered then it will return in the same way, and the sick will spend their days.
Chapter LIII. On the Care of Ramicus Carnosus.
On the Care of Ramicus Carnosus.
You should know that in this section on Ramicus, it is from fear leading to harm in several disorders. Therefore I leave him with a cure for salvation from it.
And I am remembering the operation in it, and the appearance of sores.
I say, that many sores occur on the bodies, from which the testicles are composed: and it happens for various reasons, indeed.
Or from acute superfluity or bitterness, which is discharged onto the testicles. Or from a blow.
And the color of the sore corresponds to the color of the body, and there is no sensation of pain: and the sore is gray.
And perhaps it is a sore that is pale, whose color is dusky, and it has no sensation.
And when it is from the swelling of arteries, and the inflammation of arterioles: as I have already remembered about it: or from the inflammation of veins.
That is, when it is from the swelling of arteries, it is known through the appearance of sores, when you squeeze it with your fingers. And it is not necessary to touch it completely.
However, that which is from the inflammation of veins does not disperse anything from being compressed with fingers.
And it is also possible that this appearance occurs on the section, and on other carnous parts: and it is as if it were separating the skin of the testicles. Then extend your hand up, and remove it with a sifflet or a hook: and free the suspension from the water, and tie the bandage: and let the suspension rest after you have freed it from any part of the body.
If then my bone is solid with those flesh-born [fleshly] bones, then you must draw my bone and strike it.
And if there is an adhesion between any of the [siphakets] or within one that lies between the [waa-sa]; then you must release all such adhesions and strike it with a round incision.
But if the birth of flesh is in the place of an adhesion that lies behind: then you must strike all of it and draw my bone out, as we have said.
When then your operation is complete, you must fill the bone with wool soaked in rose oil, and vinager; then take care of the whole [bone] with the rest of the cure, until it heals.
Chapter LII.
[On the Care of the Vinegar Tree, which is with the Grape Vine.]
It is useful to have an injection of a kind of vinegar in the swelling due to a soft and similar inflammation of the testicles; and it makes difficult the movement on foot and exercise and walking.
And in the treatment of this disease there is a fear because of its previous [remembrance]
But it is necessary for us to speak about the operation on her as it was done by the first.
I say that you should have the sick person sit on an elevated seat. Then push down the suspenders of the testicles to the bottom. Then hold the skin of the testicles between your fingers and with those fingers that are near the scrotum: and let another person hold it and stretch it with a forceful movement.
Then strike with a sharp chisel-shaped knife across the middle of the scrotum in a direct direction, until the skin is separated.
Then scrape off all parts, as we have said to you in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temporals.
Then fix in it a knot where there is a double thread, and tie the string in the first place where the grapes are: and tie the string again in the last place. Then dry them in the middle section straight according to the length of the body, and extract what has accumulated from the decayed and腐敗的湿氣。
Then take care of the wound with the cure for the remaining wounds, in which a healthy wound should be generated so that the clothes that nourish one testicle fall off. For it is not bad through that.
But if all the wounds are affected by this, then they should remove it for this purpose from the testicles with water so that its nourishment is not kept back because of the incision and does not disappear or become scarred, and does not remain a wound with them.
Chapter LXV: On the Care for Ramicus Intestinalis.
Regarding the cure for intestinal worms.
The ramicus intestinalis should be removed from the section that occurs in the Sifach extent on the belly of the abdomen in the part of the groin from the inguinal channel outside the scrotum with a sharp blade.
Why do the intestines come down from that rupture to one testicle? And this rupture is either from the Sifach or from the extension of it.
And these two species arise from many causes: either from a blow, or from a fall, or from a noise, or from carrying a heavy object, and the like.
And a sign when it is from the extension of Sifach. It is what happens gradually over a long period of time, and does not happen suddenly; and it is a swelling that is equal in depth: for the Sifach compresses the intestines.
And the sign of it when it is from the section of Sifach, because it makes an immediate sharp pain at its beginning: and it is a swelling that differs in depth, appearing under the skin nearby; and this is due to the exit of the intestines, and their course towards the exterior of Sifach.
And when it comes out with a wriggling intestine: and this is called Ramicus intestinalis, and wryneck; and sometimes it happens with a twitching.
And sometimes when waste matter runs into the intestines and is held there: and there is with it a great danger of death, because it brings on pain before hand, and especially when it is pressed.
And there is a fear in curing these ailments with iron: therefore one should guard against mishap in this.
And the method of operation is so that you instruct the sick person to bring his intestines by hand to the inside of their cavity, if he obeys the return. Then he lays himself down on his back between your hands: and wash his legs.
Then spread the skin that follows the skin to the upper part, and dry the whole skin of the testes by its length. Then fix two sections of the skin between your lips, according to how it is opened by you: and the section be second according to the quantity, that it is possible for him to come out from it with a push.
Then peel the skin off and that which is under the skin of the testes, until when he is detected to be white, firm from all side: then insert your finger of the index into it that follows the testicle, into it that is between the white skin, that is under the skin, and among the second skin, and break with him the adhesion which is in the back part.
Then move with your right hand to the inside of the skin of the testes: and when you do this spread the white skin up, with your left hand: and wash the balls with the skin at the section: and order the minister that he should extend the balls up: and let him break the adhesion, which is behind.
And ask your hands that there is nothing there from the intestines wrapped up in the white skin or hard skin. But if there is anything from it: then push him to the lower abdomen.
Then take the acume, in which sits the gross thread, made of ten fils: and insert it among the rear section of the skin, that is under the skin of the testes that follows the section: then cut off the ends that emerge from the thread, until there are four fils. Then put together some of theirs over some with a figure which sits in the form of a cross: and bind them up with alsifach, about which we have spoken, because it is beneath the skin of the testicles binding strongly, until there can be no sending of any fluid that nourishes them to send to them something: so that nothing happens from that place of an apoplexy of heat. And put again a ligature second after the first one, far away from it by less than two fingers. And after these two ligatures let go of alsifach, which is beneath the skin of the testicles, a quantity of the size of a finger: and cut off the whole remaining one according to its roundness, and take away one from it.
Then dry out on the lower part of the skin of the testicles the slice, from which runs blood and pus: as we have told you before.
Then administer wool dipped in oil and put it on a peg: and administer the ligature which we have spoken about. And when, as well, alsifach is cauterized of the white stuff which we said, after cutting it with caution concerning the flow of blood. For this often happens. And let go of the ligature until it falls by itself.
But if this delay happens in its fall, then boil it with warm water: and put over it that which we have spoken, until it falls by itself.
Then care for the peg with the rest of the healing of the wound, until it is healed.
Chapter LVI.
[A note about ramie fabric]
In this ramie there was no one who dared to heal it with iron.
And first they said that what happened in the ramie made with vine is like that which we have told you about in ramie that is with vine. That is, so that the ligatures do not hurt after cutting on top of it with ease: and then dry out in the middle, and care afterwards for what opens it up, until the peg falls: and care for the peg, according to what we have spoken about, until it is healed.
Chapter LVII. On the wound in the groin region.
Regarding the lacerations that occurred in the groin area.
When a tear occurs in the groin region, as we have said, and there is an exit, and nothing from the intestines comes down to the testicles: but if something does come down, it is a minor matter, and returns again at all times: truly, if this state of affairs continues for some time, a fissure forms in the sifach, until the intestines fall into the sifach.
And what happens because of the lengthening of the sifach, which is in the groin region, as we have said. That is, because the sifach lengthens: then it softens, and the opening widens, and there is discharge.
And its care is with a poultice, as we have described in what precedes.
And sometimes it is treated with iron, in this way: and that is, so that the sick person lies on his back between your hands. Then dry up the opening of the wound that has come to a head and is discharging, with a cut lengthwise, in accordance with the measure of three fingers.
Then tie the sifach tightly, and what is beneath the skin, until it is discovered that the white matter that lies beneath the skin follows it.
Then take a ray, and place it on the opening of the wound from the sifac, and press it into the depths of the groin.
Then provide two openings at either end of the ray from the sifac, and join them together with a stitch: then remove the ends of the ray.
And do not cut the sifac at all, and do not tie one to another, nor anything else, as I have told you to know about treating the intestine branch.
Then this cure for the wound. When you have cut the strands, clean it up, and restore the tendon, until it hardens.
The sifac is twisted, and no opening is added to the wound.
And a poultice is better in this place, for it is closer to health.
De mollificatione cutis testiculorum.
On softening the skin of the testicles.
Often the skin of the testicles is softened in certain men, because the flesh that lies between them is softened, and its appearance is made ugly.
Therefore it is necessary for the one who asks for healing to lie down on his back, and to cover all of the softened skin with the natural skin.
Then he should sew together two lips and stitch them well; and if there is a lot of softened skin, first three stitches, or four, and a sturdy stitch.
Then cut between the stitches.
Then care for the healing of the remaining wounds, until they are healed, and let the threads fall out.
De Castratione.
On castration:
You should know that castration is excommunicated by our law; and because of this I shall remind myself not to recall it in my book here: and its reminder is not necessary unless for two reasons.
One of these is that it should be in the knowledge of a physician when he is asked about it; and so that he may know how to treat it for him who has suffered this.
And the other reason is that we often lack castration of certain animals, for our benefits from them, such as rams, horses, and cats, and similar from animals.
I say then that castration is done in two ways. Either by abrasion. Or by a slit and cut.
In that one made by abrasion, the procedure is this: that we should make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles soften and become loose, and then with your hand you should tighten them up until they are fully recovered and do not appear under the touch.
But in castration by a slit and cut, you must hold the animal, and with your left hand press the skin of his testicles together.
Then tie the ligatures, and dry up all the openings with a single cut until both open; then cut them after you have scraped both of them so that there is no excess of the sinew, except for the thin skin, which is on the navel.
This method of castration is better than that which is done by grinding: for grinding may leave something behind from the testicles, whereupon the animal desires copulation.
Then take care of the wound, until it heals.
Chapter LXX.
The treatment for hermaphroditism has two methods.
Hermaphrodite is from the testicles according to two modes. The penis is theirs, because it appears to be a bulge, or on the skin of the testicles, in the space between the two testicles, in the form of a small female, in which there are hairs: and sometimes urine flows from it, from the skin of the testicles.
But in women there is only one member, and it is like a small penis on the skin of the pubis, prominent toward the outside: of which one is like a penis of a man, and two are like the testicles of a man.
And the treatment of the three kinds, the two from the male and one from the female, is this: for you must cut off the added flesh, until the impression disappears. Then take care of the remaining wounds in their cure.
But in the second species of male, from which urine flows on the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is there any cure at all.
Chapter LXXI.
The cutting of an inguinal hernia, and of flesh that protrudes in a woman's penis.
An inguinal hernia may be added to the natural shape, until it is well and the appearance of it is improved: and sometimes it becomes so enlarged in certain women that it reaches up to the genitals, and extends as far as copulation.
You should therefore hold the tendiniz with your hand or with a hook and fall on it; do not make the last incision, especially in deep roots, so that blood does not flow.
Then take care of the wound itself with care, until it heals.
But the middle part, that which is born in the womb of the mother, until it fills itself up; and perhaps it shall move towards the outside according to the similarity of its tail: and on account of this they call the first disease troubled by a tail. You should therefore make an incision on it as we did on the tendon, and take care of it until it heals.
Regarding the treatment of a hernia in a woman that has not been pierced.
Chapter 72.
The Alratica is, whether it be a hernia in a woman that has not been pierced or a small hole. And it is either natural or accidental.
It is accidental from an illness that preceded it; and indeed it comes about either from born flesh added, or from a splinter of bone, or from splinters of wood: and it comes about either in the depths of the womb, or on its sides, or above it, or below it; and it prohibits coition and impregnation, and parturition, and perhaps it prohibits menstruation.
And the knowledge of this is acquired by observation during childbirth, if there is evident swelling nearby.
But if it is not apparent, then ask it with your fingers or with a ray.
But if the swelling is from a subtle splinter and is near two lips: then lean forward and clean it out.
And it is, as you place a sponge on two lips to clean them.
Then place your fingers of both hands at the same time and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread. Then stretch out the two lips with force until the subtle splinter comes out, and open the swelling.
Then take a piece of cloth, and dip it in oil, and place it over the wound: and let a woman attend to it every day, so that the wound does not solidify with any other means.
If, however, the wound is very deep or thick: then it is necessary to remove it with a scissor-like instrument of similar width to a myrtle leaf.
If, however, the wound is caused by putrid flesh: then hang it with a hook, and cut it: and have with you medicines that still the flow of blood without mordanting, such as acacia and dragon's blood, and also astringent with alum.
Then introduce a large tube of lead: so that the wound does not consolidate quickly; let it remain for several days: and then introduce an ointment of dried grass, and then cure with the remaining ointment, until healed.
And when a child is conceived in the womb of its mother, the birth of flesh: it is necessary therefore that they be incised according to this mode: while there is no scurvous cancer; for which reason there should not be any contradiction with iron altogether.
Chapter LIII.
For the cure of hemorrhoids, both the atehilell and the bohtor of the red rubor in any woman.
Hemorrhoids are an opening of the anal orifices, so that much blood runs out regularly.
When therefore they begin to increase in size, then little worms are formed: and I have already spoken in the division of their kinds and signs; and I will now tell you which receive cure from them, and which do not.
I therefore say that the hemorrhoids which are in the opening of the womb, and do not appear to be able to sense anything: then there is no cure for them with iron.
But those which are in the opening of the womb above that which drops down a sense, these are the ones who are cured.
It is necessary therefore that you should introduce the woman into a cold house. Then extend the athenar with forceps, or with a rough cloth, and cut them from their roots.
Then pulverize over them near the flow of blood from one pulverized cut without mortification: like acacia, and dragon's blood, and thistle, and similar to them.
Then push his feet against the wall for an hour. Then put him in cold water.
If the flow of blood persisted: then make her sit in a decution of sumach, and of corn-powder, and of gall, and similar things.
Then take wheat flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it and put it on his back.
If, however, blood comes out with the plaster, it is good: and if not, make the back smooth with wool, and with daisies, without scarring.
Then take wool, and soak it in the juice of taraxum (or tarahon), or of arnica, or of willow twigs, namely, aglane, with wine from Pontus, and make it adhere to his back.
When the plaster hardens, then take care of the place with ointment, until it heals.
Albarth is really similar to red caps and has a rough appearance.
It should be cut so that it appears like this, according to what I said in the text about cutting evenly: and take care of it until it heals.
Chapter LXXII.
Perforation from the womb which occurs in a woman.
Divers kinds of plasters occur in the womb, such as cancer, and a plastery, and ulcers, and blisters, and scabs, and sores, and blisters, and cold sores, and fistula, and hemorrhoids, and warts, and pimples, and a plastery heat.
And I have already said all about these illnesses and their kinds, and the signs of them, and their cures, in a general way: it is necessary for me to say in this book about a plastery heat which occurs in the womb when it is caused by plasters that stick to the flesh, and how the opening of it with iron is to be made.
You should therefore reflect upon it. If the pain of his pustule is acute when he strikes it with his palm, and if there is a flame and fever, and you see it red: if he falls on it, then do not suit him with the perforation: and cure him with that as long as he lives, until when he rests, the acuity of the accidents.
Then it is necessary that you make the woman sit on a seat that she can rest, or lean her back, and spread her feet out towards the lower side of the leg: and let her legs be stretched out, and place her arms under her knees, and fasten them with a rope that suits it.
Then the midwife should sit on the right side, and bring out the instrument with which she opens the opening of the womb.
And it is necessary that you hold the womb tight when you administer this instrument, so that it does not enter more than the depth of the womb, and does not hurt the sick one.
If the instrument is larger than the depth, then it is necessary that you put a patch on the top of the depth, so as to prevent the entry of the whole instrument into the depth, and it is necessary that he puts the wheel that runs in the instrument from the upper side: and hold the instrument, and turn the wheel until the opening of the depth has opened.
When it appears that the Exit is open, and touch it with your hand, and is soft and smooth: then you must separate it from its head with a flat blade.
When the pus is discharged, then you must put a blade of oak that is dipped in rose oil: or in oily oil, in which there is some stinginess: and put it on, and extract a piece from the depth of the womb.
And put outside on the womb, and on a woolen cloth that is dipped in water, in which are boiled bad eggs.
After two days, apply the ointment suitable for it, until it heals.
And when the wound and the splint have been washed away so that it clogs with water and honey: then with water in which a root of lily or long aristocha has been boiled: then let it return to the ointment.
That if the wound is hidden within the matrix, then it is necessary that you should prohibit its cure with iron, and also care for it itself with what we have said concerning division.
Chapter LXX.
Teaching on obstetrics, how embryos are treated by the womb, according to a non-natural exit.
It is necessary for the obstetrician to know first of all the figure of a natural birth.
From these signs then, when you see a woman compressing herself towards the lower parts, and longs for air, and is relieved on her who is at the birth of the baby, and hurries in the exit of the baby: then know that this birth is according to the natural figure, and its exit is above her head, and second with it: or hanging, or hanging from the navel.
When then you see these signs, then let her compress her belly, that the baby may descend quickly.
For when it has descended above her head, it has descended with it, and is purified from her with good purification.
Whoever this birth is, it is unnatural, unworthy of praise.
For when the baby has gone out on his feet, and the body of him goes before the head of it, and the feet and hands of him go one way or another: or the head of him and his hands: or the navel within: and perhaps turns over its neck, and other similar figures are unworthy of praise.
It is therefore necessary for the obstetrician to be prudent and subtle in all these things, and to beware of error and deception: and I am showing you every figure from them, and how a baby's genius is in it, and what is signified by it, and shaking over it.
When the fetus has emerged from his mother's head by its own natural power, and he has made it heavy upon her, and difficult is her delivery, and her strength has already diminished: then make her sit on a chair, or let women support her: and with foenugraeque infusion, and with damp oils.
Then the midwife shall insert her fingers into her vagina and find the baby with her second finger, and wipe it with her nail, until she catches what is there from the moisture: and press the woman's belly, until the fetus falls out.
If it does not fall out, then the woman should be made to sit in a chair and be given a bath of foenugraeque with Sisam oil.
Then order her to compress herself after the bath, and let her sneeze with a handkerchief, and hold her nose and mouth for an hour. For the fetus will come out immediately.
What if two hands of the fetus come out first? Then it is necessary that you reduce them with ease gradually. If it does not yield in the introduction, then put the woman on a chair, and raise her feet up: then turn the chair upside down: and let the woman hold on, so that she does not fall by the concussion.
If the hands do not come out, and the fetus dies: then make the incisions, and remove the remains of the fetus: and tie her hand with a cloth, and pull it out with equality: for it will come out.
The exit of the fetus is on its feet. When the fetus comes out on his feet, then it is necessary that you push them up: then gradually turn the fetus over: and then make it even.
Then take one of his feet and stretch it out gradually.
But when they have come out as far as the hips, then order her to compress herself, and let her sneeze with a handkerchief: for she will come out if God wills it.
And if he does not come out with it as we have said, then bring back the fetus little by little until you put it in its natural form. For he will come out then on an easy exit.
That if it is prohibited with him all that we have said: then take from the mucilaginous of the aloe, and oil of sesame, and of the dissolved gum: and beat all in a mortar by good pounding: and then line with him the woman's loins, and the lower part of her womb. Then make her sit in warm water until she gets a fever.
And when you see that his lower parts are now calmed down, then make her eat myrrh: and support him himself. When he has held the sief for an hour, then make her sit on a seat. Then make her sneeze: and squeeze his mouth and nose: and press the lower part of his womb by easy compression. For heat will come out immediately.
Exit of the fetus on its knees and hands. When it comes out in this form, then support by little by little putting your hands in. Then the woman will be raised on her neck, and her feet will hang down to the lower part: and she herself will lie on a bed, and fold her hands. Then squeeze above his navel little by little. Then take out what is under her feet from the palms, until she is prepared in the lower part. That if the fetus does not come out: then take his feet, and move them violently. Then squeeze what is above the womb little by little, until the fetus ascends to the upper parts. Then put your hands in, and make the fetus even little by little: and tell the woman to compress, until the fetus comes out.
Exit of the fetus hanging from the arms. He cut off his hand. But if he cannot reduce it, then let him free the woman, and let her walk.
But if she cannot walk either, then let her lie on a bed; and strike her legs with a heavy blow.
Then apply the ointment you have prepared from mucus.
If she accepts this treatment, then let her sit on a chair. Then study the hand to reduce it, and shape it according to the natural form: and let her sneeze, and order her to squeeze herself until she has exited.
The exit of the fetus is over its neck, with spread out hands, and it is turned towards the back of its mother's womb. It is necessary that the midwife hold the fetus by the hand, and then let her turn it little by little, and ease it with ease.
When it is even, then place it on a bed we have prepared from oil and mucus.
Then order her to move little by little. When you have done this, then let her sit on a chair and order her to lean to the right. Then order her to squeeze herself, and make her sneeze with condiments.
The exit of the prepared fetus is on the side. When it descended to the opening of the womb according to this manner with a second hand, then cut the second hand with your fingernail, until it has discharged from moisture.
But if it hangs over the face of the fetus and its neck, then cut it from the navel: so that it does not remain, and it dies.
Then push the fetus into the inside, until you place it: and order the woman to squeeze herself sometimes: for himself will come out from the exit lightly.
The exit of twins, or a multiple fetus. Know that twins are often born: and sometimes they are born three, and four. Indeed this is unusual, and happens rarely.
However, this is an extraordinary thing, and happens rarely: but they do not live alone: and there is a second one joined to them, although they increase in number: and they separate by a cord that runs between their navels, distinguishing them from each other.
And sometimes when they go out it is easy as one who goes out of natural birth, and they go out with a loud noise, as we have said.
If any of them become difficult at birth and seek to go back into the womb, which we have spoken about in figures of nature, then take care of them as we have said: and let her sit quietly, and do what she does easily and slowly, and shape herself according to all the shapes with him that is preparing for his salvation, led by his skill.
This reminds us that he is formed in the womb out of embryos and some are aborted.
And sometimes one is formed in the womb, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten: and I have proved this with myself, that a woman has given birth to seven, and another fifteen, all of them formed.
That which is done by the measurement of the glorious sage.
Therefore all this needs to be put into the science of midwifery. Perhaps, if it reaches that which is similar to it: then oppose it with it what is necessary:
Chapter LXXVI.
Regarding the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you are concerned with a dead fetus and what I said about dividing it from midwifery, and it does not come out, and you force it to use an operation by hand, then you should reflect.
If then the woman is of sound virtue, and is not with any of the accidents from which she fears harm to her health: then she should lie down on a bed, with her back towards the wall, and her head inclined downward, and have her minister hold her by her two sides, or tie her to the bed, so that her body is not extracted along with the fetus.
Then wet the bone with oil and mucus of oak, and fenugreek, and linseed.
Then let the midwife wet her hand with these oils and mucus: then let her insert it into the womb with ease. Then let her ask where she should put the hook from the fetus, and the appropriate places for that.
Consider this then, if the fetus is prepared to come down from above its head: then put the hooks into its eyes, or its throat, or its mouth, or its palate, or under its beard, or its chin, or its sides, and the places close to its ribs, and below its hip bones.
If however it is going down towards its feet: then into the chest, and the middle part of its ribs.
And it is necessary that she hold the hook with her right hand: and put a loop on it that is between the fingers of her left hand: and let her insert it with ease, and fix the hook in one of those places we have mentioned, until she has finished the job.
Then let her fix another hook opposite to it, or a third one, if she is able to: so that there is an equal tension, and it does not lean towards the side.
Then let it be extended with an equal length, and not just an extension in a straight line, but also let it move on all sides, so that the outlet is eased: as happens with a tooth when it is being extracted.
And it is necessary in that one which is between that: so that the extension is softened. That if any part of it is retained: then let the midwife put some oil on certain fingers, and insert them from one side, so that they rotate with them and hold what is retained.
If therefore a part of the fetus is going out: then swap the hooks to another place that is higher: do this until the whole fetus has come out.
If therefore the hand goes forward before another, and it is not possible to reduce it, because of the contraction: then it should be put on a cloth. Then take it out until you can see the whole of it, cut it or in the joint of the plant, or in the bed: and so you should do with the other hand, and in two feet.
If, however, the head of the fetus is large, or it happens that he has a contraction during delivery, or there is water in his head: then you should insert between the fingers the thin sharp tool called Spatula, and drain the water with it as you take the head out, or cut off the head with the instrument called Almiscast: whose shape came from the same forms as the other tools mentioned above after this.
Similarly do if the nature of the fetus is large head: then you should separate the hair: or take it out with a misdach, as we have said above. Then pull the bones with forceps.
If the head goes out and there is a contraction near the fork: then drain it until the water that is in the chest comes out.
If it is not complicated, and does not submit to the exit: then cut the head quickly, according to what is possible for you.
If the lower part of the leg is swollen, or there is water in it: then you should pierce it, until the water comes out.
If, however, the fetus is on top of his feet, then attracting him is easy, and his direction to the mother's mouth is light.
If it is contracted near the stomach, or the chest: then take it out with a cloth that you put on your hand: and drain the stomach or the chest, until what is in them comes out.
If, however, other members are removed, and then returns the head: then let the midwife put her left hand. If therefore the jaw is open, then introduce your hand into its depth, and feel with it the head, and attract it with your fingers to the jaw: then introduce into it one hook, or two hooks, and attract it with it.
That if the jaw is clamped, on account of the heat that happens to it: then it is not necessary for him to labor over it, but at that time it is necessary to administer an infusion of liquid things, thick: and to administer plaster: and to sit in water that softens and moistens.
That if the fetus is on its side, then it is possible for him to adjust: then he should administer what we have said about the single fetus.
That if that is not possible, then he should cut short, and extract it out.
And it is necessary for you to leave nothing at all from the second inside.
When therefore you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said about the hot apostemes that happen in the wombs.
That if blood comes out, then he should go down into the water of astringent, and administer the remaining cure.
And I myself have already seen a woman, in whose womb a dead fetus was: then she was impregnated on top of it with another fluid, and after a dead fetus was also born. Then happened to her after a long time an aposteme in her umbilicus, and it swelled, until it opened: and it began to emit pus.
I was called to her cure, and I treated her at a long time: and the wound was not consolidated.
Then I placed on top of it some strong plasters of attraction: and she left the place of the mouth. Then there passed a few days for her, and she left the mouth out: then came out another mouth. I was therefore amazed from that place, where there is no mouth.
I thought, because there were bones of a dead fetus.
I examined the bone carefully and removed many bones, considering that the patient's condition was improving. It had been a long time since she had come, and the wound had almost healed.
And I did not find this strange here, unless that it is a science and an aid to it, which the doctor-artisan performs with his own hands in curing.
Chapter LXXVII.
Regarding the forms of the instruments necessary for extracting the fetus.
Description of the shape of the twig that opens the womb:
Here is the description of the "Striror": This is below: the shape of the strior, which are equal in length, and two twigs are attached to each end of two boards. However, this twig should be made slightly thinner than the strior: and to make it so, either from ebony or from hickory wood.
And the width of each board should be as wide as two fingers; and the edge of each of them is as wide as a finger, and the length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle of the two boards are two additions of the same kind of wood, which have already been fastened on both sides, whose length is the width of a palm and slightly more; and the width of each is as wide as two fingers or slightly less.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the mother's womb so that they open up when you pull on the two twigs.
Another form, similar to it but thinner and lighter.
It should be made from ebony or hickory wood, according to the similarity of a pair of tweezers. However, at the end of each there are two additions as you see here above; and the length of each addition is as wide as a palm; and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the womb with it, then make the woman sit on a bed, hanging her feet down; and then open what is between her knees. Then introduce two additional instruments joined together into the matrix; and you, holding the lower end of the instrument, place it between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument, as you do with forceps, equally according to the quantity that you wish to achieve from the opening of the mother's mouth; until the Obstetrix does what she wants.
Form a spin which is different from what the ancient said Form the Impelling where the fetus is driven.
Form a hook, with which the great head is turned: and it is attached to the forceps, whose teeth are on the end, as you see them.
And when it is necessary to cut, as the forceps do in this form, as you see them, whose teeth are like razor blades, by which they cut and turn.
Form the one who holds the hook.
Form the one who holds two hooks.
Form the one who holds two ends to cut the head off.
Form of two spatulimuses also bearers.
These instruments all work, and the more they multiply in kind, and are prepared for use by the physician, it is faster in its work, and higher among people because of their quantity.
Therefore do not despise these instruments, but have them ready. For necessity excuses them.
Head 78.
On the extraction of the second.
When the second is held back at childbirth, then you should use the lower ones to hold it back while keeping your breath. Then make her sneeze by holding in; and tightly place your hand on her nose, and her nostrils. If she then leaves through this, it is good.
If not: then take a staff, and pierce in the lid an opening; and put in it herbs opening the mouth of the mother, such as calamus, rhubarb, anetium, chamomile, dill, cassia and centaury: take all these herbs, or some of them, and mix them with water, and place them on fire.
Then he sewed the skin around the hole of the ear, and the other end to the jaw-bone; and held it till the vapour had come to the solidification of the bone.
Then he made him sneeze, as we have said. For the second time a great amount comes out with ease.
But if after this treatment it remains stuck and does not come out: then you shall order the Obstetrician to dip his hand into oil of sesame, or mucilaginous althaea. Then he shall insert it into the nose, and ask for the second time. But when he has found it, then he shall take it and gradually spread it open.
But if it is attached deep into the bone, then he shall insert his hand, as we have described, until he finds the second time, and gradually pull it out straight, so that the bone does not break because of a sudden pull: but it should be changed by turning to the right and left with ease; then add oil to the amount of pull. It itself then obeys and moves and gets rid of its adhesion.
If the bone is contracted, as we have already described: take care of it with sneezing, and with medicine for the ear with herbs.
But if it does not come out with all that we have said, then take care not to tire yourself out by repeated attempts at extraction.
But it is necessary that, when it comes out to the jaw-bone from her, you should tie some threads to the sides of the jaw-bone. Then bind it with a ointment of four drugs. For the matter will soon腐敗 it, and dissolve it, and come out.
But when it has rotted, a bad odour shall come out of it to the stomach and the head, and injures that member. Therefore it is necessary that suitable suffumigations should be administered to it.
Some have already been experienced in the suffumigation with nasturtium and dried fig.
The form of the instrument for suffumigation of a woman during retention of the second kind and menses.
Let it be made of a material similar to the corn and the other, and let it be placed over the fire; and the suffumigation shall be placed over plums, hold it until that suffumigation is consumed, and then another.
Chapter LXXIX.
Regarding the treatment of an unborn child not pierced.
Many boys are born, and their women have not been pierced by the needle of safar, which has now softened them with subtle smoke. It is therefore necessary that the midwife pierce with her finger that needle; and if she does not do so, let her pierce him herself with a sharp awl, and let her beware of touching her with the tail, lest she touch it.
Then place over him wool that has been soaked in wine and oil. Then care for him with unguents until he is healed.
But if you should happen to know that he has been drugged, then place a lead tube in the hole for many days, and let it be removed when the boy wants to defecate.
And also happened to the woman's drugging also from the congestion of the wound, or from pustules. It is therefore necessary that you remove that congestion, then treat him with what we have said regarding the treatment and lead.
Chapter LXXX.
Regarding the treatment of fistulas which occur in the lower part.
Fistulas which occur in the lower parts are due to nodulation and grossness which occur near the anus of the buttocks, or in the space of one of the members: and it is a single fistula, or multiple.
When therefore that nodulation becomes hardened, it opens, and there runs out of it moistness like water, white, or subtile pus.
And when they are from these fistulas penetrating. Therefore those that penetrate are recognized because of that which is removed from the discharge, and the windiness, when a sick person uses the discharge: and perhaps removed from them is the windiness.
And are out of them Fistulae when they are in space penetrabie up to skin, and up to bone joint. And are out of them Penetrables up to the connection of pelvis, and up to the knot of tail.
From that which is recognized as Penetrant Fistula up to the member, and also from that which does not penetrate, it is, so that you introduce your finger of the index in the member: and introduce try subtilely in the Fistula of copper, or iron: when there is no tortuositas.
That if in it is tortuositas, then introduce in it try of subtile copper, or feather from feathers of horses, until you feel trying, or a pin in your finger.
That if you do not feel that one, and does not go out from any opening of discharge, and windiness, and skinlessness as I said: then you know, that it is non-penetrant: so you should approach to cure.
And when Fistula is penetrabie up to the skin, or up to the meatus of urine: then meaning of it is a discharge of urine from it, and prevents it from that so that place with medicines hardens.
But if is penetrabie up to the connection of pelvis, or up to the jaw of hip: then sign of it is, that penetrates try up there, if there is no tortuositas up to the jaw: and discovery of pain in the surroundings of part, and that discharge pus from it always: and that does not ooze in it medicine, and hardens with unguent.
And in these Fistulas all penetrant there is no cure at all: and cure of them is work and vanity for him, from stupid doctors, who form it.
But in that which is not penetrant, and it is not old, there is hope of cure with sero: according to which I tell you, and already I have proved: and it is, so that sick person lies between your hands on his back: and clean the legs of him up to above hips, and hips of him are inclined towards wind of him. Then insert the lead or air, if it is in a curved fistula, until you know where the thread ends.
But if he feels it weak about one of his limbs, then you should insert your finger index in the limb.
But if you feel that the thread has already penetrated into yourself by feeling between your finger and the skin, or flesh: then you should know for sure that it has penetrated: so do not work on it, because it is not his cure, as we have said.
But they said that he heals in some people's flesh, and from the treatment by which he hoped for a cure, that is, as has preceded, to insert the brand of fine fire according to the width of the fistula, and to insert it in the fistula until it reaches a limb. Then repeat that again twice or three times until you know that all the added and filtered flesh that is similar to a feathered cane has dried up.
Then this care with liniments of oil in butter until the flesh that comes out is dried up: and then this care with ointments that produce flesh and consolidate it.
If he is healed, it is good.
But if not, then he does not heal with any other cure.
And if the thread comes out and does not reach your finger which is in the anus, and is between it and the thread a thick flesh or skin: and you see a fistula running along the surface of the skin, then dry off the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and dry off with the thread that is in the fistula until the end of the thread reaches where it ends, and releases the thread and falls.
Then clean those filtered flesh that resemble feathered cane, so that nothing remains of them.
But if it wins blood, and dissolves between you and the operation, to separate those flesh: then it is better that it has happened, and quicker healing, cauterize it with fire, or with sharp medicine.
Since the cautery, when it is gathered with fire, has good habits, it adds to the burning of their flesh, and to the cutting off of blood, and drying up of moisture.
Then take care that it should be applied with linen wipers soaked in butter, or with torn rags, until the place has discharged pus, and the burnt flesh has come out.
Then take care that it should be applied with ointments which solidify the flesh and make it hard: and there are remedies in which there is stenosis and drying up.
For when they are being treated, then they are healed at once; and do not put off the treatment.
But if the fistula has penetrates to a deep place of the pelvis, and it is extended from the surplus of the body: then put your hand into it, and feel it with your fingers.
But if you feel a sort of tension between your hand and the fistula, or between flesh and bone, and it is near to penetration: then there is no operation in it, unless after some time of hope and trust.
Which is, because it is administered in him of two kinds: or, as we have said, either to cauterize itself, or to separate it, until you have the result of its concavity, that you may be able to put therin linen wipers, and cure from near. And do not proceed much with the incision, lest you should fall upon a serpent which keeps a certain place, and happen to the departure of an ill-boding sickness without will. Then take care that it should be applied with what we have said.
Perhaps it will be healed: or, if you make it longer, and dry up the wound a little way from the anus, as we have said, or with tension, or with another acute instrument. Then make clean those burnt flesh which are in the incision, as far as you can with care.
Then take care that the healing of the whole wound should be with care, and that the solidification should be in its upper part: and there remains an open fistula in the interior part of the anus, and it will be looser than the ill-boding one.
And sometimes the fistula is followed in this way: that is, when you push a probe into it: and it is on the side of the anus near the surface of the body with skin and the margin of the anus; then seize the end of the probe that has been pushed through, which is like a needle's eye, that is, a small ring, according to this form. And introduce into it a thread coiled from five threads, and wrap it around. Then introduce the probe with a thread into the fistula until you feel resistance.
If then it enters into the inner margin of the anus near, then extract the thread from that hole: so that you introduce your finger in the anus, and extract the end of the thread, and join both ends together: and tie them well, leaving them alone for a day or two: and as long as the thread comes into contact with the flesh, tie it firmly until the flesh between the two ends of the thread is healed and has hardened, and then cut off the excess, and then care for the wound until it heals over.
But if the opening of the fistula does not penetrate: then let the thing penetrate in any way you prepare it for you, unless it is in the deep. For it will not be with you, that you make it by reason of a snake, lest you hurt yourself.
Then do with it as we have said, until it is healed over.
The shape of the awl which the fistula is found, whose curve is sharp very much, and one side is not sharp, so that it does not strike that which is not necessary, as you see.
Chapter LXXXI.
Regarding the suture of hemorrhoids, from which runs blood from the cut of them: and care for the sores.
There are hemorrhoids according to two ways. Or they are inside the anus, like coal, or prunes: or almost like grain of wheat. And from these are little and great; and blood runs out of them always, and is one, and there are many. And they are outside the body, and at its extremities.
But those that are outside the body are, for the most part, very few humors, from which runs the yellow water, or a little blood with constant flow: and they are according to the color of the body.
And the cure that is within the body is, as you order the sick to do so: and it is pressed out, until it comes out of the anus, and appears a yellow substance for you. Therefore therefore hang them with a hook: or hold them with your fingernail. Then cut them where they grow.
But if they do not hold hooks in them, because of their humidity and their own softness: then take them with a rough cloth, or with a twig of pine, and draw them out with your fingers. Then cut them and sprinkle some hot powder on them after the cut so that they stay in place for cauterization. Or cauterize them according to what has gone before in the chapter of cauterization. Then heal them with the remaining healing, until they are healed.
But if the anus does not yield to exit, then use a small enema that will make it soft with the medicine inside it, so that it yields to exit quickly when it is emptied out with the disease.
But if the warts are external from the anus, then their treatment is easy and simple; and it is as if you take them with your fingernail, or take them with a hook, and cut them off. Then heal them with that which I have said, until they are healed.
And who hate to cut with iron, then you must administer a stitch to them according to this way. Take a thread that is inwolved, and put it into the wound. Then remove the tourniquet to the upper part, and make it penetrate with a sharp blade in the root of its other part: and tie the two extremities together by means of a thread, in the lower part of the needle, and let them run transversely: and tighten the tourniquet strongly. Then tie a knot in the thread, and remove the needle.
Make it with all the tourniquets, and leave out one; and do not let your own blood flow from it, lest it should obstruct the wound.
Then place over a cloth浸透在油中，或醋中，并把它放在上面；并指示病人躺下。 Then remove the poultice, until it falls off.
When therefore the tourniquets have fallen off, take care of them with ointment, and with the rest of the cure, until they are healed.
§ On the treatment of wounds. For often both drying up and natural constriction occur.
When therefore they are a little dry, and do not respond to medicine: then it is necessary that you should cut them with the scalpel of Spatulimilus, or with your own nail, so that they may be moist, and the upper crust, which prevents them from being consolidated, may be taken off. Then take care of them, until they are consolidated, for you must do according to what is necessary.
If they do not consolidate: then cut them again with a sharp instrument more than before, until they bleed much, and then take care of them, until they are healed.
§ On the cure of scalds and not of burns; and of dry and moist gangrenes, and of ants.
Chapter LIII.
You should know that Almirmar is nothing but a round knot according to the color of the body, similar to the head of a nail; and it is found throughout the whole body, especially in the lower parts of the feet and fingers; and it causes pain on walking.
Then it is necessary that what is in the circle of the nail should be cut off, and held with pincers or a tongs, and rooted out from its root.
Then treat that wound: and if you wish to cauterize it, do so according to what preceded in his chapter.
From the oil of the astringent one, the fine, rough, filtered, round substance that is on the surface of the body. And often it happens in the hands of young people.
And its treatment is, that you stretch the oil out and pour it on: or that you tighten it with silk thread: or with hair, until it falls off. And if you wish, cauterize the wound with fire or sharp medicine: and already the oil that has been spread is removed, both the spread and not the spread with an instrument which I call a "spoon".
And the ant is also a small eminence, filtered, coarse, on the surface of the body, running into the depths vigorously: and when it comes to be cold, one feels in it a similar stinging of an ant, and it becomes throughout the body; and most of it is formed in the hands.
And its treatment is that you take a tube from a goose feather or from a strong swan feather; and put this tube on the ant, until it contains a circle of the parts of the tube. Then turn your hand with the tube, until you separate what is around the ant; and put it in deep flesh, and remove the ant from its root.
And if you wish, do this with the tube of air or iron, according to this form:
Let it be above the limit, drawing a silent vaporization, so that the pressure of its grip on the finger is relieved and its rotation.
And if you wish, cauterize the ant according to what has been said above in the cauterization of Athelil in the chapter on cauterization.
Chapter LIII.
About forms: Instruments which are used for poultices in animal ailments, and for the solution of the urine, and for the bowel.
Sometimes a hot water enema is made from silver, or from copper and silver, or from alloyed brass, or hammered brass.
And sometimes when these instruments are small, and large ones according to those with which they are administered.
But that which is administered in the cure of small children, let it be small; and as for those who are weak or suffering, let the enemas be small also.
A large enema.
The cane of the instrument, that is, the upper part in which it is tied to the uter, let it be wide according to this fashion: and let there be a separation so that it is tied as you see, and the lower end which enters into the anus, let it be dull, that is, closed, soft, violently, drawing towards subtility: and in one side of it there are two holes, and in the other side one hole.
And let the width of the holes be according to the thickness of the roots, and the thickness of the roots let them be small, and let the uter in which the medicine is put be from a wet animal: or from paper, which is according to the form of an asp's head; whose root is one palm.
And let many holes be pierced through the holes as it is rolled up, and let there be a space which is the thickness of a finger between each hole. Then introduce into those holes a strong filament from raw thread, which is made up of ten filaments, or something like that, and bind it with it so that it resembles an asp's head. But when the medicine is put into it, let it be drawn up in the cane between two separations with a strong compression. Then compress it with it.
And this is the form of the asphodel as it is depicted here, and of the holes.
The quality of the compression with it is this: that you fill the cane, or the uter, with medicine which has been heated according to the tolerance of the nurse; and let it not be hot or cold violently.
Then the sick person is laid on his back, and his legs are raised upward; and a blanket or a lint is placed under him.
Then the extremity is smeared with oil, or with alum, or with mukilagine of fenugreek, or something similar. Then insert yourself into the wound with ease. Then let the assistant take both of his hands and squeeze him hard until all the pus has been drained from the pustule into the stool.
Then remove the poultice, and raise the sick person's legs toward the wall.
If the medicine has had an effect, then hold him as long as possible. And if he sleeps all night with it on, it is more effective in healing.
But if you poultice him during the course of a day, and his condition improves quickly: then change the poultice repeatedly until he is healed.
If there are hemorrhoids or painful bumps in the anus, then apply a slight poultice of olive oil, beeswax, or mucilaginous fenugreek, and repeat this application until the bumps are healed.
And this is the form of a thin poultice on top of which there is a tight skin.
Chapter LXXXIV.
I have already spoken about the treatment of wounds according to the book, and now I speak about the treatment with the hand, and with the aid of additional medicines.
I say, then, that wounds vary according to the nature of the wound, and according to the place where it is located.
Thus, wounds that are often caused by stones, or by the edge of a knife, or by a blow from a sword, or from a piece of wood, or from an arrow, and similar objects, are like wounds caused by a fall.
Wounds that are located in different parts of the body are, however, like wounds that occur in different members: a wound on the head, or on the neck, or on the chest, or in the abdomen, or on the limbs.
And I am telling about some wounds, so that I may set forth reasoning and rule for the remaining wounds.
And I will begin from simple head wounds; because the recall of the composers will come at the beginning of chapter three.
I say: When a simple wound has occurred in the head, and there is not a fracture of bone: then consider if it is from the impact of a stone, or similar, and already broken the skin only: and it is a great wound, and be wary of the outcome of the swelling of the heat: then approach and perform cephalic phlebotomy immediately: and do not delay that: and draw out of it a second amount of blood according to its strength: if it should be prohibiting anything from phlebotomy, especially if it is the blood that comes out from the wound little. And let the phlebotomy take place from the opposite side of the wounded part.
And let the phlebotomy take place from the opposite side of the wounded part. And let the sick person avoid drinking too much wine, or eating coarse food.
If, however, something prohibits a little bit of restraint, then let him retreat from food, and do not approach meat, nor wine.
And place over the wound if it happens that there is a warm swelling, a mixture of oil and rose water alone, or with wine in which there is stiffness.
If, however, you are safe from the swelling of heat, then place over the wound if it is fresh with its own blood, and has not changed air, then I will tell you after a little while: and if it has already changed air, then place over it some ointment, until it heals.
If, however, the wound is large, or is from an incision of a sword, and similar: and if its edges do not come together by their own will, then bring them together with a stitch, according to what I will tell you in wounds of the leg about the stitching of their edges.
If, however, the wound has already been detected from a bone, and hangs down, and does not retain it, except in a little suspender: then cut it. Then treat the ulcer with medicines, and restore hard flesh to the site of the wound in the skin, and order the sick person to eat food in which there is gruel, such as are heads and cooked wheat, until it is healed like a pullet; and give them similar things.
If the flesh is rotting on the skin, and does not adhere to the bone: then cut off the whole putrid flesh, and throw it away; then treat that.
If, however, these wounds contain an artery or a new blood vessel from which blood flows: and does not heal with medicine, then enquire about the artery. If the wound is not healing when left open, then dry it with Spatem or bind it. If necessity compels while it does not grant what we have said, then cauterize it, until the blood stops flowing.
If, however, these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment of them is easy and light: so that powder placed on them will hardend them before they change or move.
The method of Powder for the Incision of Wounds. Take one part of olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of dried lime: mix them thoroughly together, and sift them; and fill the wound with this, and bind it tightly, until it adheres well to the flesh, and is healed with blood.
Then bind it from above with powder, and leave it alone, and do not remove the binding until it has dried up; so that it does not ooze. For the medicine will not drive it out, until it is healed.
And when it has hardened by itself, for you do not have olive oil at present, and dragon' s blood also does the same operation in many large wounds when it is placed on them, and bound, and they are fresh wounds with their own blood, which has not been changed by air.
If I have already changed them with some alteration, especially when they are in the time of summer, then they are not in the position of this powder's intention: so take care of it with that which we said, so that you put on them some absorbed unguents: or put on them some puddings made from barley flour, made with water and honey, until they discharge pus. Then take care of the remaining parts with the cure, until they are healed.
If it really happens that there is a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then remove it with the gesture: and I have already said that the cure of fractures in the head will be in what follows.
§ On wounds of the neck.
If a wound happens in the neck, there is no difference in the cure between it and the wound of the head when it is simple.
But if a cut has already affected the nerve of the neck, or an artery: then if it is a nerve, there is no skill in it except that it should be given the cure which makes a sharp rubbing, like a tar, and binding, and similar things. Because they are harmful to the nerves, and make them vibrate.
And do not put anything cold on the wound at all: because the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is a superior member: and let that which is cured be of the leach-ware, like calx boiled with water sometimes infused with oil, or with rosin oil, and thistle, when it is washed away also with sweet water: and also the mineral stones, according to this manner, and the absorbed unguents.
But if the wound is large, then administer a stitch: or cover its lip with powder. Then take care of it, until it is healed.
But if the wounds are deep, or have happened in a pit on the lower part of it, where pus has already accumulated: then pierce it in a more depressed place.
If the artery is already cut in the ulna and its blood flow continues: then separate, or dry it up, and bind it; or cauterize it, if necessity demands to do so.
But if the vertebra has been incised and the wound is healed in such a way that there is no risk of infection: then join the skin flaps with sutures above the canal of the vertebra, and do not touch the wound, but reduce it to its normal position. Then tighten the wound with a tight suture and let it go for a few days. Then care for the wound with ointment until it heals without scarring or drying up.
But if the ulna has made an impression on the bone, then examine it: if there are any bone fragments, remove them all, or as many as you can; and if it is not prepared, leave it until the ulna rots, and separates, and the exit becomes loose.
If the ulna is still fresh, then powder it with a powdery substance that it is made of. But if the ulna has been broken and a fistula has formed: then care for it with what is mentioned in its own chapter.
On the Ulna in Spatulas.
If the stab is from a lance or a dagger: and if you can see its depth, then examine it carefully. But if the ulna is infected with gangrene, and a sickly breath comes from it, then know that the ulna is fatal.
If it is not deep and is still fresh with its blood: then do not put powder on it right away, nor tighten it up, so that the blood does not stay in its depth and go to the heart, and does not cause sickness: but put on it a attracting ointment, and loosen it twice a day.
But if you do not have ointment with you, then put a cloth soaked in water on the wound, so that it sucks out what comes from it because of humidity: and let the sick one sleep on the ulna, so that he runs to where it is gathered up.
If indeed they had rested from their wounds for three days or more and no illness occurred, nor a spasm of the heart, nor a constriction in thirst, and his remaining dispositions are good: then you should know that the wound is healed. So take care of yourself and with care, and with the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.
If indeed his recovery is good, and his opening has been permanent, then you should know that he has already become a fistula. So take care of it from its own chapter.
And if the wound is from a cut of a blade or a knife, and it is simple on the surface of the chest, or on the back: then take care of it with what preceded it from sewing, if it is large: or with dust, if it is small.
But if it has already made an impression on the bone, and it has come out of it with fragments: then ask about the wound, and approach to remove those fragments, if they are separate. But if they are not separate, then let them go, until the wound putsrefies, for their extraction is a relief.
But of the remaining wounds' accidents in the remaining member's judgment in the cure, is the judgment of that which I have said.
Regarding abdominal wounds and the exit of the bowels and their exit.
The break that happens in the belly is great, and medium, and small.
So from a great break, and whenever the bowel has come out, or the number of bowels.
Why do they enter, and their sewing is more painful and difficult.
And a small break also becomes difficult from another mode. So follow, that your introduction of it to its place does not immediately reduce it: for it swells, opens, and thickens: why is its entry difficult?
For this reason therefore a middle break is better than a great one: for if it were not difficult to reduce the bowel, as it is difficult in these two species.
Know that the stitches of wounds are made according to four ways.
Two common stitches meet together in a stitch of the eye, and in a stitch of the rest of the body's wounds; and two other stitches meet together in the remainder of the wounds. However, there are more appropriate when stitch of the eye: and I tell you one as well as with exposure, and explanation.
I therefore say that when the wound is small and it has come out of it some of the intestine, and it is difficult to reduce it: then it is for one of the two ways. Or because of the smallness of the laceration, as we have said: Or because there is an inflammation in the intestine due to cold air.
When then that is so, then you should warm it up so that it immerses a sponge, or a damp cloth in warm water alone. Or you boil it in water with celery and spices and put it into it the intestine, until the inflammation is resolved.
When then that is so, when the stenosis does make wine in which there is stipticitis: and it is better than water alone in resolving inflammation.
When then you see that the inflammation has already been resolved, then wet the intestines with the water in which it has been boiled strongly, or dry it. For through that it eases the entry of its own flesh.
If then the return of its own flesh is excused after this cure, then find little in the laceration with an instrument where hemorrhoids are attached.
And the first cure is better when it is prepared, than sectioning; and there is no coercion to cut after necessity and a lack of instrument.
It is part of it one that is bent, sharp, and the other not-sharp, and its end not small with a sharpness of Scalamoris, but rather duller: and it is like a scabbard, as you see.
When then that is so, and the wound enters into the intestine, then it should be reduced by it according to its own natural form in its own place to itself alone, if it is possible over that: because it is better.
When there is a wide disruption in the lower part of the womb: then you should place the sick person on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head. And if there is a disruption in the upper part of the womb, then you should place the head and chest of the person higher than their lower parts.
And likewise, if there is a disruption in one of the two parts of the womb, then you should place your intention and always keep this in mind so that the part that is injured is higher than the other.
And in this way, you should handle those with large wounds and also those with medium-sized wounds.
In wounds that are small, place it according to what is prepared for you.
Then make sure that the entire disruption is held between the hands of the surgeon: and spread open the lips of the person. Then note from him who follows after a stitch at a time: and this is the common way of stitching one wound.
And it is up to you to take as many stitches or as few stitches as appropriate for the width of the wound. Then let go of the extreme ends of the disruption by one finger's width, that is, the surgeon: and fix now one end beyond which you insert the thread in both ends of the skin, with two ends of the suture being under the skin from the inner ones, until you make it penetrate from the other side, and you have already joined the two ends of the skin, and the two ends of the suture: and there are four orders.
Then tie it with double thread from both sides simultaneously, sometimes using an awl: and join together the two lips of the wound as they come together.
Then let go of the clumsiness of the finger as well, and fix another one: then make it straight with thread, just as you did with the needle first. So therefore do not cease to perform this with the aid of the awl until you have completed the contraction of the wound completely.
And let the needles be of medium thickness between thinness and bulkiness: for thin needles pierce flesh quickly: and bulky ones are hard to enter the skin; therefore it is fitting that they be of medium thickness in thinness and bulkiness.
And it is not fitting that the needle should be placed in both extremities of the skin close together: so that flesh is not quickly pierced, and does not open up a wound before its consolidation, and is also not stretched with the stitch, so that the wound does not go against consolidation.
Then cut off the extremities of the needles so that they do not hurt the sick while he is asleep: and put cottonwools between their ends, which hold them in place; and let them go until you know that the wound is consolidated.
And these kinds of stitches with needles are much more suitable for small wounds. For it is enough in the stitch of their needles that there be one, or two, or about them.
The second common stitch is to join the four ends with a single stitch; two on one side of the skin and two on the other; and let the needle go round them all together, with a thread equal in thinness and bulkiness.
Then, when you pierce with the needle all four ends, let it come from the side from which you began, so that the thread comes out from the top of the wound: so that there is a stitch as if it were a stitch of cloth that holds the cloth together; and put between each stitch a quantity of thickness of the little finger.
This kind of stitch is known to men.
And with this kind of stitch I sewed up a man in his belly who had been cut with a knife, and the wound was as large as a palm: and out came from his bowels about two palms' distance from the middle of the navel, and there was rupture in the middle of the navel.
So I reduced it, after he had stood for 22 hours.
The bone healed well in the space that had been there for about fifteen days; and I cured it, and it was healed; and after those days it lived a long time, prosperous in its disposition.
And the physicians judged that it would not heal.
And it was a miracle that I did not cure it with ointment. For I was in a place where the ointment was not found, and there were no physicians. So I put on the bone a hot cloth twice a day, and I did the ablution of it with honey water until it was healed.
Two kinds of sutures that I will call according to the narrative.
And it is, as you begin with sharp suture: and introduce it from the outside to the inside part.
When therefore the needle enters into the skin, and goes into the lumen going according to the length and width of all the body: dismiss the end of the needle where you introduced it, and let it penetrate into the other end from the inside part to the outside on the other end, with a space.
When you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate according to this on the same end opposite from the outside part to the inside: and dismiss the end of the needle which is in that place, and let it penetrate into the other end with your own penetration, by which means you make it penetrate into the end opposite from the outside, and make the needle penetrate with your own penetration which makes it penetrate into the end opposite from the outside, and make it penetrate with your own penetration.
And afterwards also from this same side opposite, and make it come out with the end which is out of the skin; and draw the needle out of the skin by which means you have made it penetrate into the other end.
And afterwards also from this same side opposite, and make it come out with the end which is out of the skin; and draw the needle out of the skin by which means you have made it penetrate into the other end. And then reduce it in that skin, and make the end of the syringe opposite from the skin to touch with this end opposite; and draw it out of the skin where it was out, and let it go one way and the other: and make it go back after it, until its movement is outside altogether according to this example.
And the summit of this suture, is as its suture of the skin: so that its thread one from a part, from one end of the skin; and leave it a thread the other side from another, until you complete.
The second type of stitch, which is his own, as said Galen.
This sentence, as he told, is such that his second type of stitch, like the way they are applied by some doctors, so that they collect all part to compare it with its fitting nature: and apply one end to another, and this end to another. And this is what I tell you.
It is necessary that you fix this at the end of the cut, near you from the outside part, and let it penetrate into the inside alone; and leave two ends of the thread. Then turn around this cut, and let it penetrate from the outside part to the inside, in two ends of the thread; that is, on both sides.
Then turn around these two ends as well, and let them penetrate from the inside to the outside, to the two ends of the cut, which are on the opposite side; that is, in the back.
And this method of suture is better than a common easy stitch, and it is a stitch whose memory preceded.
This is then the word of Galen as well.
Some said: Rectify the stitch of the foot with two nails. That is, as you will, into both threads of one thread: and start with the insertion of the nail, from where it is in your side, and let it penetrate all the way to the other side, according to their stitch which is equal from the middle.
And you should know that when the break is in the middle of the foot: then this stitch is harder than that of the other places of the foot.
But the judgment of treatment of the wound, is the judgment of the other wounds.
When you have cut a fresh wound with its blood, before it is disturbed by air; and when you have reduced the intestines, and their contents, and made ready the wound; then put on the poultice.
But if the air has already disturbed the wound; then put on over the wound some ointment that is present with you, until it forms pus; and let the yarn fall away, and let the patch be hardened, and fragrant. Then care for this in the same way as the other wounds, until they are healed.
But if you do not have present medicines with you; then put on over it at once, so that it may begin to emit pus, and change the wound [as it is] every day, as I taught you, until it is healed.
For you will not need other medicine when you have treated [the wound] with this, for many disorders; because it is simple medicine for wounds.
But if you are going to bandage a limb that is wounded in an important place; then dip the cloth into oil of average warmth, or rose oil; and put it on the wound; and wrap it around the parts between the hips, and under the armpits.
If it feels pain, or has punctures, or putrefaction in its intestines (for this often happens); then cleanse the wound with wine mixed with myrrh and a little warm water; above all, if putrefaction has already reached the intestines, and there is pus penetrating up to the skin.
And you should know that what comes from the large intestine is easier to heal; and what comes from the small intestine is more difficult to heal.
But the intestine called Jejunum does not accept healing from a wound that has occurred in it at all: and this is because of its multitude, being from veins, and great size, and because of the lightness of its body, and the nearness of its nerves.
If, however, that which proceeds from the ulna is a bone, and you have found it recent: reduce it according to your reduction, as you reduce the intestines equally.
If, however, the space has passed and it has been a while since the fracture, or it is dark: then you should tie it with a thread above the place that has become blackened so that blood does not flow out. For in the bone there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament and place two ends of the thread hanging from the lower part of the ulna outside the bone: so that it will ease your attraction to it, and its extraction at the top of the bone, and the emission of pus from the ulna.
Remembering the wound which happened in the intestine.
When the disruption happened in the intestine, and it is small: then it is possible, that, in some people, it can be restored: for I saw who was wounded in his abdomen with a lance thrust, and there was a bone broken on the right side of the stomach, and it was old: and a fistula was made, and it exuded from it, and windiness.
I therefore applied the treatment, until I was not confident in his recovery: and I did not hesitate to examine it, until he was healed, and the place had hardened.
After I saw the place now consolidated, I was afraid of a bad accident happening to him in his abdomen: and that did not happen to him from that bad accident. And he remained in better health, eating and drinking, and enjoying himself, and entering a bath, and exercising in his walks.
And some experimental people said, for when it happened in the intestine, and it is small: then it should be tied according to this way. And it is, so that you do not get big ants' heads. Then aggregate the two lips of the ulna, and place one ant from them which has an open mouth over the two lips of the ulna. So he cut above it and bound his mouth, because it was adhering and not loosing.
Then place another ant next to the first one, and do not stop doing this with the ants after the amount of wound of the whole body.
Then reduce the patient's wound. For these heads that remain attached to the Intestines, until they are joined with the Intestines, so that they heal and do not cause harm to the whole body.
And it is also possible that the intestines be tied together with a thin thread: which is torn out of the animal's intestine and attached to it once it enters the bag.
And so take the end of this thread from the intestine, and cut off a lot of flesh. Then tie on the end of this thread with a thin thread wrapped around it. Then insert that thread into the bag, and bind the intestines together with it. Then reduce the patient' s wound in dislocation.
And this method of suturing with ants and intestine is not more than a second time of faith and hope.
You know that the wound which is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the small intestines: then it is not a cleverness but an ordeal, and its healing is not at all.
Of the care for Zuchamen and Fistulas.
You know that every wound, or ulcer when it ages and grows old, becomes a sore, does not heal, and always discharges pus, and does not close: then we call it universally a fistula wherever it is in any member: and we name this itself Zuchamen.
And a fistula is according to the severity of the bump filtered out, hard, white: with which there is no pain, whose feathers are bent forward: and because of it some call it Risatus, that is, feather.
And it is in some hours moist, which discharges pus. And so it splits in some hours. And when this moisture is much, and is little; and is thick, and is thin.
And I have already preceded in the division; when I said wounds, that every wound which does not heal, and is born in it flesh, is not that except for a new cause of causes.
Of which one is, either through scarcity of blood in the body: or through evil of its nature: or because between it and on its lips there is hard flesh, preventing the birth of flesh: or because it is full of dirt and filthiness: or because the wound is putrid within itself, and the material that is cast out from it is of bad quality: or because the medicine is inappropriate in its cure: or because the decay of a fall is in the region, as happened in Caesaraugusta: where it is difficult to digest diseases, and the healing of aphemia by nature is delayed: or because in it there is one jaw, or the number of bones.
And I have already shown all the stations of causes and signs, and cures with medicines in a division; and it is necessary here that I make you know the cure of Fistula and Zuchens, which is done by means of an operation with the hand.
So you know, that a Fistula occurs in all members of the body. For from them are Fistulas that reach to great veins and nerves, or to a sinus: or to an intestine, or to the urinary bladder, or to some member of the backbone: or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to some joint of compound joints: like hands and feet: and from them are those that reach to the proximity of the main member, and similar.
Which therefore of these Fistulas is difficult of healing, and does not receive cure, and work is occupation with it, and ignorance. De his autem praecipue, quae ad uenas arterias et nervos accidunt, in quibus, si non uti possis, neque iaculum uti potes, neque uale, illuc cum manu ostendi: si enim illuc manu ostenderem,
If it is from the fistulas any depth does not reach these places that I said: and you hope, and trust to its cure, and see to come to its knowledge, then take a trial from air, or iron, if the fistula extends according to straightness, and inquire of it with itself.
But if there is any twist in the fistula, then investigate it with a thin lead. For because of the lead with its gentleness, and it cures about the twists.
That if the fistula is having many openings, it is not possible for you to indicate on it with a lead. So take a clister from them from its openings.
For because of the moisture that the clisterizans takes it, runs against other openings, and runs out of them.
Then inquire afterwards according to how it is possible for you: that you know what there is an opening, or a nerve, and whether the fistula is long or near: or is a fistula with many openings, and is over all that, with your great strength: with your interrogation, by which you interrogate the sick, and discovery of pain on compression with your hand on the place, and similar indications and causal factors are separated.
Then stand still on all those stations with true station: then go to cure according to your confidence: and is, when you consider then, if it is a near fistula appearing, or in a healthy place far from the joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or one of the places which I said to you: then dry up the fistula according to what has been stated before in my narration, and remove whatever is in it from filtration, and corrupted flesh, which comes out through its opening from the flesh, or a thread, and similar things: and cure it, until it heals.
But if the fistula is of a long depth, and extends according to straightness: then it is necessary that you separate it in the depth as far as is possible for you. Then clean it with all its corrupted flesh.
Then add the lye, dissolved in acute medicines, and insert it up to the point of the fistula which you have grasped with iron: make this several times, until the acute medicine has corroded all that remained in the concavity of the fistula from the corruption.
Then restore it with ointment which generates healthy flesh, until it heals.
If it does not heal through this, then cauterize it according to what we have related.
If the cause of the fistula is an opening, and you can confirm this for yourself: then examine it, and dry it up according to what I have told you: if it does not prevent you from doing anything, either by a vein, or a nerve, or with a main member, as we have said.
If it is discovered for you that there is an opening and there is some corruption and blackening therein: then shave it, until all the corruption has been removed. Then take care of the flesh with that which causes it to grow healthy, until it heals.
That if it does not heal, and it spits out pus as it did before: then know that you have not achieved the total eradication of the corruption.
So examine it a second time, and feel whether it has grown firmer, and clean it with your last strength.
Then restore it. If it heals well, then that is good: and if not, then know that the corruption is in a distant part of the body, which you have not reached. It is not therefore within your skill to do so, unless you leave it to nature.
If the corruption is in a small opening, and it is possible for you, attract it with subtle hooks which are suitable for it.
If there are many bones, then feel whether they are attracted to all of them, and do not leave anything behind with your strength.
If something repels you from any of them because of moisture, and there is no fear or mistake in cutting into them: then cut into the moist parts and flesh, if they are there, and free the bones.
If you are not prepared to remove the bones from your hour, then place them on the limb that will rot first; and release them until they rot as they are surrounded by flesh and moisture.
And guard the limb so that it does not harden. And constrict the section that you have followed in your operation. Then place on the bone, if needed, three times soaked in sulfur with oil: or once soaked in Egyptian ointment, or some kind of ointment.
For when those [humidities] putrefy, if they separate from the bones, then the removal is relieved and their attraction is attracted away.
But if it is one large bone, such as a femur or pelvis, and that which has corrupted it is a large part, then shave it with the last rasp until it is removed [from the body] black and corrupted. Then restore the limb.
But if what is corrupted in it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to saw it, and cut into it completely up to the place where the corruption has taken hold: then care for it, until it hardens.
And I will tell you the story of a man who happened to have a leg [injured]. So that you may place it as an example and an aid for your operation.
He was a young man of about thirty years of age, to whom there came a pain in his leg, from within the body, that is, from the inside, until it reached the flesh, and caused a great ulcer; and there was no external cause.
So he stayed for a time with the mistake of the doctors, until it opened up [the ulcer], and many materials entered with him. And his treatment was postponed until his leg had been bound up, and many openings were made in it: all of which gave off pus and the flesh's moisture.
For a considerable time an multitudine of physicians had been around for about two years, and there was not a wise man in the art of the hand until I was called up, and saw his leg, and the materials that came out of those orifices went with great speed: moreover, all the body of a man was now laid open, and the color of him was citrine.
So I entered one of the holes, and it came to the mouth.
Then I scrutinized all the holes, and I found them coming together at one place from all sides of the leg.
So I held on and followed one of the holes, until I detected a part of the bone: and I found it decayed: which was already decayed, withered away, rotted, and penetrated through to the marrow.
So I cut off what had been detected by me, and prepared it from corrupt bone.
And I cut away what was not in the bone but that corruption, which I cut off and also cut through. And I had now cut it out entirely.
Then I laid the wound open with medicine that was consolidated well over a long space. But it wasn't consolidated.
Then I tried again, and found on the bone below the first detection: and I found a continuous corruption with the bone, and also cut off what seemed to me to be also from that corruption.
Then I tried to restore it. But it wasn't restored.
Then I detected on the leg again, and didn't stop striking the bone in detail, and tried to restore it: but it wasn't restored until I struck out of the bone about a hand's width, and I took it out with its marrow.
Then I restored it with medicine, and it was quickly consolidated, and healed: and this recurrence in the operation, and sectioning of it, wasn't necessary because of the weakness of the nurse, and her lack of tolerance, and my fear for it from death: for it happened to him at all times from a bad syncopus discharge.
He was healed by a complete healing; he was born with a hard bone in the place of the spine, and his body was well arranged, and his strength returned to him; he was accustomed to his limbs; and he did not suffer any harm from walking.
If the jaw is broken at a point where it has already been fractured: then you should fix it like this: take a strip of skin, and tighten it at the end of the prominent bone; and order someone to stretch the jaw upwards: and put another thicker strip of skin over the first strap. Then tie it over the flesh that is above the bone; and stretch out the end of it so as to pull the flesh downwards: and you should cover the place where you want to tighten it with skin, so that it does not cut the flesh.
Place a strip of wood or a board under the bone from below; for when you do this, it does not hurt the corroded flesh.
And it should be fixed over the corrupted place just a little so that the corruption of the bone does not show in its appearance; and does not give an impression of being loose in its own strength, and press against another piece of wood.
If the jaw is corrupted and does not protrude, then a part of it continues with another part; corruption is in the middle of it, or in one part of it: then you should cover all the flesh with its own skin. Then place wood beneath.
Then fix that from the first part where there is corruption until it continues with the second part of the wood; and let the fixing be of the same length as the corruption, as I have said.
If the corruption is in the joint, then cut off that joint, and fix the jaw where it continues from the other part.
But if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints: then there is no strength in that except for a wound.
If the corruption is in the hand or foot joint: then the work is very difficult. It is necessary for you to inquire how the corruption appears to you. And then scrape it off, and wash it out thoroughly according to whatever disposition you find possible for it, and with whatever wit is right for you: when it does not make a contrary Vein or Nerve.
And know that there are many tools and saws for cutting these bones, depending on the position of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness and fineness, and their size and purity, and their hardness, and their rarity. Therefore it is necessary that you prepare an instrument suitable for all kinds of operations.
And know that these operations require a long study when you are holding the instrument in your hand. And understanding the methods of this art will be a witness to the methods of diseases: then you will already find, through yourself, what is suitable for him from instruments, for every disease.
And I am confirming to you, at the end of this chapter, the number of instruments, which you place as examples over what you cut, and proof of what you experience on others.
The shape of another saw.
The shape of the razor, joined together. Let the head of this razor be shaped according to the form of a star-shaped claw: and its edges be shaped according to the form of dots made by the elephant's foot.
And it is not suitable unless they are joined with heads of razor blades, when they become dull, or a wide and large mouth; and its width is great.
The shape of a larger razor.
Shape of the blade-edge.
The shape is concave.
The shape of the other edge is thin.
The shape of the other edge is curved at its end.
The blade shape is thin and delicate.
This resembles a radio and the end is like a saw: it is exhibited in many places from the incision of bones.
The shape of the blade that corresponds to its incision which has been made through the bones.
Its end is triangular, and its ends are acute.
It fits from India. And likewise it is necessary that all which we have said of the blades, and incisions, and saws, should be.
Regarding the incising of bones and the sawing of bones.
The ends putrify, or for an extrinsic cause, or an intrinsic one.
But when the patient was cured by the application of medicines, and there is no cure for the corruption: and you see that corruption incises in the limb, where it does not give any sign: then you should cut into that limb as far as the place where the corruption follows, so that the patient may be saved by that limb from death, or from a greater defect of the member.
And the sign where that takes place is that the limb is discolored until it is cured: that fire burns it, or it putsrefies after nigridine: until it incises putrefaction as far as that limb which follows it, and it seizes in the whole body.
Thus when there is proper incising with it, and likewise if the cause of corruption is from some percussion of certain venenosos: such as the marine scorpion, and the horse-fly, and the gnat, and others.
If therefore corruption, or percussion is in the end of a finger, then cut that finger, and do not allow space for corruption to spread, so that it incises as far as the remaining hand.
And likewise if it happens in the hand, then cut it from the root quickly, and do not leave space for corruption, until it reaches the powerful arm.
And if it has entered into it, then cut the arm at the shoulder joint.
But if corruption has passed and you see it around the hip: then death is certain in that place. And besides this cure, there is a quantity of strength.
And likewise do with the foot, when corruption enters into a toe, then cut it at the joint: and if it enters into the shoe, then cut the whole foot. But if it has risen up to the knee, then cut the leg at the knee joint.
What if corruption has already reached above the knee, there is no remedy except to amputate and leave the patient to die.
And the way to cut a member off, or to bend it, is so that you tense the ligaments below, which you wish to cut: and tense another ligament above the place. And let one minister of the ligaments extend to the lower: and let another minister of the ligaments extend upwards. And you shall separate the flesh which is between the two ligaments, with a chisel, until all the flesh is seen. Then cut it, or bend it.
And you shall place a sheet of linen before all the parts, so that the saw does not touch the sound place: and let happen to the sick person an addition of scar, and of swollen heat.
But if blood comes out from within while you are working, then quickly causticate the place: or put on some powder to stop the blood. Then go back to your own medicine, until it is finished.
Then bind the wounded member with a suitable ligament, and take care of it, until it heals.
And I will tell you what happened to the man in his foot, this same thing that I told you.
What is, because it happened in his black foot, when the ash that is absorbed is like the combustion of fire; and that corruption first happened in his finger, until he began his whole foot.
Then the man recovered from his swelling, after he saw the corruption enter into his limb with its pain, which he felt and its dryness; and it entered himself at the joint, and was healed.
And after he had passed a long time, that corruption again happened to him in the same way in his finger of his right hand.
So he came to me, and I tried to recover that superfluity with him when I put on the hand with the medicines after the purification of his body: and the superfluity did not respond, and began to enter into another finger; until it began corruption in his hand.
He called me then to cut his hand off: and I would not do it, hoping from me about the response of that superfluity: and I was afraid also about him at the cutting off of his hand death. For the strength of the man was over his falling.
Then when he was disappointed from me, he returned to his land: and came to me about it, for he desired to recover, and cut off all his hand; and he was healed.
And I did not bring this story, except that it might be a help about what falls of this kind of disease: and that it might show, according to when it happens.
Of the cure of sores, and the quality of clogging with medicines.
When it happens that a sore is on some fleshy member, and its space is prolonged, until it forms a clump of pus: then it breaks, or pierces, and what is in it is discharged out, leaving behind an empty place like a wound, and the skin over it as thin fabric: and does not spread to the final corruption of its disease, nor prints into the mouth, nor the nerves, nor the ligaments: it deserves to be called a sore: but if it prolongs its space, until it impresses the corruption on some of these members, then it is called a fistula, or a tubercle.
And his cure is that you should strike off the whole skin as it peelings: and above all when it has thinned, and made like a cloth: and trust that it will not stick to the place because of its decay.
But if you hope that the skin will adhere and not lead to such corruption: and if there is a thickness of flesh on it, then your cure with Clister is this: and it is as if you consider it towards the Sinus.
Then if it is large, and the pus that is discharged from it has a foul odor: then your cure with Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, oil, and myrrh, parts equal, gathered together in a jar: and boiled over fire, until it turns red with the medicine: and comes to a thickness like honey.
Then take from it whatever you need: and dissolve it with water and honey, and your cure with Clister put in it: and tightly close the opening, and let the medicine flow into it for two hours.
Then extract it with an expression: do this for days, until the sinuses are cleared and the foul odor is gone away.
And when your cure is made with water of ash, when this medicine is not present with you: and it is as if you take the ash of oak wood, or the ash from oak trees: and throw it on the water. Then stir it, and your cure with it, until you trust that the sinuses are now washed away.
That if the tolerance to Egyptian medicine or water of ash is not good, then your cure with water and honey, in which there is also some crushed myrrh. Or your cure with honey and wine mixed, because of the property of honey is to cleanse and wash away: and the wine makes the sinuses adhere, especially when there is an abundance of astringency and dryness.
How often you do that and be confident that the corruption of the sinus is now far away: then let him make him a clister with what he does, to give birth to flesh in him.
And is, so that you take from the plaster dyafinicon: and dissolve him with olive oil, and wine stypical: or let him make himself a clister with some medicines, and other ointments, whose properties I have written in the treatise of ointments.
That if the orifice of the sinus is strict, in which the cannula of the clister does not enter: then increase it with iron a little: or put in him licorium inuolutum in unguento aegyptio, or in unguento basilicon, until it is increased.
And likewise if the orifice is also wide, then aggregate the lips with a suture: and let him go out of it a quantity in which to be added to the clister without addition.
And likewise if the orifice from which the pus runs is raised higher: then dry him in a lower place that is in him, so that the pus runs out of it down: for when the pus is constricted in the depth of the sinus, it prevents flesh from being generated in it.
That if you do not find it possible to dry the sinus all around lower than it is, according to what you want: then strive, so that you prepare the member with which the pus runs out of it with ease according to which you prepare it for yourself. Strive, so that nothing of the pus remains in it at all: and take medicines consolidatıves which are placed on the mark, fitting for what you want. And extend them over the cloth. And have a cloth of such a quantity that it comes into contact with all of the sinus. Then cut with forceps in the direct orifice of the sinus hole, a little wider orifice of the sinus. Then extend from the ointment with soft brushes over another cloth according to the quantity of the hole: and put it on him in a position distant from the orifice of the sinus, so that the exit of the pus is facilitated: and do not remove the large cloth, unless after some days take off one edge.
But he who is above the sinus opening, that is whom you move at all times, so that he emerges from it what is gathered in him from pus; and so that you know, that which runs out of it virus, is much or little: or digested or indigested.
And with this again consider the place of the sinus itself, that does the lord feel pain or not be in it pain, and if it is in it a swelling or not be in it a swelling.
Now when your medication is extended thus, and you see the material that emerges above the sinus opening, then know that the sinus has already adhering, or is approaching adhesion of the scar; then therefore solve it in the morning, or on the third day: and when you dissolve the wound, then change the cloth to another, and renew the ointment.
But if it emerges from the sinus after a long interval subtile virus, then do not despair of the adhesion of it, because the cure of it approaches, because there are people who delay the generation of flesh in their wounds, and among them are those who act in the opposite way to it.
But if it emerges from the sinus after many days pus undigested, then know that the sinus does not adhere.
But if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and its duration is prolonged: then add to the drying of medicines, truly let the doctors make them so that they are in their substance humid, and in their virtue dry: like the unguent of daphnicum, when it is added to it in abundance of addition from zeki.
And at the very last when it is cured, that you take the unguent of daphnicum, and dissolve it with rose oil, and rub it on the old wound to equal substance.
Then prepare the wound with it, and use it.
And this same action does, when you do not have present to you the unguent of daphnicum, honey, when you heat it up, until it thickens, and use it. Take myrrh and aloe and incense; let them all be mixed together and powder and spread it on honey while it is over the fire. Then bind the cloth over the wound and tie it around the sinew: and bind the cloth with the honey you have prepared until it thickens: and sprinkle the powder on the wound, and bind it to the cloth, and tie it.
And sometimes when it is administered in him long aristolochia, and roots of lily of the sky, and there is a lily: and flour of grass, and centaurea. Use them simple, or mixed, knead it, and sift the powder over the honey you have prepared, and use that.
That if the matter of the sinew is prolonged, and does not heal with this cure: then you shall know that there is corruption in it: or it already has made an impression on the bones, or on the other hard members, or ligaments: then cure that member with fistulas, according to what has been said.
Of the cure of a finger that is swollen and rubbed with ointment, and an incision in the finger added, and cutting it off.
Panaritium is an inflammation that arises under the nail of the thumb or of any other finger.
When therefore the matter of it is prolonged, and neglected in its cure, and turns into an abscess that discharges pus, until it corrupts the nail root: and perhaps corrupts all of it, and perhaps reaches the jaw, until there is a foul odor from it: and makes the end of the finger swollen, and blackens its color.
When therefore you cure that member with the method we have mentioned above, and your cure does not succeed: then you must cut away all the excess that remains under the nail. Then cauterize the finger after it. Because the cauterization of the injured is very hot.
But if the jaw is sound, and the nail also is healthy, and the addition of the nail begins to press on the flesh toward the inside, and begins to prick it, then you should place a very fine lead under the corner of the nail that pricks the flesh, and push it up: and cut the flesh easily, and place over it what remains of the flesh from burning medicines, and corrosives, until all of it is removed. Then this cure with the ointment, until it heals.
But if the corruption has already set deep into the bone, then it is necessary that you break that bone and take it out: for it does not heal at all while it remains in it.
If you see the corruption and the corrosion penetrating into the finger, then cut it at one of its joints, according to what was said above as a reminder. Then heal that person, until he heals.
But if there is a pain due to the fingernail being torn or struck; and it begins to ache acutely, then first of all you should drain the blood from the wound. Then dry the nail with a sharp spatula, cutting across from above to the nail.
And guard it, so that the cut does not reach the flesh under the nail; for you will bring about an extremely painful pain in him, and it will be a cause of birth of flesh in that place.
Then heal the place with this while he sits; for he will suffer from great pain.
The finger, however, that is added on some of the hands of men, perhaps is all flesh; and perhaps there are bones in it, and perhaps there is a nail on it; and perhaps its birth is in the joint of the hand or in any other part of it. This one who is born in some joints of the fingers does not move; and this one who is born near to the joint of the finger may be moved.
But this flesh that is added on some of them is easily cut. That is, to cut it with a flat spatula.
But the healing of that one whose birth is in the joint of the hand is difficult. So then, abstain from cutting it.
But in that one who is born in the finger up to its last joint, then it is necessary that you cut off its first flesh with a round knife up to the nail. Then cut the bone with one of those saws suitable for cutting bones to that end. Then take care of the wound, until it heals.
But the fusion that occurs between the fingers often happens many times, or from birth in man, that is, he is born with it, or from bone injury, or fireburn, and similar things.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to separate this fusion, until the fingers recover their natural form. Then place between them a piece of lindenwood or cloth dipped in rosin oil: so that they do not quickly heal and separate them: or place between them a thin lead plate, until the place heals as it should.
And likewise, if the fusion occurs in some of the fingers with the palm, then dry out that fusion, according to how it is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
Regarding the Incision: The fault is not in those who translate, but in those who are unable
Veins that are swollen, large, and full of melancholy fluid occur in many parts of the body; and most often they occur in the legs, especially in those who walk or work a lot, or who carry heavy loads.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to provide strong treatment with some form of incisions and drainage for the body from black cholera.
Then, draw blood from the patient with a basin-shaped cup.
The cure of these wounds with iron is according to two methods. One of them is that they should rest, and the black blood should be drawn out. And the other method is that a vein should be raised, and all the blood should be drawn out.
But the incising of it is according to this method. Whip the leg first with hot water a lot, until the thick, putrid blood is dissolved. Then bind the leg tightly by the nurse from the upper part of the hip to the lower part of the knee with strips, and tie it up with strips. Then dry the wound in one, two, or three sections with a wide piece of cloth.
Then wash, that is, wipe away the blood from the lower part of the leg with your hand until it reaches the top and from the upper part let it run into the bowl; because the sick should first be bled from above. Then dry the wound with a cloth down to below; until he has gone out of the blood as much as you see is sufficient and what the strength of the sick bear.
Then bind it up; and order him not to have any food that generates black bile: and again let there be an evacuation and a bleeding when the veins are filled, and this pain the sick man.
But the elevation is to be made in this way. Shave the leg of the sick if there are many hairs in it. Then put him into a bath: or wrap him up in the leg with warm water until it turns red, and the veins swell; or he exercises strongly if there is no bath present, until he warms the limb.
Then dry the skin in one straight piece of cloth along the length of it; or at the end of it near the knee, or in the lower part of it near the heel.
Then open the skin with a hook and scrape away the wound from every part, until you can feel it; and that is the appearance of it, which you see turns red into blackness by its falling. But when you have taken off the skin, you will see it white as a cord.
Then put beneath it a razor, until when it is washed away and has gone out from the skin: hang it up with a blind hook, soft.
Then dry another piece of cloth close to that piece of cloth with three fingers. Then scrape the skin off from the upper part of the leg, until it appears. Then wash it with razors as you have done, and hang it up with another hook as you did at first.
Then cut off another section, or multiple sections, if you are able to. Then wipe it clean, and make the incision at the heel.
Then remove it to the section above it.
And make that, until you remove it from the upper section, or higher sections, until it is completely removed: then make the incision.
If it does not obey you when you try to remove and clean it: then insert a strong double thread into it, and tie it, and remove it: or insert Radium under it: and withdraw your hand from all parts until it is removed. And be careful, so that it does not get cut. For if it is cut, it will be difficult for you to remove it deeply, and it will enter into the sick part, causing harm.
So when you completely remove it: then place it on the spot that is sore, soaked in wine and oil, or just oil: and care for it, until it heals.
Which if it is contracted, having a curvature to which there is an angle of inclination, and not as we said according to the straight line: then you must find out over all its parts, and the locations of its contraction.
Then hang it with a hook, until you clean it all over: and be careful at the section above your hook, so that you do not cut yourself on it, or make yourself sore: for it will be difficult to clean you if you hang it on you, or remove it from you. So then be careful with your caution.
The shape of the wound when the wine heals.
The shape of the hook.
It is not a curvature like the rest of the hook, and there is no acute extremity, so it does not sore the skin: and it has a blunt flexibility, gentle: for if it were subtle, it would cut the skin with its subtlety: but it has excess thickness, as we said.
On the extraction of the venous blood from the leg.
This vein is found in the legs on warm ground, such as in Al-Jaziya and Arabia, and on dry, hot ground with little vegetation, that is, where no herbs or trees grow.
And perhaps it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And indeed its origin is from the putrefaction that occurs under the skin, just as it happens within the bodies of snakes and worms, and how vermin are generated between the skin and flesh.
And the sign of the inception of this vein is a severe inflammation in the leg. Then the area becomes swollen. Then the vein begins to emerge from the area of swelling, as if it were the root of a plant or an animal.
When this end of it appears, then you should wrap a piece of lead around it, whose weight is from two to three drachmas, up to five drachmas, and fix it in place: and remove the lead from the leg.
As often as anything moves out of it towards the outside, wrap it in lead and mark it. If it is prolonged for a long time, then cut off a portion of it, and wrap the remainder. And do not cut off its root until it has completely emerged. For if you cut into it, it will contract and penetrate into the flesh; and it causes pustules to form, putrefaction in the place, and a bad sore.
Therefore it should be handled gently, and extracted slowly, until it has completely emerged from its root, and nothing of it remains in the body: and this vein emerges from certain people at a length of five palms and ten fingers. And it has reached me, for it has emerged from a man of twenty palms.
But if you are injured during your treatment: then insert a ray into its openings and pierce it with the ray, with the body, until all that is inside it has drained out of it, and administer decay to the site with medicines for several days. Then the care of him is to cure the sores.
And these [veins] sometimes have many branches, especially when it appears in the joint of the foot, or in the foot itself: and many openings are present in it, and a branch comes out from every opening.
Therefore care for him, as we have said in the division, and with what has been stated above.
Regarding the section on worms that are born under the skin, and it is called a sore plague.
This plague is called in some country with us a sore plague: because it often happens that worms are born, and there is one only sore spot which appears between the skin and the flesh.
And it moves in the whole body, ascending and descending, and is felt through sensation when it walks with its limbs, until it stops wherever it stops in the skin, and it goes out.
And its generation is from the decay of certain humors. As happen worms and snakes, that is, earthworms and roundworms in the belly.
And they are afraid of its malignity. Because when it moves in the body, and goes up to the head, and reaches a spot: then perhaps it opens in that place, and goes out, and destroys an eye; and this happens often.
But when you are to care for him, and to take him out, then he does not do that unless it walks with its limbs, and feels the sensation with its sight.
Therefore, so that you tie what is above him, and what is under him with a strong knot. Then dry up on top of him, and take him out.
If it penetrates into the flesh and does not affect him: then place cautery over the spot with fire until he dies.
And greater is what is feared, that is corruption of it, which corrupts the eye, as we have said.
But if you see it already reaching to the head near the eye, then tighten below it a good tight bandage. Then dry over him, and remove him.
And it is necessary that he should use his own purification, with medicines solving the bad putrid humors.
And let him beware of foods that generate putrefaction.
[On sectioning over sickness by Al-Nakhi].
This sickness is called in our language Nakir, and it is a pain that occurs in some member; then it passes from one member to another.
And I myself have already seen it, according as I tell you. I was called to a sick woman in some villages. And she raised her arm and I saw an inflamed swelling in the armpit.
And after an hour had passed, I saw one swelling going up with a fire-like heat, as if it were skin, rising faster than it can be: like silver running from place to place.
Then the pain receded from that place and was fixed in the shoulder.
Then after an hour he sat down, and ran through the rest of his body, until it reached another arm.
Then he told me that it was running all over his whole body, according as I saw it.
I was amazed at the speed of its passing from one member to another. And I myself did not see this sickness with my eyes before in such a way according to this mode. However, I saw many who suffered from the passing of pain from one member to another; and I did not see it with my eyes, as I saw it in the woman.
I do not think that it is, unless because she was one of those who came from the wombs of dried-up bodies whose venes were detected: hence this appears to the sense as a change in windiness.
And it is necessary that they do not appear in this way in those who are delicate and have moist bodies, hiding the veins.
When you are treating her and the patient feels that pain, then if it appears to you with your eye as we have said, then hold it above her, and under her quickly: and dry above her, until she comes out this windiness: and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see the vein with your eyes: then care for the vein with the scraping of the body, and with that which drives out windiness, and makes them red with bitter pills, and with pills of serapeum, and similar ones.
On the Extraction of Arrowheads.
Arrows differ according to their species and according to the places in which they are lodged in the body.
But there is a difference between them, because there are some that have large points, and small: and埋伏、埋伏し、隠れ潜り And of these there are three angles. And of these some are tongues. And of these some are stars.
But those that lodge in the limbs, fall in two ways. Or limbs are from the principal limbs, such as the brain, and heart, and liver, and lung, and kidneys, and intestines, and bladder, and those similar to them. When then falls into any of these limbs, and you see signs of death, which I will tell you about later, then it is necessary to remove the arrow from among them, for death follows it in many dispositions. And when these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not buried deep within the limb, then extract it, and take care of the wound.
For when the arrow falls into the brain and pierces bone and exits through a hole that is above the brain, then occur: for there occur from it violent sodomy, scotoma, vertigo, redness in the eyes, inflammation, redness in the tongue, spasms, confusion of thought, and cholera-like nausea. And perhaps blood comes out through the nose or ears. And perhaps speech is lost, and speech is destroyed. And white pus comes out of the wound's site like mucus. And exits from it similar to a water-like flesh.
But if these signs appear to you, then refrain from treatment, and pull out the arrow if it has not already exited.
The signs of an arrow that has hit the heart are: it is near the left nipple: and it feels as if it were almost fixed to a hard thing, not to a soft thing. And perhaps the arrow moves with a similar motion to a pulse: and black blood flows from the wound. And it follows that extreme coldness of the limbs, and cold sweat, and fainting spells. So you know, death has clearly descended.
And the sign of an arrow that hits the lung is the exit of foamy blood from the wound: and the veins that run along the neck, begin to pulse, and their color changes with the pulse. And he breathes out a great, deep breath: and seeks the cool air.
That if an arrow hits the spine, which is in the chest: then it is close to a few ribs: and it becomes a great sigh with violent pain, with a sigh: and the shoulders' muscles all move.
And if an arrow hits the stomach, then perhaps it exits through the mouth from undigested food.
And if an arrow hits the belly and gets stuck there: it exits through the wound with stool, or dung, or already broken intestine. There is no hope for his recovery or for extracting the arrow.
For if the arrow falls into the bladder and urine is discharged, and something comes out to the outside, and the pain is stronger on the sick person, then you should know that it is a fatal wound.
The rest of the limbs, such as the face, neck, throat, tongue, jaw, back ribs, shoulders, hips, legs, and their corresponding bones, should be tended to according to a number of dispositions. Unless the arrow hits an artery or nerve, and then it is not a mortal wound.
And I will tell you that I saw such arrows, which indicates to you the hope for your recovery.
For an arrow fell into a man's eye, at the root of his nose. So I extracted it from him on the other side, with fat from his ear: and he was healed, and there was no damage to his eye from the arrow.
And I extracted another arrow from the Jew, which had fallen into his eye underneath his eyebrow; and the arrow was now hidden, and I could not extract it unless I cut off part of his cheekbone, where it stuck in its own wood: and it was a large arrow among the arrows of the Turks, with a soft iron point, where there were no blades.
So the Jew was healed, and there was no misfortune to his eye from the arrow.
And I extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And it was an Arab arrow, and that one had blades. So I followed it with two fingers: and it was already submerged in his throat. So I took care of it carefully until I extracted it: and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow that had fallen into the man's belly; and we thought that he would die from it.
After he had been there thirty days and nothing was changed in his condition with regard to the dispositions, I followed him along the line of the bow: and as for his intellect, I took it out from him; and he recovered, and no misfortune befell him.
And I saw a man who had been struck in the back by an arrow, and the fracture was healed over it. After he had been seven years out, the arrow came out at the root of his hip.
And I saw a woman to whom an arrow had fallen into the belly, and the fracture was healed over it, and the arrow remained within her; and nothing was changed in her condition with regard to any of her natural dispositions, and no harm befell her in any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow had fallen on the face, and the fracture was healed over it, and remained there, causing him little pain; and I saw many similar cases.
And I took out an arrow from a king's son which had fallen on his nose and had sunk a little to the right side; and the arrow was entirely hidden.
So they called me to cure him after the arrow's death for three days. Then I found the arrow's shaft quite tightly bound.
So I asked him what it felt like and he said that he could feel a prick and pain on the right side of his face. Then I hoped that it might be the end of the arrow.
Then I applied a plaster where the drawing-in and digesting force was concentrated, trusting to me that the spot would become better; and it seemed to me as a sign of the arrow, which I should have struck on it: and no misfortune befell in that place as indicating that the arrow followed its course.
So I applied the plaster to him for several days; and no misfortune befell him, and his fracture was healed over during that time: but he remained feeble from the extraction of it for a day or so, until he felt an arrow in his nose on a certain day. And he told me that.
And he told me that. And I put an acute medicine on that wound and kept it open for many days, until the pain was gone; and when I tried to touch it, I felt a sharp pain in the wood.
Then I added more of the acute medicine to the wound, keeping it open for about four months; and then the tip of the arrow finally showed itself to us: And time passed with me as I continued to apply that acute medicine to the wound.
Then, when the arrowhead had become larger and was possible for me to insert the hooks into it and move it, I did not cease to be subtle, and devised means with which to work on it; until one day I inserted a certain die with curved hooks in the end of the wound, according to the shape of their tips; then I pulled it out. Then I restored the arrow.
And some doctors say that the cartilage of the nose is not restored. Then I restored it, and the wound healed, whole and sound: nor did any harm come to him.
And I tell you about the quality of extraction of some arrows: that you place a rule and meaning on it which I did not say.
For since the parts of this art and the distinctions thereof are not understood with a narrative; neither does that book understand, and the skilled craftsman compares to little over much: and when something is present he understands it, and when something is absent he understands that too: and he discovers a new operation, and a new instrument for the descent of foreign things in this art when they occur.
I say then that arrows do not come out from the body by their own power unless they have two types of motion. Or through attraction from a place from which they entered. Or through the opposite side.
And that which comes out from where it entered, or is an arrow moving in a fleshly place; and is attracted, and comes out.
If he does not comply with the exit within the hour in which it falls: then you must let go of him for a few days until his meat that is in his surroundings putrefies: and his attraction will be alleviated, and his egress.
And likewise if he is broken into bone, and does not comply with you to the exit, then let go of him also for a few days: and again let it out with attraction and movement every day until he emerges.
That if he does not comply with you to the exit after a few days, then you must perform in his circumference with a small blade, until the archers become larger. Then attract it, and pull it out.
If, however, the arrow has already gone into hiding in the place of the body, and is hidden and concealed from your sense: then seek it out with trial. If, however, you feel it, then attract it with some instruments that are suitable for attracting it.
If, however, you cannot get on top of it, because of the constriction of the wound, and because of the length of the arrow in the depth: and there is no bone, nor nerve, nor blood there: then find on top of it, until the bone grows larger, and it becomes possible to pull out the arrow.
If they have ears that need to be held, then I fix the free flesh on them from all sides with all the skill you can, and any tricks, if it cannot overcome the skin of the ears in a fracture, and their twisting, until it heals.
And you when you administer the extraction of the arrow, in whatever place it is, then use your twisted hands with forceps to all parts until you make it heal: and the last subtlety, so that the arrow does not break, and becomes difficult for you to attract it, and its extraction.
If you cannot overcome it in one hour, then leave it for a few days, until what is around it putrefies. Then repeat it: for indeed if the flow of blood makes you uncomfortable, then administer what we said in our chapter on cure: and protect your skill from the incision of the vein, or nerve, or chord.
And administer any trick that you can make the arrow heal: and let it be with ease, and peace, or slowness, and strength, as I tell you.
And it is necessary that you do when you pull out the arrow so that it is damaged according to the figure, according to what was with the injury of the arrow on itself. Because it is more useful. If not, then administer what you can from the figures.
But the arrow that emerges from the opposite side, or has already gone out a little to the outside: or makes a bump at the tip of the arrow from the upper part of the skin next to it, and you see it standing out: then cut off over it, and let the section be according to the quantity it holds in it with forceps.
Then attract it: for indeed it is easy to come out.
If, however, it is held in the bone, then twist your hand according to its roundness, until it presses the arrow into the bone, and increases itself on it: and then pull it out.
And if not: discharge her for a few days; then examine her again until she walks out.
If there is an arrow in her, then push it out with the wood.
But if the arrow has penetrated and you want to give a push: then introduce a concaved tool into her behind the arrow's head: then push it out with the wood.
But if the arrow is concave: then push it out with an instrument that enters inside. For the arrow is relieved through that.
If the arrow is poisoned: then let there be a concave meat, in which is venenum: if it is possible for you to do that. Then take care of her with him when he comes close to that.
If the arrow is falling into the chest, or the abdomen, or the groin, and it is close to something that you can feel with your hand, and it is possible for you to cut above it: then cut it off, and carefully avoid cutting the flesh, or a nerve, and take it out.
Then tighten the wound, if you see it, and take care of that, until it heals.
And this is the form of the forceps, with which the arrows are removed.
The tips should be similar to a pencil, made like an iron: when they grip onto the arrow, they do not let it go.
And there are many kinds of them, large and small, medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow, and the depth of the wound, and the width of the wound, and the constriction.
The form of the forceps is concave.
And the form of the forceps is flat.
This is the end of the forceps like a ray, so that it can enter into the concave part of the arrow, and push it out with it.
On phlebotomy of veins.
There are thirty veins which the custom runs in the body and they are called:
The sixteen veins in the head are as follows: two pulsating veins, which lie behind the ears, called the two herbs; and two arteries, which appear on either side of the face; and two veins that run from the two eyelids of the eyes, called the two aspirant veins; and a vein that runs across the middle of the forehead; and a vein at the tip of the nose. The two jugulars which are in the neck. And the two veins that run from the upper lip of the mouth. And the two veins that run from the lower lip. These are called the Algecirachian veins. And the two veins that lie under the tongue.
But the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are five in all.
One of them is the cephalic vein and it runs on the lateral side; and it is called the common vein of the head. And the fuscal. And the median vein, which is composed of the basilical branch and the cephalic branch; and it is called the common vein of the body. The basilic, which lies on the inner side; and it is also called the titillicaris. And it is called the common vein of the hand. And the tendon of the flexor muscles of the forearm, which lies on the back of the forearm; and this is the one that appears above the pollicis by the flexed thumb; and it is called the flexor tendon.
And the salvatory vein, which lies between the circular and the minimal arteries; and it has two branches.
In the leg and in the foot there are three veins. One of them is that which lies under the thumb by the lateral side. The second is the saphenous vein; and its location is at the heel from the inner side. And his wound: and his place is at the heel from the lateral forest.
and in the other leg there are three wounds similar to those.
§ On the phlebotomy of two wounds behind ears.
Indeed on the phlebotomy of two wounds behind ears, it is an oath to ancient catarrh and haemorrhage and sahafati [a kind of fever] and bad sores of the head from ancient times.
And the quality of phlebotomy is according to what I explain. And it is so that he washes his head: and he rubs his occiput in the place of two wounds with a rough cloth for good friction. Then let the sick man tighten his neck with a bandage, until two wounds appear. And their places are behind ears in two depressed places of the head. So then you shall feel with your finger, and where you feel the pulse of them beneath your finger, there are signs with caustic.
Then take the scalpel of a phlebotomist, and he is that which is called Incidens. Then introduce yourself under one wound in the cut, until the phlebotomist comes to the mouth. Then rub your hand with the wound and the cut on top, and then cut the wound with an incision that cuts. And the length of the incision is the quantity of two fingers spread out, or something like that: and make it exit from blood as much as you can able.
Then tighten it with powder, and let it go, until it heals.
And already preceded in the beginning of the book incision of them, and their cauterization.
Indeed on the two arteries that are in two seasons of phlebotomy, it is an oath to ancient haemorrhage: and salt water, and eye dropper abundant  [to wash out excess fluid]: and course over-flow of acute drops towards eyes.
And the quality of phlebotomy is as I have told you. Now let him stretch his neck very much, until two veins appear clearly by the visible pulse under your finger. Then are the signs with the caustice.
Then rub the skin of the vein from above with your index finger, and introduce the phlebotomy instrument below it, and rub the vein from above. And cut it, as you did with the two other veins: and make the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
Then loosen the compression bandage, and place your finger on one vein. Then put a cloth and pulse over it, and tighten the compression strongly: and release it, until it heals.
And now has come the memory of those, and their incision, and their extraction at the beginning of this book.
The treatment however of phlebotomy of the forehead is after phlebotomy of the head, for ancient diseases of the face: and for headache, and redness of the skin: and bad sores.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is as I have told you. Loosen the neck of the one who has fainted, until a vein appears. Then take the instrument which is called the fossoria.
Place the prominent acumen which is in the head of the fossoria on the vein, and strike it with a comb or with something else like that: and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish. Then loosen the piercing wound, and tighten it, until it heals.
And sometimes it opens with the phlebotomy instrument at its side. However, it is not necessary that there should be a sharp end, as in the other phlebotomies, but rather a side end. And let him take blood by incision: for the mouth is near: and perhaps the incision will break when it is thin.
The binding of two veins which are in two lacrimal glands of two eyes, is to the eye from scabs and rudeness: and blood-letting on the face, and diseases of the face.
And the quality of phlebotomy of them is, that it should bind the sick neck with a bandage. Then blood-letting on her: and you stand above her head.
And let the phlebotomy be according to the incision a little lengthwise, with a small one, for there is no flesh in the place. If the phlebotomist is thin at the end, perhaps it will break.
Then let the blood run out as much as you need. And put a cloth over her, and bind her night long, and untie her.
But phlebotomy of the veins of the nose, is conferring according to a sharp fever, and quick sods, and diseases of the face, such as hemicraniae, and rudeness which happens on the face: especially when it is old.
And the quality of phlebotomy of her is, that it should bind the sick neck. Then hold her nose with your left hand, and take a small phlebotomist, long: and bind it in the middle of her nose, between what divides the nose according to the line. For the vein does not appear to the touch there, and because blood begins to flow immediately.
And let your hand be a little smaller with the phlebotomist: and let the blood run out according to your need. Then bind her night long. For she will quickly recover.
With the help of cupping, bloodletting by Guidegi is effective for the treatment of colds, leprosy, melancholy, festering sores, and ulcers, as well as wounds infected with poison.
And the quality of bloodletting is that it constricts the sick person with a ligature around his neck: and the physician stands over the patient's head, and the sick person sits on a chair.
Then the cupping should be done at a distance that is greater than or equal to twice the width of the patient's body. Then remove an appropriate amount of blood from the patient, or as much as you think necessary for the procedure. Then do the same with another cup.
Then remove the ligature and tighten two cups tightly on the middle part: so that the sick person does not move. And leave it until morning. The wound will heal.
On bloodletting by cupping from the Arabic of Al-Ghafiqi. Bloodletting by Al-Ghafiqi's method is effective for the treatment of wine in the mouth and corruption of the tongue; festering sores, also, and cracks in the lips, as well as sores in the nose, and those around it.
And the quality of bloodletting is that you should make the sick person sit before you: and tighten his neck with a ligature. Then turn the patient' lips upside down and look at two cups, one on the right side of his mouth and the other on the left: and their color is black like amber. And this is true: because there are small black circles around them. Then cut each one with a cut.
But if there is doubt on your part about which one of them is which, then you should cut into the larger one of them, and you will make it more clear.
And do likewise with the two nails that are in the upper lip; for indeed custom runs much with it: and cut two nails that are in the lower lip.
Regarding bloodletting Bloodletting under the tongue After cephalic bloodletting. Of the two veins that are under the tongue Phlebotomy: That is to say, phlebotomy of the head is for the pretensions that are in the throat, and the sickness of the throat, and the sickness of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing them is that he should sit infirm between your hands before the sun: and wash his tongue, and look under his tongue on one side with a nail, and on the other side with a nail: and the color of both shall turn to blackness.
Phlebotomize then both: and guard, so that you do not put your hand into their bloodletting. For under them are the arteries, and perhaps it happens that a flow of blood comes out from those arteries.
The veins, however, that are phlebotomized in the bed, are those on which custom runs in all men.
And the phlebotomy of them is done according to two ways. Or with a needle when bleeding is done on the side with a twig: or with an oil to the slight change in color: or by cutting with a scalpel, and it is Astringent. And this is the form of it.
And of these there are different species, and subtle according to the length of the nails and the tightness of their form Phlebotomy with a twig is broad, as you see it. And it is suitable for opening closed nails, full of blood, coming from within, thick, and those that contain thick blood.
And this phlebotomist is of smaller latitude, and more subtle in its extremities.
It is appropriate to perform phlebotomy on the veins that contain the subtile blood of a citrine color.
The bazooka, which is a single harum vein phlebotomy, is the following: For it draws blood from the ailments that are beneath the throat and neck, for it proceeds towards the chest and abdomen; and it is appropriate to draw blood with phlebotomy where there lies an artery, lest a mistake be made, for under it lies an artery. If one then makes a mistake and adds phlebotomy on top of it, he will cut the artery and cause a flow of blood to occur. Therefore, in order not to phlebotomize while puncturing with the phlebotome: let it be done by one who is skilled in suturing with the awl.
For if the bazooka does not appear visibly, then you should remove it, and rotate it towards another location, or seek out one of its branches: or perform phlebotomy at a site where an artery lies. For it is apparent, and cut it with the awl, as we have said.
If you desire to phlebotomize this same bazooka, then it is appropriate to do so prior to the brachial artery's bend, in order to identify the spot that needs to be punctured. Then mark the site with a caustic substance, then cut the arm, and perform phlebotomy by means of a section that is bent inwards with the awl, as we have said. And ensure that the blow does not fall outside the space from the site of the artery.
And when you see that the tendon has been tightened, and there is swelling at the site that you marked with the caustic substance, then this swelling is due to artery inflammation; therefore, avoid it.
If you see blood rising at the site of phlebotomy, resembling urine from a boy, and it is subtle, ruby-colored blood; then know that it comes from the artery's blood. Then therefore place your hand upon the wound and then remove it. If then blood is cut (for indeed it is often cut) then tie the arm tight, and let go of it: and let the sick one be careful to his motion: and sit over his fear.
And let him not moan for a few days, until he is well.
If then the blood is not cut, and it hurts you: and there is no present medicine for you at hand, then cut the artery, if it seems to you. For its extremities do hurt, and blood is cut off.
Or take the skin of a frog, and find it: or take half, and tie it on the neck, with thread and powder, until another day.
Then if blood is cut, it is good. And if not: then the care of him with him is a reminder from the place of the dust flowing blood from his wound: and the cutting off of his blood is not difficult in many places, because of the small wound, and possibility of thread from the arm.
For the veins of the frog are a help in phlebotomy, which draws blood from the upper part of the head and lower body: for it is composed of the branch of the Basilica and the branch of the Cephalic, as we have said.
And it belongs to the phlebotomist, that he be over his fear from his phlebotomy, for there is a nerve under it. If then he adds to the piercing of the phlebotomy and finds the nerve, there comes stupor on it, and its cure is difficult, and perhaps it does not heal thoroughly.
And this nerve often appears to sense. If then it is hidden in some men and is subtle and does not show itself: then you shall put your phlebotomy so that the phlebotomist puts it, and cutting away of the nerve with strength of his.
If it is between two nerves, then find one nerve in length.
Regarding the cerebral vein. However, phlebotomy of the cerebral veins is an indication as it attracts blood from the head and contributes to eye ailments.
And it is necessary in this vein to be particular, if you wish, so that when you phlebotomy with a phlebotome oil-bearing, or with a phlebotome myrtle: for it is salutary for all veins, since there is no arterial subcutaneous nerve.
However, you should be careful when phlebotomy, so that you only use the head of the lacerte, and seek a more comfortable place: and it will not hurt him if, after hitting it first, you return to it with phlebotomy occasionally.
However, perhaps he should be stopped in some people when not phlebotomized in the first hit, but it does not hurt him that spasm in a certain place.
Regarding the usefulness of phlebotomy and precautions to be taken when observing it. The quality of phlebotomy and accidents from it that you should consider in its correction.
First, therefore, of these is the fact that you should know, that phlebotomy is administered not unless in the preservation of health, and perseverance, and caution from the advent of ailments.
And so that phlebotomy is done in one vein of three which are in the bed, namely, Cephalica, and Fusca, and Basilica. And so that phlebotomy is done at the beginning of spring on a fast, in truth, and summer: and in autumn, and winter after a meal, when there are signs of fullness.
And so that phlebotomy is done on the first day, or on the third day, having passed three hours after the end of the three days.
However, the phlebotomy administered in ailments does not have a determined time: but when it provokes conveniently and necessity to it, at night, or during the day, and at any hour, and at all times.
It is not appropriate for boys to be bled until they are fourteen years old. And it is not appropriate for pregnant women to be bled until the seventh month. And it is not appropriate to bleed the elderly who have already passed the age of sixty.
Since then, whoever wishes to bleed should first make their bowels clean before bleeding with a mild enema if they have held much feces in their bowels: so that the dirty secretions do not attract blood from the main vessels when bleeding.
And it is not appropriate to bleed a patient who is dizzy, that is, nauseated; and it is not appropriate to bleed someone who is sweating due to drinking alcohol, until they have recovered from that state. And it is not appropriate to bleed a sick person with hydrops.
And let bleeding be repeated after a diarrhea, and after vomiting, and after the flow of blood, and after multiple copulations, and labor, and exercise, and vigils, and fasting, and all that dissolves virtue from the physical body or from animals.
Then consider the subtleties of the humors before that, if blood is thick with food and drink, and medicine: if possible for him.
Then apply a lukewarm bath, if he permits anything; or exercise himself with some exercise, to render the blood subtile.
And place his bleeding in his chest, on the third day as we have said: and wait until his chest is empty of all animal evil on that day: such as anger, fear, and distress: and of all physical evils, such as labor, punishment, excesses, and similar things.
And let him make present with him these things from which he usually enjoys the custom of men out of aroma, and fragrance, and feast, and similar things by way of quantity of possibility.
Then let the phlebotomizer sit on a raised platform, which is higher than the phlebotomy platform: then let him remove his arm, and rub it with his own hand twice, or three times. Then tighten the ligamen with a correction tool, and wrap it twice.
Then make the incision at a slight angle, because if the incision is uneven or there is excess fluid in the incision, then it will prevent the flow of blood; or if it is softened, then it will also prevent the flow of blood.
Then after the incision, he should hold his fingers together on the wound while shaking them back and forth until they are red, and then expose the sensation.
Then the phlebotomist will clean the phlebotomy with a little oil, his own old one.
Then he will place his left-hand index finger on the wound below where he plans to make a phlebotomy, slightly: so that the blood does not flee, and the pulse is preserved. For it is from the veins that one draws as if from a running chord when phlebotomy is performed; and those are full of blood: and when you place the phlebotomy on them, it will be closed under the phlebotomy, and will deceive the phlebotomist, and does not open the vein: and if it opens it, then it is tight: so that for this reason, it should be that the phlebotomist firm, and is vigilant in these things.
Then he will place the phlebotomy. If then a vein opens from one vein, then it is good. And if not, then go back to the next vein below it a little, or above it with some speed: if not, the place will not stick.
What if it sticks, or it is weak, then let it go for a day, or two days: and do not tighten the ligamen. Perhaps, because the stickiness of the blood may attract the cold. And it should not be bathed in bath.
Then he will go back to phlebotomy if he loves it.
What if the opening is small, or the blood runs slowly: and be careful not to discharge a quantity greater than that which you take: then go back to the wound with the phlebotomy second time, and add a little more in the operation.
And make it with haste, before the place is measured, for the place is measured by many men during lung surgery.
But if you see that it has already been measured, then do not go over it at all, for nothing excuses you with regard to this before me. And put something soft on the wound from a tube of oil: because it soothes the course of blood. And is better in this place than oil itself, and than other oil as well.
And also administer oil in all your phlebotomies, when phlebotomizing veins with a banishment of blood flow: and make it with touriaca and sago, when put from one of them on the place.
For blood is weakened and resolved when it is thick.
For if it happens in the place of phlebotomy a great apostema, for many times does happen, especially to him who is not phlebotomized except at that time, or is an opening of a small vein, then bind it and put over it a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly warmed: and hold it for an hour: because it is solved.
And it is necessary that you do this after the exit of blood out of the vein itself with its complement, or out of another vein.
For if it remains in the place for a certain number of days of darkness or of viridity, then does not hurt that: and if there is a swelling, put over it something of aloe, or of myrrh dissolved: or some of the juice of mint, namely, of calamus or similar to it.
And many times do happen apostemas and eminenties during phlebotomy in the Basilica.
So put your hand over it, then if you feel a soft feeling under pressure when your hand is on it, then that eminence is bad. Be careful therefore, so that you put over it something of what I said. For perhaps there is blood flowing out from the artery.
But put a plaster on it with him where there is stenosis, so that the place toughens up. Then care for yourself with the rest of the cure, until you are healed.
And it is necessary that he should give blood to everyone in accordance with the amount of his virtue. And what appears from the color that blazes on top of the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let him not go out until he turns red: and likewise, if he appears thick, then let him not go out until he becomes thinner: and also, if it has keenness, then let its keenness be taken away from it.
And it is necessary for him who is full of blood, strong and resistant to the extraction of blood by one vessel, so that the venesection of the black blood may be increased, and let the phlebotomist stand on the side: and in him who is weak, let it be the opposite.
And it is necessary that he should extract himself with the vessels and that a tight hole should be made: and it is better if it is administered in the venesection of the black blood, that it is turned across, not a puncture.
And this mode of phlebotomy is safer from the flow of blood and from cutting the nerve: and it is more worthy and healthier than phlebotomy by width and length.
And for those who are prone to fainting during phlebotomy, it is necessary that they eat a little before phlebotomy with bread soaked in grape juice: or secernia, if he is hot: and let him give blood from his blood in three vessels, or four.
And if he has a pale complexion, then let him take bread soaked in honey syrup, or in honey syrup flavored with spices, or in scented syrup.
If it happens that there is syncope during phlebotomy, and it is caused by a lot of blood going out: then let him drink water of meat, and slightly sweet syrup: and he should use the aroma with allspice, and rub his chest while he breathes, and use the rest that we have mentioned in the division on syncope from discharge.
Whoever wants to bandage his own arm and stop the flow of blood should have phlebotomy performed on him often, and his power should be weak, so that he stops the flow of blood gradually over a long period of time.
However, whoever wants to bandage his own arm and stop the flow of blood should have phlebotomy performed on him often, and if his body is strong, he should do it after seven or nine hours from the first phlebotomy.
Whoever wants to draw blood from his body toward the opposite side of the body should do so on the second or third day.
If, however, there is already much blood in the body that has become warm and has increased fever, you should let out a lot of blood in one go and extract a large quantity from it; and by enlarging the opening until syncope occurs, then after you have performed all the conditions of phlebotomy, and having placed your hand on its pulse at the place of the flow of blood, so that death does not occur at the site of syncope. This happens several times when the phlebotomist does not know, and he falls because of negligence.
And it is not appropriate when you want to bandage an arm and stop the flow of blood a second time, if the opening of the vein is already closed, and the exit of blood becomes difficult, so that it presses on itself with a sudden movement, and curls quickly. For this is very painful, in the middle of it, let go of it until it is phlebotomized second time.
Or remove with the sharpness of phlebotomy that which has coagulated blood in the opening of the vein, and put a little dissolved salt on it in water. And place over it some of the tar-water or the color of the sea, and place on it a soft compression until blood comes out.
But if the vein is already seared, then let go of it, and do not tie it up, until it has softened.
If necessity calls for the blood to be stopped by second-intent surgery, and there is no excuse, then either phlebotomy itself above that place, or in the arm in a vein of another.
But the veins of the arm are phlebotomized at the place of Fuscus and Basilica, when they are not found and are hidden, because it is composed of them.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that the sick person should dip his hand in hot water until it turns red, and then a vein will appear clearly.
Then tie over it with a little tight ligature. Then phlebotomize second-intent little by little, not laterally, and not along its length: and let the opening be wide, and your phlebotomy let it be a little above the joint of the hand.
If the blood output is prohibited, then repeat the hand in hot water and let the blood run into the water, until you have met your need.
But if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from repeating the hand in hot water. And indeed the course of blood in hot water is put many times in the time of winter.
And this vein's phlebotomy is better than all the veins, because it is not a pulsating vein, nor is it nervous.
But phlebotomizing the right hand's veins confers benefits on people with liver sickness.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that you should tie the massager's hand with a ligature, or your hand after you have dipped it in hot water, until a vein bends, and it appears to the touch very much. Then phlebotomize it by going across it. And if you hit it completely, it will not hurt that one at all.
And keep, so that you do not repeat the phlebotomy on your hand. Because under it are the nerves of the fingers stripped from the flesh.
Then again put your hand to warm water, and let the blood flow out of it. For if you do not dry it in warm water, the blood will congeal in the orifice of the urethra, and its flow is stopped.
When you have drawn out a quantity of blood as needed, then put oil and salt on the urethra so that it does not congeal quickly.
And likewise you should do in like manner with every broken limb.
The instrument for phlebotomy is in the left hand, since it relates to splenitis; and likewise you should do with its phlebotomy, as you did with the second one, equally.
The instrument for phlebotomy, however, is used for ailments that are in the lower part of the body, such as those of the mother, and retention of menstruation, and ailments of the kidneys and old sores of the hips and legs, and similar ailments from illnesses.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is that it should touch the sick foot with warm water; and make friction on it until the urethra flows; and tie above the knot with a strap. And the place of the urethra is at the heel, visible towards the thumb; and many branches emerge from it on the face of the foot.
Phlebotomy should be made in a larger branch of it, or at the heel in its gathering; for it is better and more salutary.
Since if you phlebotomy on the face of the foot, then take care away from the nerves that are under it over the face of the foot.
And place your phlebotomy so as not to cut it when you phlebotomy from above, as if you wish not to hit it; and the phlebotomist is called Celsus.
But if the exit of blood is stopped, then put his foot again in warm water; and let the blood flow out of it until it runs clear.
If the phlebotome has made a mistake in the first cut, then it is better to proceed with phlebotomy to some degree upward, for the site is healthy, and do not fear ill effects from it when you are drawing from the nerves as we have said.
And likewise with the saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
But the location of the sciatic veins, as we have said, is at the heel from the outside forest.
And the phlebotomy for it is to the pain of the ankle, when the blood is warm.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is so that he shall enter a hot bath and sweat, and tighten his leg from the ankle up to the heel with four fingers, because it does not appear except for this reason.
When it then appears, then phlebotome it as you can manage your skill, or after a turn: and it is better to do either of these, or as if you were to cut it, or separate it by sectioning. For the site of it is healthier, and it is hidden well in many people.
For the site of it is healthier, and it is hidden well in many people. If you do not feel it at all: then phlebotome a small branch of it, and that is which appears on the back of the foot, and towards the ear: and draw from the nerves, and let it run with blood in quantity as you wish.
Then bind it tightly, and place the site of the phlebotomy on top of the skin, and tighten the site. For it heals quickly.
Regarding ventilation, and the quality of use.
Wind instruments are made from horns, and from air, and from heat.
And Wind-instrument making is done according to two ways. When it comes to scarring and drawing blood, and the other is wind instrument making without scarring.
And this Wind-instrument making without scarring is according to two ways. For fire is with the heat. Or is without fire.
And the four places of the body that are administered with scarification and bloodletting are fourteen. Of which one is Ventosa of the King, and it is in the last place of the head: and Al-Khel, and it is in the middle of the neck: and the two ventilations of the neck from both sides at the same time: and the ventilation of the mind, and it is under the mandible in the lower part of the mouth: and the ventilation of the two spatulas: and the ventilation of Al-Akhous on the end of the tail: and the ventilation of the two fires, and they are in the middle of the two arms: and the ventilation of the two chaps: and the ventilation of the two shoulders.
And the ventilation is not drawn blood from you from the small vessels scattered in the flesh, and for that reason the power does not fall from them, such as is the case with phlebotomy. And it should not be administered with ventilation if it is with fire or without fire in any disease that happens from fullness until the whole body is emptied.
If necessity requires ventilation because of illness or custom, we will administer it at the beginning, end, and middle of the month, and at any time.
That is, for there is a man who, when the blood multiplies in him, does not find it until he extracts it by ventilation, but has a headache, and swallows.
And of them is one who finds fullness and redness on his face, head, and neck. And of them is one who finds itching on his face, forehead, darkness, and dullness in his eyes.
And of them is one who scars the place of his ventilation. And of them is one whose laugh multiplies. And of them is one who finds the taste of blood in his mouth, or spits with his tongue and spits out blood. And from these, whose dreams multiply. And of those who see in their dreams blood and ruddyness, and those who are slain, and plagues, and things similar to them.
When then do we see anything from them, and especially if it is on the third day of the month: we then order that a vision be made, after they have passed two or three hours from the day.
But the oath of the vision by sleep is this: for it comes to a burden on the head, and that it gushes out to the eyes. But indeed it should be after the evacuation of the whole body.
And this is called a wind by phlebotomy of the head.
And it should not be used as to one who has a cold complexion, or one in whom there is a catarrh. For it infers a great harm.
And because of this it is not good that they use them to the elderly, and in whom there are illnesses of a cold head.
But whoever uses it constantly, he causes oblivion to himself.
And because of this it is necessary that you order the wind-worker to put his hand down a little with the wind, fearing the generation of oblivion.
The wind-chafing, or alkohl, is the place of phlebotomy of the flesh, and phlebotomy of the bazils, and because of it brings about air, and constriction of breath, and fissures of the instrument of breath, and coughs, and filling.
And it is necessary that the Wind-chafing be driven a little further, for if it is put down, it brings about weakness in the heart and stomach.
The wind-chafing, however, brings about pain in accidents in the head, and eyes, and headaches, and piercing, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is the place of phlebotomy of the bazils.
And you order the Wind-worker to not put his hand out with the scarification: that he may not hit an artery, and may not happen a flow of blood.
Winding the nose with alcohol, and corruption of the gums, and similar ailments that are in the mouth: and it remains in place after phlebotomy Aleherich, which are on the two lips.
Winding the spatulas, add alcohol, which is done with a retraction and heat.
But winding the inner parts of the two veins, take hold of the phlebotomy of the new three, Basilike, and Fusca, and Cephalica: for they themselves attract blood from all those small veins that are in the flesh: and these small veins attract the blood from other larger veins until the attraction reaches the three veins.
And it is necessary so that you order the winders, so that it does not go too far in the scarification: because the place is naked of flesh, and under it are nerves and arteries.
But wind that winds over the Alcahuse, brings hemorrhoids of the Anus, and ulcers of the lower parts.
And it is necessary so that you order the winders, so that there is a strong suction and it is made of metal: because the place does not like a strong suction, and perhaps the fine winders break: and the scarification is done with a large scarification.
But the winders of the legs decrease with evident reduction: because they attract blood from all the body, and bring about old pains in the kidneys, and membranes, and vesicles: causing menstruation, and giving birth to bothor and bewitchment: and remain in place after phlebotomy of the two saphenous veins, and alhorcobeni.
However, it weakens the body very much, and causes fainting in many people.
And the phlebotomy of alhorcoben is close to the phlebotomy of two legs.
The quality of the position of the winders is that you place the winder in the first place in the vacuum, and moisten with moderate suction: and do not prolong the position of the winders, but put them quickly, and move them quickly, so that the humors go to the place of entry evenly: and do not stop to repeat that and continue, until you see the place already red and swollen, and appears redness of blood: then therefore scarify, and repeat suction slowly. Then consider in the disposition of bodies.
For he who is of flesh tender, and rare porridge, it is necessary that the scarifices should be made once only, not more, lest the place should ulcerate.
And order the Ventosator to increase the scarification, and make it a little deeper: and moderate the suction in ease, and speed, and movement of itself.
That if there is grossness in the blood, then it is necessary that the scarifices should be made twice. In a first indeed the way of subtillation of blood is opened, and its water-likeness: and in a second indeed the careful examination of the extraction of gross blood.
But if the blood is very foul, then let the scarification be made a third time: that the last result be obtained.
And to the last, when we have extracted the blood little by little, or a little more, one scarification is sufficient for us. That if we have extracted the blood many times, let us make multiple scarifications.
And if we measure, that the blood is gross: then it is necessary that the scarification should be made deep: and the equal term in the scarification, is the depth of the skin.
What is that which should be administered out of oils at the disposition of the Ventosas, and what cauterizes the Ventosando?
IN that indeed whose skin is thick, hard, dark, and whose pores are tight, it is necessary that the places of the Ventosas be oiled with open, soothing, dissolved oils: if in season of summer, as is the oil of alkyli, or oil of violets, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of pumpkin seed.
And if it is in season of winter, then oil of narcissus, or oil of lilies, or oil of chamomile, or oil of sage: and these similar.
But if the superfluity is gross, cold: then oil of bitter apricot, or oil of myrrh, or oil of alburnum, or oil of annatto: and these similar.
If indeed the wound is wide and the flesh is tender, then one should prohibit the use of oil and one should wash these wounds with rosewater, cold water, water from a herb called "solatri", water from a herb called "cucurbita", or water from a plant called "portulaca", and similar waters.
But if the blood is of one who has much moisture, he should wash the wounds with vinegar or with myrtle water and sumac: and similar things.
But if the sweat is thick, he should wash his wounds with old wine or with samsou water, or with a decoction of anet or chamomile: and similar things.
And it is necessary that the bathing be done in a bath or in a shower room; and moreover, it should be administered after leaving the bath for an hour, or for two hours.
And one should not sleep after bathing.
What is needed so that the wound is treated with care, or with phlebotomy before bathing?
AND after that, you should consider first of all: if then the wound is on a cholerical person, and the sharpness and inflammation of his blood are great: then let him take something cooling, such as granatum mus [pomegranate juice]; also lettuce, vinegar, and pepper, and garlic: and similar things.
And put before him food of fowl, and meat that swells up, and cooked food with fruit: and similar things.
And if his complexion is cold, let him drink in a cup syrup of honey, or of almond, or alsecaniabin made from seeds; and let him drink red wine, which is between new and old; and let it be commanded that he eat little food. And put before him food of fowl and mead; and pigeons, that is, many birds: and let him eat pigeon soup.
It is necessary that the drink of bleeding and phlebotomy be more than food: and it is necessary that it be given in drinks to some men in the hours of tyrocha alfaroch, or a remedy of musk, that is, muscat, or aeselsithe before bleeding; and before phlebotomy, or after: so that the main members are comforted and the blood thinned. And it should not be drunk in a hot drink.
On Bleeding without Scarification: And those that are bleeding but not scarified, are Ventose that are placed on the liver, and the spleen, and the podagra, and over the windpipe, and the navel, and the places of the kidneys, and the pixie of the anus: for these members do not suffer scarification on themselves.
And is not sought through them, unless it is to attach a drop of blood from one member to another: as we place the Ventose on the breasts in the illness of flux of blood to the nose. And we use them so that we solve a cold windiness from one member into another: as we place the Ventose on the windpipe and the navel. For it rarefies the member, and warms it, and relieves the pain because it resolves the windiness.
Also is placed on the kidneys when there occurs in them urination, or stone. For with his virtue of attraction it perhaps opens urination, or removes a stone from its place.
And also when it is placed on the liver and the spleen to relieve windiness in them both.
And these Ventose are administered with a cut only by part. And when they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered full of warm water in the illness of pleural pain: and that is, so that the Ventose be filled, and great, with hot water alone, or with water in which have been boiled herbs that are appropriate.
Ventilated forms administered with fire.
Form the opening so that it is two fingers wide, according to what we have made: and its quantity in the depth be half of a palm: and in the back of it at the place which is around the middle of it, there is a small hole, according to how much it is put into it the spike: let it be made of bronze or copper, with rounded edges, smooth, equal, and three-sided: so that it does not hurt the limb at its position over it: and in the middle of it place a wire across from bronze, or iron, where the candle is placed with fire.
And now this flowing water is made great, greater than we have told you, and the lesser one little less, according to his illness and age who uses it.
For the winds of young people, and they are weakened by others, as much as the winds of men, and as much as the bodies of those who are big.
But the quality of putting this wind with fire on a limb is, to light up the wood with fire from linen carelessly, or set a small candle made of wax: and put it on the middle of the wire that is across in the middle of the wind: so that the fire surrounds the lower part of the wind, so that the body does not burn.
Then put it on the limb: and the finger is over the opening which I said, until we hold it: when we don't hold it, remove the finger, and the vapor will come out of that hole, and the wind will immediately be released.
Then with this fire light up it, according to its kind, and repeatedly do it, if you don' t mind it.
But in the wind that is administered in illness with water there is no cross wire, and it is not administered, unless it fills with water, and is put on the limb only.
And this is its form.
And this wind is the greater, as much as it takes in a lot of water, it is better.
About suspension of blood-sugar.
The blood-sugar should not be given in many cases, unless the limb is such that the vials can be placed on it, because of their smallness, like the lips and gums and things similar to them. Or in a member stripped of flesh, such as a finger or a nose, and so on.
And the quality of the use that is made of them is this: as you obtain from blood-sugar which are in sweet water, clean from putrefactions.
Then they should be removed by day and night from sweet water, until they are hungry, and there should remain in their stomachs nothing at all. Then the body is evacuated with phlebotomy, and with blood-sugar. Then the member is washed with milk, until it turns red. Then they are placed on top of it.
When they are filled, and fall down, and it is possible to suck the place with a wand, then it is more of a last resort to wipe the place with vinegar. Then with a lot of water, and it is rubbed, and expressed.
If the course of blood is prolonged after the application of blood-sugar, and it is this residue: then put a cloth made of linen in cold water, and place the member upside down, until the residue disappears.
If blood multiplies, then sprinkle on top of it crushed ginger, or nards, and things similar to them: until the blood is dried up.
Or place on top of the spot half of herbs that are cut, and leave them, until the herbs adhere to the spot, because the blood is dried up.
And it is necessary to repeat the application of blood-sugar when it is possible, to change them.
If blood-sugar are prohibited from suspension, then the spot is washed with fresh blood. Or plug up the place with plaster, until something of the blood comes out. Then they should be placed on, for when they feel something from the blood, they will cling at once.
When therefore you wish them to fall, sprinkle over them some powder of trodden-down aloes, or salt, or ash: and they will fall at once.
This chapter is also frequently necessary in the art of Medicine, and consists of the restoration of fractures, and dislocations of accidents in bones.
Know ye sons, that many medical and laymen do err concerning this chapter, having not examined the ancient book carefully, nor read its letter thoroughly.
And for this cause it is, that this mode of knowledge from the sciences of our own country is rare. And I was not ignorant of it at all, and was not accomplished in it, except through the length of reading ancient books, and studying their understanding, until I extracted the science from them.
Then by experiment and study of a long life.
And I have already described to you from that same text all the science contained therein: and having passed over experiment of my own, which I abreviated for you, and freed it from the occupation of elongation, I abreviated that also by the end of abridgment, and showed that end by the end of declination; and I formed in it many forms from the forms of instruments used therein, with the addition of declination, as I did in the two preceding Chapters.
Head Two.
It is necessary that we say in the prolog of this chapter the essence of the speech and the chapters on which it is considered first to consider the master at the station regarding its truth: namely that you and those who are quick know or learn this noble art, and others from you.
I say therefore that when it happens to someone that there is a fracture, or dislocation, or twisting, or fall: then it is necessary that you should be the first to phlebotomate him and to resolve him, or both together: if not prohibit anything, as the strength of virtue: or is he who has happened something from those boys: or an old decrepit man: or is the time of feverish heat, or feverish cold.
Then let him be satisfied with his food, cold drinks, and meat of birds and heads: and prohibit wine, and gross meats, and eating in abundance from the table and all food that fills the blood. Until you are secure from the feverish heat, and do not time the flow of fluid into the member: then return the sick to his usual routine first with whom his custom runs.
Then when the mouth that is broken begins to be restored, then it is necessary that the sick eat food that is nourishing, with a lot of moisture, and thick, and dark, in which there is freshness: such as are the foods made from wheat cooked with water, and rice, and heads, and feet, and livers of cattle, and eggs, and fish fresh: and strong wine, and similar to them. Because this regime, when it has been thus set in motion, the clotting of a fracture moves faster, and better.
And you should know that bones that are broken, when they are in the age of old age and decrepitude, cannot continue and harden according to their nature forever, because of the drying up of their members: and they harden and continue those that are at the end of slowness, as the bones of young boys of small age.
Indeed, nature joins together the broken bone from all sides with a similar glue, which is thick, which adheres to and tightens it until it heals from within and is tied from within, until it returns to its strength and solidity as before, unless it prevents itself from performing its operations: and for this reason, you must place food in the patient's diet, in which there are light foods, and drinks, and thickness, as we have said.
And know that the types of fractures are diverse, according to the diversity of the limbs; for a fracture of the leg is different from a fracture of the skull bone, and a fracture of the breastbone is different from a fracture of the spine bone, and likewise each limb has all its parts different from one another; and I came with a reminder of all the types of fractures presented in their own chapter, distinct from the other. And the species of bone fractures also differ from one another.
For it happens that a fracture is curved, except that it happens in it that the stars collide. And when a fracture is made according to the length of the bone: and there are fractures of the limb, that is, stars, and additions that come from, as there are in the reed when it is cut with a pen to write. And not coming from: and there is a fracture with a nail and a break in the head: and there is a small crack fracture.
And all its species has an invention, or its own instrument in restoring it, according to which comes the reminder of it, separate in its own places.
And from that it is known that a bone fracture has occurred, is its curvature and eminence: and its appearance to the sense, and its sound when you compress it with your hand.
And when it is not in place, the curvature of its appearance is not apparent, and its sound does not come to your hand when you touch it with agitation, and there is no great pain: then it is not a fracture there, but possible that there is a curvature or a small crack: so it is not necessary that you move it with your hand and compress it completely, but rather put it on top of it from the medicines, of which comes the reminder, after a while that it fits into place: then tie it tightly with a narrow band.
And know that the place is ever so much the better when it arches and splits in two, except for what happens to it by chance, but every part moves away from its comrade: then you must begin to rectify it from your own hour, making it even before it happens to him an apostema of warmness.
But if a warm apostema has happened to him, then you must leave him for a few days until the apostema is quiet. Then make the arch even according to whichever way you can out of slowness and artifice.
And know that the restoration of it, and its making even, is easier than the bones, in which accidents happen.
Then tighten it, according to which way you may remember it for yourself.
But if the accidents are in a bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member out of two parts, if the hand is, or the foot: or with your hand itself, if the member is small: or with two strings, or with a string and a hand.
And put the member in such a position that you set it on a place equal to its own natural figure, until when the parts of the broken member are extended: then be careful, as if you are going to bring back additions with artifice, and in whatever way you can in your places: and be careful according to your strength, so that no pain happens to the weak by your operation, nor any excess: and be careful according to your strength, that you join one of two bones with its comrade, according to the better shapes.
And it is necessary in this hour, as if you are going to hold and touch the member with your hand. But if you see anything different there, then rectify it, and make even that by the quantity of your strength.
And be careful about swift extension, and strong compression, as many dull-witted people do. For often by their own operation they bring about a warm apostema or a contraction in the member: as we have already seen that from their operations many times.
Then, after equalisation, and after the operation has been performed, and after having tightened his member, and after resting and tranquillity: and warn the sick man himself. And let him avoid any motion, lest he move himself in the hour of his need, and let him sleep in his own bed during his recovery, and during his pain and during his eruption, and during all his movements by his last strength. And that he may be careful not to position his member in a way that causes him pain. That is, because when he feels the pain of the member's position, or its injury: then it should be that he changes himself to another position from which he does not feel pain.
And be careful with him so that his position is equal and straight: so that no twisting of the member occurs when he recovers.
And the quality of a broken-member's tightness is according to the narrowness.
Know that broken members differ in their width, and in their size, and in their shape.
Which of them are smaller, such as the arm, and the finger, and the foot, and the like to them, then it should be that the cloth is soft, thin. Which of them are thick, such as the hip, and the leg, it should be that the cloth is wide, hard.
For a broad ligament connects a large member, and tightens it with equal tightness from all parts, so that it does not enter the member any stain.
Then, after your evacuation, begin to apply a soft ointment suitable for it, in a soft poultice over the break's place. Then begin to rub three or four times over the break' place, according to how large the member is: and grip your hand lightly with the ligament.
Then walk with him towards the upper part from the break' place, and tighten less than your usual tightness, which you tightened the broken place. Then lengthen you with the joint to the place of fracture somewhat, and make the stiffening soft gradually, until you take out from the place sound matter great.
Then take another and work on it again with the joints on the broken place of joint workings. Then lead with the joint to the lower part, which is injured. And your work in the stiffening of the joint and its softening, according to what we said in the first upper working.
Then put between the joints of the joint with a soft cloth or with anything that suits the curvature of the fracture, if there is any curvature in it: and if not, do not put anything in it.
Then work on the other taken out one again. Then set equal on these working joints disc-shaped ones that are slightly off center, if there is no swelling in the place, and without any heat.
But if there is swelling on it, or a fever: then set over it what sits on the swelling, and let it take off the swelling: and let it go for a few days. Then tie up on it at that time discs.
And let the discs be made from half a can of flour, ground, formed wisely: or let them be made of wooden slats that are made into cribs, which are made of pine, or branches, that is to say, palm shoots: and let the width of each disc be according to this form, and this figure.
But it is necessary that the disc put over the joint should be a bit bigger and wider than other discs: and the length of the disc should be according to what suits the member in size and shape.
Then tie up on the discs with another thread, according to the first stiffening. Then tie on top with disc-shaped joints that are slightly off center, according to what we said about the stiffening: and it is, so that your stiffening is over the broken place more: and the more it is stretched from the fracture, the less stiffening.
It is fitting that they be fine and average in size and delicate, and made from soft linen.
Since if the stitches are thick, as is the case with the stitches of those who make sutures from twisted linen cords, it is a great mistake: for tightness is lost with them outside the quality.
And thin stitches again do not agree: for you do not achieve that which you wish with them in tightness, that is to say the thread.
And it should not be, that it is between a finger and a hand width less than.
Since if the sick person is hurt through the ends of the stitches after tightness in healthy places: then place under them from soft cloth or red wool, until nothing hurts from that.
When however there is a fracture with the bone, and there has been a breakdown on the skin, I will go back to his consideration in the second chapter with regard to uniqueness.
And you should know that not every broken limb needs to be sutured from the first day. That is, because the limb is large when it is, it should not be placed on top of stitches, unless after five days, or seven, or more, according to your security against the development of seroma.
And this is the method of ancient emplasters, which were placed on fracture and dislocation.
**Common Shortened Emplaster Method, Restoring Fracture, Suitable for Various Complexions, Especially Women, and Children**: since it is from this that heat does not hurt, nor cold.
And it is, so that you take from a flour-like powder, and there is a crumb of bread hanging on the walls of the mortar when the mill is in motion: and you lay it down as it is, except that you rub it with alum: and place its coating not thick, nor thin. Then use it.
**Other Method of Emplaster, Restoring Fracture and Dislocation and Twist**: Mix almes, laudane, acacia, enulae, myrrh, and aloe with the oil of citronella and alethos, 20 parts each, and with water; or, if the wound is festering, mix them with albugine. Then use this plaster. For it is of good composition, restores broken bones quickly, and is beneficial to many people.
A different method of the plaster which also benefits fractures and dislocations. Mix mugath, almes, and alethos white, of myrrh 10 parts, aloe and acacia each 5, and balsam 20 parts, thoroughly; then grind them, and mix with water or albugine, and apply it.
A method of the plaster for joints, and bones separated from their places: it soothes pain in the injury, bone separation, and fracture. Soak a wool pad in vinegar and oil, and place it on the spot.
This plaster is not effective for healing fractures, but it is beneficial for soothing pain and inflammation.
A method of the plaster which restores a broken bone. Soak leaves of fig and wild papaya, thoroughly grind them, and make a plaster of both.
A shortened method of the plaster to be applied for restoring a broken bone; and when you wish to treat an inflammation remaining after the fracture has healed. Mix root of alethos, chamomile, flowers of violets, and herb flour, all in equal parts; thoroughly grind them, and mix with wine, if it is not a member of the body that needs to be warmed.
But if it needs to be warmed, then prepare it with water and coriander seed, moistened with alethos; or, if it is to be used with water, then use alethos water itself.
A stronger method for poulticing, which is to be used when this first poultice fails and the wound becomes infected during the healing of the limb. Grind the roots of plantain and the seeds of flax and fennel and mallow and sarsaparilla and the flowers of chamomile, all in equal parts, then they are to be mixed with either salt water or sweet water or wine. All this should be applied according to the heat of the member and the calmness of its heat.
Hippocrates, however, did not say in his book that poultices should be placed on a broken member during its healing except those made from ash and oil: nothing else: and he related that they should be of a middling consistency between grossness and lightness.
But Galen, however, has said that poultices should be placed on a broken member during its healing in which there is drying up of heat, such as myrrh and aloe and olive oil and similar things from those which we have described.
A poultice that is beneficial for wounds and pain. Grind moth and chickpea and human hair and bird feathers and plantain seeds and salt in equal parts: they are to be ground and siftered and made into a poultice.
But the quantity, however, according to what is necessary, so that there remains a paste, and then let it be dissolved, consider this then, if pain does not occur, or itching, or the broken bone moves from its place: do not then dissolve it over many days. If however there occurs to it an irritating itching, or a troubling pain, or swelling: then put on the paste without delay, and dissolve it at once, and remove the poultice from it: and take a linen cloth or a marine sponge wet with water: and dip it in tepid water and wash the place with it until the itching is calmed down and the pain subsides.
If however there occurs to it an irritating itching, or a troubling pain, or swelling: then put on the paste without delay, and dissolve it at once, and remove the poultice from it: and take a linen cloth or a marine sponge wet with water: and dip it in tepid water and wash the place with it until the itching is calmed down and the pain subsides. Then, let the limb rest for an hour. Then cover the wound with wool dipped in vinegar and oil, or oil seasoned with rosewater; and bind it up for the night, so that it may be free from heat, and the inflammation of the member may cease, and the pain thereof be removed.
Then, again, apply a thin plaster; and do not tighten your bandage the first time, nor with delicate ligatures, until the wound is healing.
If you see that the swelling, redness, pain, and inflammation are all gone, and that the wound has healed thoroughly, and that your bandage and constriction are comfortable, then again apply the plaster as before.
If none of these things happens to the member, then do not remove the bandage until after three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when it has been twenty days, as far as appears to you from the healing of the member, even as we have said, until such time as the fracture is united, and the blood-clot on it is firm; then add also at that time more constriction than your first constriction; and add also at that time greater swelling by food, as far as recalls.
But if you see the place of the fracture already drying up, and growing less than it should: then know that food is forbidden to reach it. Cover it therefore with lukewarm water at all times, and keep the bandage on for three days, and loosen the constriction slightly.
By this means then the member runs to the food, and heals quickly.
But that which do the foolish healers from the fracture of a member, when they do not heal first, as is necessary, and heal second to its tortuosity, is an error in their operation, and a great fear: and if it were right, the ancients would have said about it in their books, and they would have worked on it.
And I did not see anywhere on them their footprints at all, and it is better that it should not be.
On the making of an accident in the head.
There are different kinds of fractures and many forms of them; and their causes are distinct.
For from a blow there results a fracture when the bone is completely broken until it reaches the socket, which is under the bone, as does the ax in the wood: and for this reason this kind of fracture is called axial.
Or a certain blade incises some bone and incises its face, but the incision does not penetrate to its end; and this kind of fracture is called Kalān, that is, Absoluutio.
And it is a limb when there are two fractures, or one great, or small.
And one is a break, that is, a crushing, or an rubbing; and its cause is a blow with a stone, or a fall on a stone, or the like.
And this break is also penetrating, when it approaches a flap, which is under the bone: or is in the face of the bone; and a limb of these two fractures is also small, or great.
And one is a secret fracture in the bone in a hair's breadth: and it is a small crack; and for this reason this kind of fracture is called Capillaris.
And of these is a fracture which results from a fall, or a blow with a stone, and similar things, which make a layer of bone go inside, and it is joined together by a clamping: as happens in the case of an axe when it falls on it, and some of them go inside.
And many things are done to this in the heads of wet bones, such as are the heads of boys.
And all these kinds of fractures have separate names, and I will go back to them when I remind myself of the whole.
And we know all these kinds of fractures by their detection over them, and their inquiry with respect to them, and the removal of corrupt flesh from them.
Indeed, the capillary is known by this, that it is detected over the bone, and eradicated, and secured on itself with caustic: for the fracture appears black.
In the cure of a fracture, the first things to be considered are the nursing accidents: then if you see from these accidents what signifies a clear sign on fear, such as fainting with cholera, and spreading, and loss of reason, and cutting off of speech, and syncope, and acute fever, and exit of the eyes, and redness of them, and such things to those accidents in many dispositions, it is certain that they do not heal: and if you see from these accidents non-terrifying things, and hope for healing: then begin to cure him.
That is, if a person comes to you wounded first with a wound: and it is in the middle of winter, then one should seek to remove the bone by the fourth day after the second day:
And if it is in the days of summer, then one should seek to remove the bone by the seventh day before it corrupts what is under the bone from a flap, and those accidents which we have described.
That is, if the fracture of the bone has already reached to a flap touching the brain, and it is with small, and attraction: then one should seek to break off a part that is crushed, and ground, as I tell you.
And it is, as you shave the head of a wounded person: and you detect over the bone in any way that you can: and according to the shape of the wound, and what is softest above the ill.
That is, if you experience a flow of blood for you at the detection of the bone, or hot effusion: then oppose it to that which is needed. And it is, as you fill the place with cloths soaked in wine, and rose oil: and make the wound rest, until the effusion subsides, and you are secure from the flow of blood. Then begin with the cure of bones and their removal.
And that is done according to two ways.
The one mode is that you break the bone with a sharp chisel: and this is its form.
Then take another Incisory, wider by as much as the first: and this is its form.
Then also take another Incisory, wider than the second.
The second mode is that you have with you a number of Incisories of various widths, some broader and some narrower: and let them be at the extremities of their sharpness, and let some of them be made of iron or brass: and use the ease in striking on the Incisory so that it does not cut the head and hurts itself.
But if the bone is strong and hard: then you must perforate around it before administering the Incisories with the Terribles, which are not called so except because they do not pass beyond the end of the bone's flesh towards it: for this reason, the Terribles are round extremities above that, which is under its acute head, similar in edge, and a little circle prevents it from sinking and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is necessary for you to take a great number of these Terribles, and each one should correspond to the thickness of the bone, until you have all of them on hand: but let the acuteness of their extremities be of various length and brevity, according to the thickness of their bone.
And this is the form of the three kinds of Terribles, or trepanations.
But the quality of piercing around a broken bone is this: that you place a Terriblem on the bone and rotate it with your fingers, until you know that the bone has been pierced. Then change the Terriblem to another place and place what is between all the apertures of its thickness or around it.
Then cut with the scalpel where it is between all openings from bone: and make it finer than you can over it at the end of lightness, as we said, until you have removed the bone, or with your hand, or with some other instrument which you have prepared for it: such as needles, and fine awls.
And it is necessary, so that you take all caution, lest it touch the brain, or any of the incisor teeth from the sipha.
When therefore you have surrounded the bone by perforating it, and it has been separated from the sipha, if it is continuous with that, and you extract it, it is necessary that you shave it, and make its extremities as equal as possible, what remains in the bone with another similar scalpel. However, it is necessary that it be thin and fine with other scalpel
If then there remains a little of the bones, and they are small, then take them with ease, with the one that is with you from the instruments. Then care for the wound after it with linen, and the ointment which we said.
And another mode of operation is simple, by no means far from fear: which said Galen, and commended it with great praise: and this is his saying. Necessarily you should first, so that you begin to grasp the bone's part where the fracture is more painful, and more evident: until when you have grasped it, and placed under it the end of this lente
And the lenticular part, which does not cut anything; and the acute part of it on its two sides in length, as you see: so that it is the lenticular part placed at the sipha, facing the acute end of it into the bone.
Then beat over the incisor on its one part with a little mallet, until you cut all the bone with ease, as it is broken up: and you are safe from the panel, which does not happen to it any accident, which you are very afraid of.
And if the medicans were not more stupid and ignorant of it, and did not sleep, then if there remained something attached to the bones from the panniculus in some places, he would fall from him with the sharp end of his lens, and would free himself from it with ease. For he would be freed from it without harm, and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate as far as the panniculus, and the piece which is torn off from the bone is the form of it, and there remain in it roughness and subtle furrows: then it is necessary that you should scrape away this roughness, and cut out those subtleties with very fine razors which you have prepared, so that it is possible for you to administer them in every place more convenient for them, and straighter for their form, according to the operation which brings you, and the broken bone, and its shape. And it is necessary that you administer in your ratio, especially at the root of the bone, a wider space for these razors. Then use after this a finer edge.
And it is necessary that you administer in your ratio, especially at the root of the bone, a wider space for these razors. Then use after this a finer edge. And do not cease to make it according to continuity, until you reach the point of administering them more fine, and finer of all.
In each and every one of the tiny cracks that remain from the hair, and the subtle fracture, it is necessary that you should administer care, according to that which brings you to the straighten of it.
And this is a thing which is not hidden over all, to which in this art is any study, and stands over that which we have written, and shown in the great fractures.
But if the panniculus is caught, when you cut the bone: then it is necessary that you should take linen cloth, according to the quantity of wound, and submerge the bone in rose oil, and place the bone on the opening of the wound. Then take another piece of linen cloth, doubled or tripled, and submerge it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth: and make it so that you can do it as easily as possible, so that it does not chafe.
Then apply the medicine over the ligament; and do not tie it up too tightly, except for as much as the fracture requires: and release it on the first or second day, until you are free from the heat of the wound. Then dissolve it and apply the medicines with which it is useless to be dry: such as lily roots, herb flour, thistle powder, aristochaos, and similar ones; and this is how you should make a powder from these medicines, which should be sprinkled over the fracture like those that are dry.
And apply universally on it all the medicine of its property which is to cleanse and not to bite. And let it be smooth in your cure, so that the fracture is smooth: and let there be no gum in it, nor any dirtiness.
And let it be smooth in your cure, so that the fracture is smooth: and let there be no gum in it, nor any dirtiness. And do not let there be any excess of the medicine at all in it: for when the excess is applied on the skin of the brain, it corrupts it and makes it putrefied, and brings about a great evil after it; and this has already happened in the skull hole, when it is cleaned out by it, especially when the care of it is neglected, with blackness on its surface.
Consider therefore then, if such accidents happen to the sick as we have said, that it is certainly dangerous.
And if the blackness does not happen except from the medicine that is applied on it, and it is in the power of its medicine to make it black: then you should take from honey one part, from rose oil three parts, and with them a piece of linen cloth; and put it on. Then put the fracture on the hole: then take care of the fracture with the species of cure that are appropriate, until it heals.
On restoration of the nose when it is broken.
You know that the nose does not break except when both of its upper parts break at once, or one of them: for it has two bones: because the lower part is cartilage, it does not break, and it does not happen to it except by friction, and it twists, and it becomes irregular.
If one of the parts breaks, then you should insert a small finger in the nostril and break it with your index finger and thumb until the nose returns to its natural shape; and do this with skill. And beware that you do not cause pain to him through your operation.
That if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and does not reach that point with a finger: then it should be evened out with the tip of the little finger where there is a small groove.
But if the fracture is in two parts, then make it similar to that; and repair it on the first day of the fracture, if possible. And if not, then after seven or ten days when the swelling has subsided a little.
Then insert a bit of linen thread into the end of the nose if it has broken in one part; or insert two threads if it has broken in two parts: and let it be so long as to fill the nostril with the quantity that fills the hole.
And some old restoratives say that they should dip the thread in butter and change it every day. That does not seem right to me, but it should be dipped in chalk powder mixed with flour. Then remove the thread when the nose has hardened and the cartilage has healed.
And when a feather of a goose is inserted instead of the thread in the nose after it has been wrapped with a soft cloth: and so it will hold the fracture more firmly, and not prevent the sick from breathing.
That is not necessary. If you want to do that, then do so: and if you don't want to, then do not do the thread.
That if the nose swells again while you are operating, then put a wisp of grass or a bit of wool dipped in rose oil or a little of the substance called dヤquilo on it.
If, however, there is no apoplexy of the hot type, then it should be made that the plaster itself is mixed with rice flour and the turpentine powder mixed with alum. Then place a bed of resin on top of it and don't tie the nose at all.
If, however, the nose bones break or crack, then it is necessary to split them open and remove them with the tools that are suitable for this. Then carry out the cutting, and be careful of the flesh that is ingrown and hardened with the plaster suitable for it, or with ointment.
If a bone comes between the nose, then it is necessary to treat it with liniments and administer a silver tube until it heals.
The restoration of the lower jaw when it has been broken.
When the lower jaw is broken and not joined to the cheek bone: examine it then if the fracture is only of the jaw and does not break into two pieces, and treat it internally: then it is easy to recognize it.
It is necessary therefore, if the fracture is on the right side of the jaw, to insert your index finger of your left hand into the socket: likewise, if the fracture is on the left side of the jaw, then insert your index finger of your right hand: and push it out with ease toward the outside with your other hand from the inside of the bone, and thus adjust it evenly.
If the jaw fracture has already separated into two pieces, then it is necessary to administer external pressure from both parts, according to the straight line: until the adjustment is possible.
If, however, an injury or rupture has already occurred to the teeth: then tighten them with a golden, silver, or silk thread. Then place pitch on top of the fractured jaw. Then place a double cloth over it and a large wooden block made of skin equal in length to the jaw.
Then bind the wound above, according to how you prepared your ligature, and let the application stay on until it is destroyed; and instruct the sick person to use tranquility and rest; and put food for his consumption that is soft to digest.
But if you think that something of the shape has changed by any means: then approach it and loosen it on the third day. Then straighten out what has been changed from it with plaster made from ground down wool, or with flour made from sifting, after you have removed the scabs: and place over the plaster a piece of thin linen cloth.
While that plaster remains attached to the wound, and the position of the bones does not change, let go of it, do not loosen it, until it has healed: or tighten the fracture. This fracture is often tightened seven times.
If while it is being tightened this warm poultice causes a reaction, then administer to it that which I said many times in the sedative, until it removes that poultice.
And if the fracture is with the ulna, consider. Now I will tell you if a small fragment has separated from the bone, or is hanging by a thread; then take care in this case, so that you remove those fragments of the thread with it when you prepare the instruments for their removal.
But if the opening of the wound is tight, then widen it with a phlebotomist according to the quantity of your need.
Then when you remove those threads, and none of them remain, then broaden the opening of the wound if it is wide; and if not, place over the wound from the plaster that suits it to make it flesh, until it has healed.
Regarding the restoration of a fork when it breaks.
The fork is often broken at the front part from the shoulder, and the fracture of it is made in one of three ways.
Or it is broken and separated into two, except that it happens to be hanging by a thread; and it is easier to restore it.
Thus it is with those who suffer from bone disease; and it is harder to restore them.
Or thus, with a fracture of the radius.
And the operation when the fracture is without the ulna, is, that you make these two ministers present, so that one of them holds the assistance which follows the broken fork, and the other extends the neck towards the side.
Then make your fingers equal as to their length, until they take on the right shape; and do not let them be prominent or crooked.
If you wish to extend the length more, then it is necessary that you place under a small ball of cloth or wool; and make its size according to the necessity of your case: and extend it, and press down the fork, and hold the ball with your hand, until the fingers take on the same shape, as required.
If you are not able to bring the extremities of the fork to the outside, since it reaches to a depth; then it is necessary that the sick person should lie on his back upon his chest; and place under his shoulder a block or a board, in width, and press down his shoulder by means of a minister at the bottom, until he raises the bone of the fork which is in the depth towards the top: and then, rectify the fracture, and make it equal with your fingers.
If, however, you feel a tingling in the fork, and it moves: then it is necessary that you should discover it, and remove the tang from it with ease.
If it is retained in the bone, then use the incision-making tool which you have prepared for it, after you have placed under the fork an instrument which supports the tang; and that instrument is of wood or iron. And this is its shape.
It is similar to an ear-shell, which is not crooked.
And make its size according to the length of the bone, and the convenience of your case. Length indeed also concerns you as much as possible for the operation.
And it has two ends, as you see: and one end is wide, and the other end is tight.
But if you have cut the wound that you made when you extracted the bone from the shank, it is wide, and you secure it with warm cautery: then you join together the two lips of the wound with a stitch.
And if the disruption is small, or you time the warm cautery: then fill the bone with wool, and powdery matter according to the amount of the wound.
Which if it happens that the cautery is warm, then you pour wool in olive oil, and vinegar, and wine, and place it on the top.
The rigor of the bone is, when it is without wound, and without section, is, as you place on the bone a plaster made from milled flour with alum. And you place a block of wood on top of the bone. Then place a ball under the tip of it, if you can bear that. Then take a drop of blood, which the Saracens hold, which is long and wide: and its length is that of one palm, or about that. Then place a doubled powder on top of the block and plaster. Then take an awl from a thin board, whose length is like three fingers, and its width likewise. Then wrap it in cloth. Then wrap the cloth with the awl in that place of alchemy that falls on the fracture and the spot. Then place the alchemy on top of the fracture as a bandage, and wrap it around the neck, and under the tip of the chin, and below the tip of the sick one: and reduce it on all sides, and so you see that the rigor holds the fracture tight: and this is what does not cover you over, and all around, so that it does not move the awl from above the bone. And for this reason it is necessary that you observe the sick person every day. Whenever therefore the ligaments become softened, and you see that the joint has already become loose: then straighten that, and tighten the ligaments.
Then put the patient to sleep on his back, and place under his head a pillow near his ears, in the night, so that he may have aid from his side. So let the fracture of the forearm be healed by elevation of the shoulder.
Or bind his arm to his neck: and do not loose the ligaments, if it does not happen in place of accident from itching or from rust, until twelve days have passed.
Then tie again the plaster, if you see the face of him towards that. And add to the tightening, and let him go, until he is healed and has clotted.
And the fracture of the forearm is tightened and supported after fifty days: and sometimes it happens in some men with less.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the spoon.
The spoon rarely breaks, and in its wide place: and it does not break from it except the edge of it.
When therefore it breaks from that place, and it breaks in the middle of it, and it is not known that except by touch: then according to what it is in shape, prepare the treatment for it. And reduce it back to its natural form by all the skill of your ability.
Then put over that place with a powdered thing that is made smooth by the chaff of wheat, and a block of wood, and put on a cloth of twofold linen. Then put over him the flat board from a thin table according to the quantity of the spoon of all, or larger than that by little.
But if under the board is there a crack of the spoon in any place, then make that crack equal to the chaff with a smooth block, until it descends the board according to the equality.
Then spread the skin over the top, long, constrictively fitting, and firm, until it does not move from its place.
And consider the ligament every day. Whatever time it is that the ligament softens, tighten it, and if the skin moves from its place: let the sick lie on his healthy side.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days, or in twenty-five days.
When this number is completed, then solve the ligament: and you are secure. For this very reason it is that the joint is not feared, nor is its release.
But if it proceeds from a bone fragment, and stings under the skin: then cut above it, and remove it. And do what I said about the fracture of the mandible with a hot seat-warmer, if anything happens from it.
Regarding the restoration of the fracture of the breastbone.
The breastbone sometimes breaks in the middle, and this rarely happens. Its extremities, however, are most frequently broken, and they are destroyed by its accidents.
When it is broken in the middle, which declines towards the lower parts, and there occurs a very painful pain, difficulty in breathing, and perhaps blood spitting, and a breach becomes visible in the broken bone, and does not remain concealed: its restoration is so that the sick one lies on his back: and place it between the spatula.
Then press his shoulders together, and gather the ribs on either side with the hands: and gently adjust its alignment, in any way that is possible, making it right: unless it returns to its shape, according to which is necessary.
Then place over it a cushion and a blanket, and put above it an astellan from a thin board of oak, or ash, and similar ones in buoyancy, after you have wrapped it up in a cloth. Then, with a sharp knife, bind it over the broken bone, so that it does not move: and sometimes, when the ligature becomes roundish, turn it around to the back and tighten it slightly.
Then consider the ligature at all times, and whenever it becomes soft, tighten it; and if need requires to remove it from the place of the wound, or if there is corruption that has occurred in that place, or pain, or swelling: then approach and remove it, and cut off the plaster, and correct what has happened with the method of treatment.
Then reduce the plaster, if you see towards it: and attach the ligature to it, until it is healed.
Of the restoration of ribs, when they are broken.
You should know that a break in the ribs does not occur, unless in the large spaces that follow the back, and from the ends of them from the front part. And they do not suffer from rubbing, except for this reason, because they are cartilage. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the sense in inquiry with fingers.
And the restoration of it is done so that an even fracture is made with the fingers according to a possible manner, until it is even in shape, according to which it is necessary. Then bind the bone and tighten it with a splint, if you need it.
And if the fracture of the ribs is to the inside: then it happens that there is a sharp pain, and a prickling, like that which happened to him who has pleurisy: because the bone pricks the membrane, and also he experiences difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and much blood spitting up: and this is a difficult treatment.
And the ancient people have devised many devices for it: and from these are those who say, as you put food that generates inflammation and ventosity, so that the belly inflames, and extends, and pushes the fracture to the outside.
We do not want to hurry, so that there is no cause for a hot aposteme, if it does not happen. If it has already happened, then add it into it.
And someone among them said: Let it be placed on a flowing place, and then suck with strength, and it is similar to reasoning. However, they are afraid that the flows will attract flottations to the place, because of the weakness of disposition.
And someone among them said: It is necessary that the place be covered with wool which has already been submerged in hot oil: and let them put feathers between the sides, until it is filled up: so that the bond is equal when it is turned according to its roundness.
Then take care of the sick with poultices from food and medicine.
That if it hurts the sick thing, which it does not tolerate, and pricks the mouth with a scar that hurts, and we are afraid over the sick one: then it is necessary that we split on the place, and detect from the side that is broken. Then let us put on her a tool that preserves siwach, of which the memory precedes: and let us cut the mouth with ease, and let us cut it.
Then let us gather two lips of the wound, if it is large with a stitch: and let us take care of him with plasters, until he heals.
That if the hot aposteme happens while it is happening, then come on, and pour feathers in rose oil, and put them on the place: and take care of the sick one with it that suits the apostema.
In the meantime, he also lies down on his side where he sleeps, until he heals.
The restoration of a broken spine of the back and neck.
However, when a bone of the neck has happened to fracture, and rarely happens to it that it is worn out: and also for the spine of the back and neck. Then when it has happened to someone, and you want to know if he heals, or not, then trust. If you see his hands already softened, stunned, and dead: and he cannot move them, nor stretch them out, nor compress them; and when you compress them with your fingers, and prick them with an aiguille, he does not feel that, nor does he feel pain in them: then you will know that it is not healing, and it is mortal in many cases.
That if he moves them and feels constriction with your fingers and pricks: then you will know that the spine of the bones is healed, and that the sick will recover with treatment.
That if he becomes like the spine of the back in his shape, and you want to know if it heals as well or not: then consider his feet: then if you see that they have softened, and that which happens in his hands also happens in his feet: then when he lies on his back, he walks with a wavering and without willingness: and when he raises himself on his stomach, he walks without unwillingness: and when he raises himself on his back, and wants to drink, and cannot: then you will know that it is mortal. Therefore do not undertake to heal him.
But if nothing of this happens to him, the matter is lighter.
And the healing that happens from this is such that you put oil on a sore back: so that you put it on a shredded horse: or when you rub it in.
Place it over that several times a day until he sits down with a sore blister: then place it on a place of supporting plasters, drying up, and紧緊地绑在上面用绳子：然后命令病人静静地休息。 And let him not sleep on the part where he feels pain until it heals.
That if something happens to the bone as a blister, or something that has already separated from it: then it is necessary that you cut off the skin and remove it. Then gather up the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture. Then heal yourself with some ointment, from the unguentarium, until you are well.
If it is ultimately broken, however, the bones of the foot and the heel: then you should, as you introduce your left hand's thumb into the anus, and your right hand's hand, as possible, and by second nature: and by equalizing them.
Then place over it, and take it away: and heal the wound with the cure that preceded it, until it is well.
The Restoration of Ankles.
Chapter XI.
Rarely do the bones break in the ankles. If they break, then their fracture is not, unless it is broken at the extremities of them: and they split along their length, and lean towards the inside: and happens to the foot an ache in the place, and a prickling: and the leg freezes when it breaks.
And the restoration thereof is, that you should extend your hand over it, until you stand on top of the fracture, just as it is in the figure of it.
If the fracture is only in its extremities alone, then make it equal, according to which it is prepared for you out of equality, until it resembles its natural shape.
If, however, the fracture is along its length, or has already leaned towards the inside: then let the sick person lie on his back, until the restoration of its fracture is prepared for you. When you have made it equal, then place over it a plaster: and then place over it an wooden staff, or a skin: and tighten it with a firm tension so that you do not move the fracture, nor remove the staff.
And the equal concavity of them with that by which it fills it, until you take it by means of a firm tension according to equality: and command the sick person, that he should lie on his back, or on his sound side.
But if his wound is warm: then stop the spread of it, and restore him, until the warmth of the wound subsides: and place something above it that will support it, according to what preceded it; then return to its restoration; and bind it tightly as is right.
But if he has a broken bone, or it is crushed, extract it.
For the restoration of a fracture, ask for an assistant.
The assistant is that which is between the knee and the head of the spatula.
But if it is broken, then its restoration is according to two modes.
Of which one is: that you take a flat piece of wood of medium thickness, according to this form, which follows.
And bind together with two ties at the two ends.
Then hang it from a raised place: and let the sick one sit on a chair. Then let him throw his broken arm over the wood, until it reaches its joint, in which place sits the little piece of wood.
Then hang it from above the sick person something heavy so that he extends himself by the aid of a servant below. Then the doctor shall adjust the fracture with his hands simultaneously, until he has restored the fracture; according to what is necessary.
And the other mode is that the sick person lies on his back on his pillow: and let his hand be suspended from his neck with a strap. Then order two servants, that one of them hold what is above the fracture with his hands: and that the other hold below him, and each one extends to his side.
And if it is a knee, so that the extension is stronger, then tie a strap under the fracture, and above it with another strap: and let each of the two servants extend to their sides.
But if the fracture is near the end of the arm, then it should be: that one tie is placed under the joint, and the other under the fracture towards the elbow.
And likewise if the fracture is near the elbow: then it should be placed, so that ligaments are put on that place, and also on the elbow itself.
Then the fractured bone should be made equal with ease without work, until such time as it is made equal according to what is necessary, and applied by good application: then tighten it, if it does not happen that a warm apoplexy occurs.
If on the other hand a warm apoplexy occurs, then let the tightening be discontinued until the seventh day. And place on top of it a woolen cloth soaked in vinegar and olive oil, until such time as the apoplexy subsides: then tighten it: and the mode of tightening it is that you put a plaster over the fracture.
Then place an unguentation of new cloth over the plaster. Then he should grind the arm on a board, and put his open hand on his shoulder.
And put a cloth, and tighten over the helper arm, so that the arm stays in place with the help of the supports: if it does not prevent you from doing so, nor should anything change on top of you from the broken bone.
That if the time comes when something changes on top of you from the broken bone, then use supports: and it is that you put on top of the fracture a support which is wider and stronger than the other supports. And put between all the supports a distance of a finger: and let the length of the supports be according to the fracture with the addition of three fingers from every part.
Then tighten over the supports with the tightening which I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your tightening should be stronger over the place of the fracture than yours. And to the extent that the fracture is elongated, the tightening is less strong.
If then you see that the supports of the supports and the tightening are in place, as we have said, at the time when you restore the member: then do it: and if you see a warm apoplexy, then discontinue the tightening and the supports until the seventh day, as we have said.
Afterwards, examine the ligament for three days, so that there is no itching or swelling at the site, nor does food reach the member, due to the excess stiffness. So, make the whole thing straight according to what we have said.
But if you are confident that nothing will come from it: then do not open the ligaments until after three days, or longer.
And let the nurse lie on her back and put his hands on her stomach, and place under the pillow a stuffed pillow filled with wool evenly.
And consider at every hour of the night or day, so that the broken member does not unfold, nor do the ligaments become softened. So, make the whole thing straight with your skill.
And place food for the nurse according to the order we have set out, so that there is a light meal first, until the mouth begins to tighten: then it should become fattening food.
For the custom of the assistant and the limb is that it be tightened for forty days: so then it should be loosened, and given a bath, and treated with ointment that straightens it out.
But if the fracture has become rotten and worn away: then do not open the ligaments and stars from it until fifty days, and until two months.
On the restoration of a broken arm.
The arm is made up of two bones called the two heads.
Of which one is small: and this is that which follows the thumb. And the other is large, and this is that which is placed beneath the little finger on the lower side.
Perhaps, therefore, the bone in one part alone breaks, or the other, and perhaps both break at once.
But when the bone breaks above on the small side, then the restoration of it is easy, and its recovery easier.
And when the bone breaks below on the large side, it is a bad break, and its recovery difficult.
And it is worse when two bones break at once.
If therefore the bone that is broken is not very far above, then it is good for the doctor to go to its restoration, so that he can put an extension on it with ease, until it is equal.
But if the broken bone is big: then it should be, so that he puts a stronger splint on it quickly.
And it is necessary to put the hand in a position at its restoration, and its extension over the little finger. And the thumb of the hand should be placed higher than all the fingers; and the articular lower part of all the fingers, or other than that; and the injured sitting on a square behind himself, and the little finger before him, or directly in front of him, at height, so that the injured does not suffer pain.
Then let it be extended by the arm from the lower side, or with its own hand, or with a strap. And another helper should extend from above similarly.
Then the doctor sets the bone, until he reduces it to a better form than he can.
If there are any fragments in the fracture of the bone, then you shall strive to reduce any fragment to its place with your own strength.
But if it seems to you that there is a separate fragment sticking out through the skin, and there is no hope of restoring it: then find under it, and remove it according to the mode which we have said before in those which precede these.
But if the fracture is with the wrist, I have already done for that particular caputulum, so you take the cure of it from there.
If it happens in the beginning of your restoration that there is a hot swelling, then take a thin cloth made of linen, wet with oil that has been seasoned with white wax, and white powdery stuff, and put the middle between the thickness: and tightly tie the cloth on the bone, until when he sits down the swelling goes away: then remove the cloth, and put a pre-made patch made of powder that is finely ground with linen thread. Then put on stars, and let there be a star which is placed over the fracture itself a little wider, and stronger.
And you shall know that the number of stars of the arm is six in various dispositions: whether it is a fracture in one hand, or in two hands together.
Then put on your bandage over the site of the fracture a stronger and more robust one, and somewhat more with the bandage of its upper fracture, or its lower: or put on a softer bandage somewhat according to what has preceded it at the beginning of this chapter.
And let there be cloths that are wrapped around the fracture, soft, moist: and not hard, rough. And let there be a thread that is tied from linen itself, middle between thin and thick, as we have described.
And consider the limb and its ligaments after days. That if something should happen in which correction is necessary, such as itching that happens to a limb: then it should be, to immerse the limb in hot water, until that itch ceases, and remove the bandage not constricted, until it has ceased, and then repeat the bandage.
That if the bandage is already softened, and the bone has already moved away, and such things: then correct it all with your skill, and consider again.
For if nutrition is prevented from reaching the limb, because of excess bandage, then it should be, to make the body somewhat softer, and remove it for a few days, until it has healed to the body's nutrition, and then tie it up.
But if any of those things that we have said does not happen to the limb, then it is not necessary to untie it, unless after twenty days, or around these.
Then hang up the injured arm by its side. And let the neck be equal, and guard it with your skill from moving. And let him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days, or in thirty-two days; and perhaps it will be restored in fifty-nine days. All this depends on the state of the wound's closure and the state of healing strength.
Of the restoration of fractures of the hand.
Know that it is rare for a fracture to occur in the wrist and knuckles of the fingers. And it does not happen to him, unless there is much friction.
When then a fracture occurs in the foot, or from much friction: then it is necessary that the sick man should be seated at ease; and before him there shall be a seat according to equality. Then put his hand on top of it extended.
Then the surgeon shall extend the broken bones and make them even; and let the doctor join them together when they are well joined together.
Then it is necessary that he should put plaster and a bandage, if there does not occur a warm blister. Then put the plaster above from the quantity of the place; and you have already wrapped it up in linen cloth.
But if the fracture is lower around the ankle of the foot, then make a sphere-like shape from cloth; and order the sick man to put his hand on top of it with his broken foot: and then bind it with a long piece of cloth.
And let there be a splint made of linen cloth, on which sits something soft, to apply the cloth to the body of the foot: and bind it, according to what is necessary.
But if the fracture is on the outside, then it is necessary: that you put the splint above and a splint from below on the foot: and let the hand be open and straight. Then put a bandage, as it is extended; and extend it between the fingers with a ligament.
That if a fracture occurs in someone's knuckles of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, make it even according to what is necessary. Then bind it with the plant: and if you wish, put a straight stake on it, so that the fracture may be held in place and not move.
But if the fracture is in the middle, or in the index, or in the ring finger, then it should be made equal and bound to the healthy finger that follows it: or all should be bound according to the continuity: and that is better. Or put a stake on top of it, as we have said for the thumb.
And consider in your restoration, and after that preparation of the wound: and oppose with it what should be opposed, when anything happens from it, according to what it goes back to its story.
[On the Restoration of the Fracture of the coxae.]
The hip bone often breaks and is felt because it turns towards the inner and back part.
And the restoration of it is so that one binds ligaments above the fracture, and a ligament below the fracture. And the invalid will stretch out on his face.
Then he extends all the ligaments towards his side according to equality: and this is when there is a fracture in the middle of the bone.
But if the fracture is near the root of the coxae, then let there be a ligament on the side towards the pelvis, so that it falls up: and a ligament below the fracture.
And in the same way if there is a fracture near the knee, then let there be a nearby ligament of the knee, so that it falls down: and a ligament below the fracture.
Then the doctor makes the bones of both his hands equal, until he reduces them according to their natural shape: and the joints are joined together.
Then it is necessary that you put a cast on it and tighten it up, if it does not happen to the appendage. What if something happens in that appendage: then you should let go of it for a few days, until the heat of the appendage has subsided: and then come back to your cure.
But let his scar be thus. But you should wrap a strapping cloth around the fracture; that is, a bond: and double it twice or three times; and leave off from it what is excessive. Then wrap up the leg, until the heel has joined the heel bone.
And insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg close to the knee from below, and bring the ends of the thread from the upper part of the two parts. Then wrap up the leg and thigh that which is excessive with the strapping cloth.
Then put on the place of the fracture itself the stars; and put one star on the bone of the leg.
Then fill up the gap between the thigh and the leg with soft cloth, so that the tightness is equal.
Then begin with the strong middle of the three or four wound-bindings at the place of fracture. And if you lengthen more by means of the rope from the place of fracture, your tightness will be less and softer, and gentler.
Then extend to both ends of the thread that you inserted between the thigh and the leg. So bind with the two stars that are on top. Then move with both ends of the thread to the bottom, until you reach the heel of the foot. And bind also the ends of the stars from the other side: so that the wound-binding does not move away from its place.
Then remove the tightness from that when it remains, so that corrosion does not happen to the limb, nor swelling, nor inflation, and similar to these. If something should happen to any of those things. So arrange with the solution of that, and set right what has happened from there all, as often as we have said many times.
But if a piece of bone has come out of the bone that hurts: then it is necessary to make it equal, if you can do it. And if not, find on that, and remove it: and take care with what preceded it, until it heals.
And when this fracture is tightened, besides adding pegs to it, as we have said in the adiutorium and brachium.
But verily in restoring it thus fractured, there does not occur a limp disease. And if it is restored alone, besides applying the other leg to him, then he must necessarily limp always.
And you should know that the hip is tightened in fifty days, or a little added, or a little massaged: all of this is according to the diversity of complexions and other dispositions.
The restoration of the fracture of the kneecap.
You should know that a fracture rarely occurs in the kneecap, but it often occurs to him by abrasion.
But if a fracture has actually occurred, then either there is a crack, or a hole in its parts. And it is with an injury, and without an injury. And he will stand on top of that with all his might.
And its restoration is such that he equals what has been broken from his parts with fingers, until he sets it together, and joins it according to what is possible by way of equitation and facility, and manufacture.
Then put on plaster from wheat flour, or grind it with egg white: and put on top of it a round peg, if you can bear that one: and tighten it tightly with a fitting instrument to it.
Then consider all the dispositions which we have mentioned in the other fractures: such as feverishness and its like: so that you oppose every accident to him who belongs to him, until he is healed.
The restoration of a fracture of the limb.
You should know that there are two bones in the limb, of which one is large and is called the femur, and the other is fine, and is called the fibula.
And it happens to both species of fracture that occurs in two bones of the arm: and because of this, its restoration is done as the equal restoration of the arm, and the operation is one.
If two bones break at the same time, the crack spreads to all parts of the body.
And if a smaller bone breaks, the crack spreads to the front part of the body.
And if a larger bone breaks, it injures what is below it: and it is from these that you do not see.
Then administer the extension, and the normalization, and the binding of the sternum according to that which is equal.
However, if the fracture of the Crus is a bad fracture, it has many complications: let there be less extension, and milder relief for you.
And in the Crus there is a certain operation on the arm: and it is, as when you equalize the hinges, and complete all your operation, then take two strips of pine wood, which is used in the making of the joints that are placed under the tables: and they are made from palm leaves: and choose from them those that have a small thickness, and there are none from the minute ones: and let their length be according to the length of the Crus from the knee down.
Then wrap around a piece of cloth twice, on either side, according to its length. And place one side of the Crus from one side, and the other from the other: and they are from the knee down to the foot.
Then bind the two strips in three places from the two ends and the middle. Since the tightening is prohibited, the Crus tilts to the right and to the left, and stands firmly.
And now allow a piece of wood to be administered according to the length of the Crus, and place it on so that it keeps it from moving.
And much more should you do, that you make it in the fracture when it is its own proper uulnus.
Then consider the Crus every day, and study with it the last resort from aching, or swelling, or any other thing. And if then something happens from them, then oppose it with him that it should not happen again until it is healed, if God wills.Et si Crure est fractura foeda, et non potest sanetur in diebus aliquo: tunc ad tuum opus oportet ut illud exspectes donec tu facias, aut quod alter faciat qui potuit
On the fracture of the bones of the foot and the toes.
The fracture of the calcaneum does not occur within the bone itself.
The fractures of the bones of the foot, and of the toes, do indeed occur sometimes, and the fracture of the toes occurs but little; but it does not happen to them except through abrasion in many directions.
If a fracture should occur in the bones of the foot, and if you see those bones disjoined from one another, then let the sick person place his foot on the ground prepared for walking.
Then stand you, and set your foot upon that which is raised from those bones; then press it, or trample on it; and make it even, until it comes back into its place.
Then set a plaster upon it, and cover it with a cloth; and place under the foot a thin panel which has two flat heads.
Then bind it closely to the foot as you walk with it, having wrapped it with cloths, and leave it there until it has been healed over by the bandages.
When therefore they have passed the time of three or four days, then dissolve the ligatures. For you will find the bones even if they are not broken, or if they are broken and dislocated. The operation then is upon them as you see it.
If any of the toes are broken, then restore them, and make even all the toes according to what you tell me in the restoration of the toes of the hand. Then place your finger upon an Astragale according to the length of the finger, and make it a little broader; then place under the foot the panel which you told me to prepare for you, and bind it closely to the foot as you walk with it.
If, however, the fracture has occurred among the bones which are two or three or more, then place upon each finger an Astragale of its own quantity, wrapped in a cloth; and bind the panel beneath the foot, standing on one head of the panel outside the foot as you walk with it: and let the sick person hold the panel by the hand so that he will keep his balance well.
And it is proper that you not forget, unless you remember all that I said to you in the remaining fractures from the accidents which we have mentioned: and oppose every accident with what is necessary.
Regarding the fracture of the female gender, and the ribs of the chest, and the male gender for the male gender.
When the woman's hip is fractured, then let her sit in a squatting position. Then lean her slightly towards the back of herself and hold her from behind.
Then the midwife should fill the woman's womb, until she is filled: and let it be made in the female gender from that like a ball.
Then shake the woman, and support her back slowly. That coccyx should be removed, until it is in front of the woman' s door like a ball, and the fractured bone returns.
Then put a small pillow on her back. When she therefore wants to urinate, remove the coccyx with ease, then let her urinate: and reduce it according to the manner in which you introduced it in the first place: and then return to her little pillow first.
Let that be done for seven days, or about, for the bone itself is restored.
And if you want, take a smooth stick, and tighten it over the hole of her tube, and insert the entire smooth stick into the woman' s womb. Then blow into the tube with force, until the smooth muscle bends inside the womb, for the fracture returns.
Then fill it with a coccyx, and let it stand for several days, according to what we have mentioned, until it is healed.
And when the rib of a man or woman is fractured, then administer to its restoration, and that which we have mentioned regarding the bone of the ankle.
And the rectum is not hidden in these nearby fractures, which happen little, especially in those who have some kind of study, or use.
And understand my book well, for it signifies to you many things concerning the straight way of rest and contraction. Understand therefore.
And when the rod of a man is broken, take the throat of a goose; and insert the virgate into it. Then put a bandage over the wound, and let it be wrapped up; and leave it for three days, or something like that, and he will be healed, if God wills.
For the restoration of broken bones, when it is with an arrow.
It is fitting that he who has had a fracture with an arrow, especially if it is great, such as the hip bone or the pelvic bone, or similar to it, as you think fit, and draw blood immediately: if you are allowed to draw blood, as we have said above.
That if the arrow spatters blood, then you should cut off its ends, so that it settles on the top of the wound in dust: if there is not another for you.
Then begin to restore the fracture in him on the same day; and do not put off doing it, if there is no swelling.
But if a swelling is hot, then dismiss the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the swelling subsides. And do not approach him on the third and fourth days at all, for you will do him harm.
But if a bone is broken above the skin that has been discovered: then you should seek to reduce it, and make it level with your hands with ease and small extension.
But if its extension is not prepared, and its leveling with your hands: then reduce it with a chisel. And this is an instrument made of iron, the length of which is the number of seven or eight fingers; and its width according to the measure of the wound. And because of this it is necessary for a physician to take three or four according to the measure he needs for that healing in all kinds of fractures.
And let it be round: and let there be a small bulkiness within it, so that it does not double up on itself under pressure from above during the operation; and let the acute extremity be, to which there is a margin at its extremities. And let it be placed above it by half its width down to its lower extremities.
And this is the shape of it.
In this operation, it is necessary that the acute extremity be curved over the prominent bone end: and push it with a single force until the bone returns and becomes equaled to some degree.
Therefore take care to make the ends of the fracture face each other at an angle.
If its ends are fragile, and does not accept it well, then you must, to strike the end of its bone, until the instrument can have power over it.
If you cannot reduce them at all with the means we have described, then strike it with one of the knives that we mentioned: or clamp it down using a clamp in any way possible for you.
Then rasp what remains on the bone from its roughness and small fibers.
When the bone is reduced, and finds itself after its reduction in a painful, irritating position, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
Then do this. For you confer a great advantage of healing when you complete the restoration that you are making to the bone.
Then dip the cloth in black vitriol wine. And particularly if it is in the summer. And do not place anything on the wood of the bed, or any oil: so that it does not happen in it that decomposition and corruption take place.
Then administer the following at the time of your supplement to the restoration of the bone: And remove the bedpost: so that you strike with the pincers a hole in the second degree of the wound.
And with all caution, do not tie the tendon with a fracture. Many doctors have done this foolish thing; and they have caused injury to their patients or death or corrosion or putrefaction, that is, disease. And your tendon should be soft, gentle, different in tension from the remaining tendons of the fracture.
That if the tendon is bad or large, and you wait for some bad accident that we have described, and suspend pain in the place: then it is not appropriate that you should put a splint on it. And make them solutions from hard towels in the place of the splints, and tighten it with them.
When however it is after one day or two days, and you see the tendon beginning to generate pus, then remove the towel that you put on the tendon with the splint. Then apply the poultice, and the oils with which we are accustomed to treat wounds: such as the four-part ointment, and others like it.
And it is fitting for you to loosen the ligaments. And consider the tendon every morning and evening until it has healed and become whole again.
And it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that pus can flow out of it easily to the bottom.
That if there pass many days for the wounds and they do not heal, nor does the pus flow away from them: then you should know that there are small bones in them. Why it is necessary to inquire about the tendon with the splint on. How many of those small bones are separated, remove them, and take them out themselves. And which of those are not separated, and hurt the limb, and cause injury to it, and remove them in any way that is possible for you that one.
That if an accident of the tendon occurs, or ekileten, that is to say, tendon torn off, or any other type of corrosion and putrefaction: then it is necessary to oppose each one with what is appropriate for its cure, which preceded it in description in its chapter.
And from this it is necessary that my speech stand, and you bring your present mind when the jaw breaks, and comes out over the limb, like the hip bone, and the helpers, and those of them from great limbs, so as not to suspect his attraction, for many times death has occurred from him, besides letting go until he putrefies.
Perhaps, indeed, it will fall down by itself after twenty or thirty days.
Then, therefore, take care of the wound, if it remains with you: otherwise, let go of him.
On the cure of a nodulation in the shadow of a fracture.
This Nodulation has often occurred in the shadow of the cure of a fracture. Especially that which is near the joints: and it grows out of that limb's shape. And perhaps it deterrents the limb from its natural action.
Consider therefore then, if the nodulation is new: administer to it medicines that have a tightening effect, such as aloe, and olive oil, and myrrh, and cedar resin, and acacia, and those like them.
So, that you take some of these certain ones, or all of them: and bind them with a strong staunch, or with white of eggs, or with vinegar: and place them over the nodulation in a poultice, and紧紧地绑在上面，直到它收缩得很好。
And let go of the stiffness, and do not remove it for many days. Then, when you have washed it off, and repeated it another time, until the nodulation disappears.
Or bind over it a leaden strip of lead-plaster. Lead is indeed the property to remove anything that is feared from the limb.
But if the nodulation has already turned into a stone, and is stiff, and there is a need to remove it quickly: then find on top of it a little bit of the blade, and strike off the surplus: or cut it off with some rasps, until it comes off: and take care of it, until it heals.
When cure is brought about when a member remains after it, not in accordance with its own nature.
When a broken bone has healed and there remains a deformity, then it is not good for that member unless it is for many causes. Of which one is that there is a multitude of ligaments and the ligation thereof not according to what is right; or because of the redundancy of the stricture of the ligaments, until such time as nourishment runs to the member: or because of the number of emetic substances in an inappropriate time; or because of the scarcity of blood in the body and the weakness thereof.
And its cure is, to nourish the sick and weak body, and to make it strong, until there is an increase of blood in it. And to apply a bath. And introduce joy and happiness to him.
Then place a poultice on the member: that it may draw towards it much nourishment. And apply the emetic frequently with warm water until nourishment runs there and returns to its own shape.
On the Restoration of Fractured Bones when they become crooked.
When it happens that a member has been restored after its sanation is completed and there is a prominent bone fracture or a deformity, and the form of the member is established; nevertheless, the member should not be prevented from its natural function: then you should not take issue with what it exists, that the member be broken again.
And there were also many doctors and surgeons in our land who did so.
This operation is most remarkable, driving to death or great fear, as if it were deadly.
But if the claudication and deformity are recent: then it is fit that they be applied with warm water in which have been boiled softening herbs, such as the leaves of aloe, and its root, and meletium, and others like them. And let there be made for him a plaster with a soft plaster, as the dyacheta decener is made.
Or let there be taken the mucus of the root of the althaea, and let it be mixed with the fat of a chicken, or with oil of sesamum; and let it be applied to him.
Or let there be taken young fig-trees, and let them be crushed with the ash of columba (holly), and similar substances which are called by the name of medicines that decrease consolidation.
And when the swelling has been relieved by careful, old-fashioned, and gentle friction with wet hands. And let the member have movement in all directions at all times.
But if the tortuosity has already come and is firm, and has gone round about into a stone, and there is a need to treat it with iron: then it should be cut off above, and the continuation of the bone should be healed, and that which comes from the torture or the bone with fine incisors: and ease should be given to him with care and diligence.
On the treatment of dislocation.
Dislocation is the exit of certain joints from their place. Why it is prevented by its own motion, and is supported in its figure. And causes painful hurts and severe wounds to the weak.
So when a dislocation has occurred, then one should hurry to restore it: and should not be late in doing so at all.
For if he is delayed, the place will become stiff, and there may very well be a reduction of the dislocation with him.
Therefore it should not be necessary for him to move or stretch out in the hour of his delay. For it often causes a spasm and painful wounds.
But when this has occurred, then you should go to have the wound dried up. Then it is dismissed, until it is at rest.
The member should then be washed with warm water and oil. It should then be reduced with ease.
And the member should be curbed with that which will bring back its memory to its own place.
I have already arranged the chapters on dislocations, also as regards what preceded it in fracture, from the upper part of the body to the lower.
On the treatment of a dislocation of the lower jaw.
The two jaws are rarely dislocated unless by rare chance.
And there are two ways in which the jaw-dislocation occurs. Or they may move slightly from their places by a slight distance and become slightly loosened. Or they are dislocated completely and perfectly, until they become loosened to the rib-side, until the tear is drawn out by nursing, and cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue hangs loose with a lisp.
When, however, the dislocation is slight, then it returns of itself to many positions with little difficulty.
But if the dislocation is complete and perfect: then it is necessary that the reduction thereof should be made quickly, and without delay: and it is as though to hold the head by the side with a bandage: and the doctor should insert the thumb of his hand into the root of the jaw-dislocation between its mouth, if the dislocation is from one side. Or insert both thumbs at once, if the dislocation is from both sides. And the other fingers of his hand should be placed outside, with which he will equalize it.
And command the sick person to clean his jaws, and allow them to eat by all means. And the doctor will equalize the jaw, and push it forward, until it returns to its place.
That if the reduction thereof is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated together: then administer a steam with warm water and oil until the reduction of the jaw-dislocations becomes easy: and do not delay the reduction of the jaw-dislocations in any way, as we have said.
And so, when they have returned and become equal, and the bone has been sutured, and they have not softened: then place on them small towels, with a sponge that is made from wax: and with rose oil.
Then tie it up easily with soft ligaments.
And let the patient lie on his back: and let his head be between two towels so that it does not move to the right or to the left: and let him not sniff or bite anything: but his food should be soft for him to eat, until he has recovered from the pain, and his jaw has been allowed to move: then he should eat what he wants, and give it to him easily.
Do not cause pain in his mouth during the meal and drinking, and his breathing, until his jaw has healed;
If the reduction of the two jaws becomes difficult when they are displaced at some time, and do not return to their places: then frequent fever occurs from there, and persistent pain: and the stomach may be sore, and pure cholesterol may escape.
So when you see this: then know that it is a loss, and often he dies who experiences this in ten days.
Of the reduction of a fracture of the cleaver and the limb of the arm.
The cleaver does not dislocate from its inner side due to its connection with the chest. And it dislocates when it is pushed outwardly: and gives a sense of movement.
And its restoration is that he lie on his back, and stretch out his arms. Then wrap the place with your palm firmly, for it will return.
Then place on it a sponge, and towels, and tighten it.
The extremities of the limbs that follow the bed, and continue with it, do not dislocate unless rarely. If it is displaced on one day: then let it be reduced and made equal as we have said, and let you be prepared.
Then put on over it an ointment, and pulli, and a strap. And command the sick to adhere to tranquility and quietness until they are healed.
And with this same cure the extremity of the humerus is reduced when it is separated from its place also.
De reductione dislocationis humeri:
You know that the humerus does not dislocate except in three ways.
Of which one is such that it dislocates towards the side of the tickle directed downward. Of which second is such that it dislocates towards the side of the chest. And perhaps it dislocates towards the upper part of the humerus, and this happens rarely.
And does not dislocate toward the back due to the shape of the spine. And does not dislocate toward the front due to the presence of nerves.
Indeed, it most often dislocates and moves downward toward the side of the tickle: above all, in those whose flesh is thin. Since it moves out of these quickly, and enters them quickly.
But in those whose flesh is thick, on the contrary, it moves, namely because it goes out with difficulty and enters with difficulty.
And perhaps in some people there is a knock or a fall, and the humerus is dislocated by means of heat, and it is thought that because of this it has already been dislocated.
Therefore, let it be so that you test that, until you are certain about its effect, and then proceed to its cure.
And know the dislocation when it is directed downward toward the tickle: and distinguish between a dislocated shoulder and a healthy shoulder. For you will find a great difference between them, and when the base of the clavicle has come together, and under the tickle near the touch of the head of the humerus it seems to be itself; and the sick cannot reduce their hand to its place, neither can they move it in all its movements.
And likewise, if it is dislocated towards the chest or upwards: then the injury is evident to the touch and cannot be hidden.
And of this dislocation it is easy to reduce when it is recent or when the boy is weak.
And its reduction is such that he raises his hand towards the upper part. Then put your fingers under the tickle of him, and raise the joint with force towards the upper part to its place; and the minister shall lift up his hand, and extend it upwards. Then let him put it down, for he himself will quickly turn it around.
But if he does not turn around by that which we have said, and it is a long time since the dislocation occurred: then it should be, that the sick person bathes in warm water, and an emollient is administered which softens and soothes, such as if radishes of aloe, and fenugreek, and mallow are crushed in water, and administered.
Then the sick person shall lie on his back: and let a sphere and wool be placed under him, which is equal between the soothing and the tightening.
Then the doctor shall place his heel on the sphere, and shall draw down the shoulder with force, and shall lift up the hand of the nurse to the lower part.
And if you wish, reduce it according to this mode: and it is such, that the longer sick man stand on one side, and his shoulder be brought under the tickle of the nurse: and raise the tickle of her towards the upper part, until the sick person hangs in the air. Then another minister shall hold the hand of the nurse towards the lower parts of his leg. But if the sick person is lighter: then it should be, that he is suspended with something else, so that he turns himself around: for the dislocation turns him around immediately.
And it is also reduced according to another mode: and that is, so as to be figurated in the earth a long piece of wood, the head whereof is round figure: as the hand of the mortar: which is neither thick nor fine. Then place under the sick one after they have been placed on top of the head of the wood a thin cloth: and the sick one stands according to the length of the wood.
Then his hand is extended to the lower part from the other side, and his body is extended from the other side with strength: for the joint returns to its place with speed.
That if his reduction is difficult through all that we have said, then use this care: and that is, take a piece of wood the length of two arms, and its width the width of four fingers, and its thickness the width of two fingers: whose head is round, so as to relieve the entrance into the profundity by titillation, according to this form.
Then they are bound on top of the round head with thin cloth, so that it does not hurt the wood.
Then place under the titillation the sick one, so that his hand or arm extends over the wood to the lower part: and bind the wood on either side of the aid and arm and extremity of the hand.
Then place the arm over the step by the breadth of it, and extend the hand to the lower part, and dismiss the remaining body suspended from the other side. For the joint enters immediately.
When therefore the entry is complete according to any possible mode: then you should place under the sphera of equal quantity from wool. Then place the preparedemplastrum made of molendinum flour and incense, and albumen spread over all the shoulder as it turns upside down.
Then tighten under the titillation with a tightening that comes down: and it is relaxed by the joint on the sphera: and he joins his hands to his neck, and dismisses them, and does not move them for seven days.
It is necessary that food be given to the sick man, until his member is healed; for it is swifter in its recovery.
Then let him be given more food after seven or five days, and let him be exercised with motion. If he then remains stable and does not become softer, then he is healed.
If, however, the joint dislocates frequently, on account of the moisture that occurs with it, or on account of some other cause: then it is necessary that he should receive a cauterization with three holes, according to what has been stated in the chapter On Cauterization.
That if this is done entirely, and the ligaments are healed after seven days, and the dislocation does not occur, and the poultice and stricture are applied several times to it, and it does not harden, and it falls, and he cannot raise it up towards the upper arm: then you should know that the nerves which are in the shoulder-blade have been cut, or stretched out, or softened: and you should know that the dislocation never sets in its place.
But the dislocation which takes place opposite the breast and the nipple, or towards the rear, takes place with an impulse and extension with the hands; until it has returned, and a remaining stricture and care is received on it, until it is healed.
That if anything happens after healing with a weight in the member, and slowness in its motion, then the sick person should often use the bath until that weight is softened, and he returns to his natural state first.
On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Elbow.
You should know that the dislocation of the elbow joint occurs with difficulty, and in a similar way it returns with difficulty; and it itself dislocates to all sides, chiefly to the front or to the rear.
And its dislocation is not hidden from you; for it falls under the sense of hearing, and under the sense of feeling, according to whatever figure it dislocates. And when you join the broken bed with a healthy one, let that be manifest to thee. For the joint will be dislocated, and the arm cannot be doubled, nor can it touch its shoulder.
And you must act promptly to reduce the dislocation before a warm apoplexy occurs.
For if a warm apoplexy has occurred, it is difficult to reduce it; and it is likely that it will not heal at all, especially when it is behind the shoulder. For it is worse in every respect to the dislocation, and more painful to that pain; and often dies with her.
And when her recovery is from those things that can be reduced, let it be that she extends her hand with two hands; and let her arm be stretched out, and her fingers above the bed and below it, and herself push the dislocation with her thumbs of her hands at once, or with the root of her palm, until she comes back to her place.
Or, on the other hand, the dislocation is to the front; then she returns so that she doubles her hand with her own hand, until she hits against the shoulder which has been dislocated with the root of her palm.
Which if it does not obey the dislocation to reduction, then administer a painful and strong extension; and let it be that two ministers extend his arm: and let them hold him also so that he does not move when extending.
Then the arm turns around to all parts after it has been rolled over her hand with a long, double cloth, or with a wide ligament.
And when the doctor touches the dislocation with his own hand, he should rub it with oil so that it is from those things that help the lubrication of the joint with ease. Then push the dislocation with a painful thrust until it comes back.
And after reducing her, it should be placed on her a plaster, in which is staphylization and drying with chalk, and it should be strained by tightening as it goes down. And let the arm be suspended from the neck by the nurse; and let it be taken away after some days.
Then let it be removed. If then the joint remains firm in its own place, then loosen the ligaments from it, and let it go itself.
And if you see that the joint is not tightly strung, then renew the plaster and the ligament, and let it go after some days until it is tight. Then let it be removed.
If, however, the weight of the patient causes trouble after the joint has been reduced and is in motion: then administer dampening in the bath, and gentle friction, and compression until it heals, or place it on the joint with an iliac poultice, that is, with nettle leaf. Then let it be tied up and let it go itself over night and day. Then take it off, and let the patient enter the bath. When then he sweats, then rub the joint gently. Then change it three times with oil while entering the bath until it becomes soft.
And if you want, put on top of it a paste made from hay, moist, warmed with butter, and tightly strung over it.
Make it then after some time. For it heals itself and returns to its own position.
The treatment of a dislocation by Albucasis.
Mahassem often dislocates, that is, the joint which is between the arm and the hand.
And the reduction of his dislocation is easy. On the contrary, the joints of the other limbs are difficult to reduce. However, it is necessary that the speed be in the reduction of his dislocation at the hour when he dislocates, before the apposition of the warm: or that it happen to him during a warm apposition.
And the reduction of his dislocation is such that he lays the weak hand on a table, and extends the hand of the minister; and lays the doctor's hand on the eminence of the joint, and pushes it back until it comes back into place.
Verumtamen oportet, ut consyderetur, si palma iam recessit ad uentrem manus: tunc ponat infirmus dorsum manus suae super tabulam apud extensionem et reductionem: et si dislocatio est procedens ad dorsum manos, tunc sit positio manos eius intrinsece super tabulam, id est, interior pars manos eius super tabulam ponatur, ut cadat manos medici super ipsam eminentiam iuncturae.
Indeed, it should be considered if the palm has already receded to the navel of the hand: then let the sick person place his own back of the hand on the board during extension and reduction: and if dislocation is proceeding towards the back of the hand, then let the person's hand be placed intrinsece on the board, that is, the interior part of his hand over the board, so that the doctor's hand
If he cannot (tolerate) or you cannot (perform the reduction) after a few days have passed, then the joint remains according to its tortuosity: and it does not harm the sick person if his hand becomes softened, and he cannot grasp anything: then you should know that the tendons have been cut or rubbed.
Not at all is there talent  (in it), except that it be grasped with a caustic close to its injury. And perhaps it does not do anything.
But since Almahessem did not return, then place on him the plaster which we have described. Then let it be grasped, and let it be left for five days: then let it be loosened and let it be exercised.
But if its movement is restricted, and something heavy occurs to it: then make it soft with hot water, and sometimes with rubbing, until it becomes soft.
§ On the treatment of dislocations of the fingers.
This is the treatment of dislocation: if a finger comes out completely from its socket, or from the back of the palm, or from its hollow: then extend the finger and push the dislocation with your thumb, until it returns.
Then support the head of the finger and suspend it opposite the part where it is dislocated, and let it be for two days.
Then suspend it and extend it until it has healed in that day of its own accord.
When the night comes, bind it according to his story: and do not cease to wash it on that day; and exercise it with movement: and bind it at night.
Make it for a few days until it is tight.
And do the same with him if he is dislocated at the wrist of the hand: and bind it to the side, and do your first operation with him until he heals.
And do the same with him when he is dislocated in the other parts.
On the treatment of dislocation of the spine.
When it happens to anyone that the spine is dislocated, or many of the Vertebrae are removed from their places: then there is no cure for it, because death approaches the weak.
And a sign of it is that the weakness walks away from him without desire, and cannot hold itself: and many times the limbs become weak on him, or two legs, or two arms of his, or one of them; or a Vertebrae is removed from its place.
For many times the removal is, for many times it happens that they are removed to the four sides.
That which is removed towards the back is called a hunchback.
But the cure of it is, so consider then, if a hunchback happens to you from childhood: then there is no cure for it, and from it there is no healing at all.
But in that which happens from a fall, or a blow, or the like, the ancient men have said long words of the cure of it. Whose most does not return with profit.
I however have shortened that from it, of which little excuses a great deal of his nearness to me on purpose: and my exposure of it, I formed an instrument out of him in many ways from him by which they showed it to him, and showed him himself.
I therefore say that in the deformity which has occurred from the front part, there is no talent, nor is there cure for it.
And likewise in that which was made on both sides.
And it should not be cured from them unless that which happened in the back of its own is told with what I am telling: and it is, so that it extends on its face over a level platform near its wall: and it expands under it a wet cloth, so that its chest does not hurt.
Then a straight wood should be placed in the foot of the bed in the earth, at the end of the foot, around its head: and another wood around its feet at the other end of the foot: and the servant should hold the wood, and it should not be firm in the footboard. And the other servant should hold the other one.
Then the nurse should turn over on her head and under her chin with a soft bandage, firm: and she should extend the end of the bandage to the wood that is at her head: and she should tie herself up in it.
Then a different bandage should be tied above her armpits, and above her knees, and at the joints of her legs. Then all the bandages should be gathered together, and they should tie themselves up in the other wood that is at their feet.
Then the other servant should stretch out to the side of the wood and should not move the two woods from their places, which they are fixed: but they should not be firm, as we have said.
And the doctor should put his hands on the spine with strength, until he can turn it: or he should put it on a plate. Then he should connect his feet to the plate: and he should turn them back.
If he does not turn it back by this cure, then take a plate whose length is about three arms. And make a hole in the wall from which we have spoken that is near the sick man, the place where the end of the plate should go in. Then place the board on top of the spine. And let the doctor put his feet on the other end. And tighten it well, until the spinal girdle is in place, and return to your station.
Then if you wish to operate with a tourniquet that is wound with your hand: and it is so, that you fix in the ground at the head of the patient two beams whose length is equal to the length of an arm: and apud caput eius in postremo podii duo ligna.
And the length that is between all the beams be a palm: and now it has been done in every place a hole, in which the tourniquet runs: and all the wood is made firm on the ground, so that it does not move at all.
And introduce the round wood: and the tourniquet is in two holes of two beams.
And at the end thereof is a hole, in which the wood is fixed, whose length is a palm along with that which turns: and in two other beams also is similar.
Then tighten the ligature which you have tightened in the chest of the patient with a tourniquet that is at his head: and the ligatures which you have tightened in his thighs with a tourniquet that is at his feet.
Then stand by every tourniquet, who tightens his hand with a thistle, with which the tourniquet turns: and the doctor adjusts the spine, according to what we have said.
This is the form of the tourniquet which follows.
Then after the spine has returned to its place and is adjusted, then you should put out dried blood with albumen. Then the caulk. Then put on top of the dried blood a board from the table, whose width is three fingers wide, or something like that. And its length be such as to take up the space of the girth, and on the side of the spine healthy.
Then bind with a bandage where there is a knot as we have said. And let the injured person be nourished with delicate food until he recovers.
If anything remains of a disease in the place where it was at the end of recovery: then let those medicines be given which soften and relieve, with the tablet we mentioned for a long time. And now that lead Tablet is administered to him in his bed.
And when it happens that a disease remains at the end of the back bone: and let it be thought that there is a dislocation, and this is the jaw which has already begun to emerge. Why should he not be left with this medicine? For it might well happen that death will come about.
The treatment of a dislocated ankle.
You should know that an ankle sprain and a shoulder joint dislocation do not occur unless there is a complete dislocation; and it does not happen to them what happens to other joints with a small distance apart and with tightness.
And the ankle joint dislocates according to four parts. Because it dislocates towards the front and towards the back.
And indeed, it is most often dislocated inwardly; and little dislocated forwardly and backward.
And the treatment of this dislocation inward is this: because when you bind a healthy leg to an injured one, it is longer; and the injured leg stands out more than its healthy counterpart, and the injured person cannot bend his knee at the knee; and there is a hot place following the knee joint, so that the head of the hip has already reached there.
And the sign of which happened to be a dislocation outward is that its symptoms are opposite to these symptoms.
And the sign of which happened to be a dislocation forward is that it spreads out a healthy leg according to its complement; nevertheless, it does not double itself without pain in the knee: and if he tries to walk, he cannot step forward on it; and he retains his urine, and puts his foot out behind him, and when he walks, he stumbles on his heel.
And the sign of him who has a dislocation at the back, so that he does not spread his knee, and cannot double it until he doubles his hip: and also his leg is shorter on the other side; and the hip is softened, and the head of the thigh is in its place.
The reduction of this type of dislocation is so that you consider then, if the dislocation is recent, which has now healed with the one who has it. Then if you administer the reduction of it, and it remains in its position: then there is no cure at all in it. So therefore it should not be assumed that he has a complete recovery.
But in that one whose dislocation is recent, and there are four types of dislocations: then approach this so that you move the joint, and extend it towards the inside and outside, and move it to the right and left: perhaps it will come back, and will not need any other treatment.
But if he does not do this way, then you should prepare a strong tool, and extend his leg from the lower part: or with his hands, or with a bandage that is tied above his leg over the knee: and another tool extends his hand from below its tickle, so that he puts his hands under its skin. Then he tightens it with a soft bandage over the root of the hip, and holds the end of the other ligament.
And let his extension be from the front part of the groin to the side of the thigh, or from the back to the side of the spine.
And let all their extensions move one way only, until he raises himself up with his body from the ground, and remains hanging.
This type of reduction is a common type of reduction for all four types of dislocations.
If then the dislocation comes back with what I said, it is good: and if not, then it is necessary for all species that I should say about its own cure.
For indeed when dislocation is to the inside, it is necessary that the sick one be placed on his sound side. Then put the ligament over the root of the hip, for it is between the head of the hip and the place that is under the groin. Then extend the ligament to the top from the groin on the side of the body, to the side of the fork.
Then another minister shall take hold of his strong arms, and shall lessen the large place of the sick hip, and shall extend to the outer side with great movement. For indeed he has returned to his place.
And this kind of treatment is easier than the other kinds of treatment for the cure of this limb when it is reduced.
But if he resists you at all when you bring him in with this kind of treatment: then it is necessary that two nurses bind his feet with a strong ligature, soft, over the two heels, and over the two knees: and let the length of each from its fellow be four fingers' length: and let the leg of the sick man be drawn out by two fingers' length on the other side.
Then let the sick one be suspended over the head of the timber that is in the house: and let the length of him from the ground be two arms' length.
Then order a strong man to hold the head of the hip: and let another suspend the sick one with his back: and let another push him with strength from behind, for the junction returns to its place with speed.
But in the restoration of his own, when there is dislocation to the outside, it is necessary that he lie on his bottom, according to which we have spoken in having a gibbosity. And let the ligament be strung over his own sick leg, and over his chest.
Then two beams are to be placed, one at his feet, and one at the head of him. Then a beam is to be placed in the middle of his foot, well fixed: and let there be laid upon it wet cloths, so that they do not hurt the sick one: and let the beam be between his hips, so that it does not draw towards the lower side at the time of extension.
Then let all the surgeons extend to their sides, and the doctor shall make a careful incision with his hand.
If he obeys for reversion, it will be good.
And if not, place a table over it, and press it, as we said in the hunchback, equally. However, it is necessary that the sick man lies on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is to the front, then it should be that the leg of the nurse extends quickly: and it is according to this that he tells it on the platform: and let the doctor place his hand with his right palm over the knee of the sick person. Then let him stretch it with his other hand, and with that stretching place it extended towards the lower side of the leg.
And if the dislocation is to the back: then it should not be that the sick person extends towards the lower side, and sits on the ground: but it should be that he is placed on a hard thing, as it also is, and if his hip is dislocated to the outside, according to what we said about his lying on two hips: and it is on his face, and the ligaments are extended: according to what we have just said.
And it is necessary that the compression be applied with a table also to the place from which the joint has come out, when the reduction is complete, according to what needs to be done.
And the sign of his return should not be hidden from you: and it is that you extend the two legs of the nurse: and when you see them equal, and the sick person tightens his leg, and expands himself without excuse: then you will know that the member has returned, according to what needs to be done: then join the two hips, and put a splint on, and tighten it with an immobile, that is, a rotator: so that it does not move the wide part of any sides: and let the sick person remain calm for three days, or four.
Then loosen the ligaments, and the splint, and join the legs together again: then if you see them equal in their state, then you will know that the dislocation has now healed: so let the sick person go out to walk.
And if you see anything that is softening: then take it off and wrap it up, and tighten it according to your first intention: and also let it go for three days.
Then loosen that and make the person walk a little on both sides for a few days, until he is healed.
The Dislocation of the Knee Joint.
The knee may be dislocated three ways. by the outer side, by the inner side, and by the lower side, that is, by the rear.
And it is not dislocated to the front.
And the sign of its dislocation is that the person will have pain when he applies his knee to his hip. But if it does not adhere with the hip: then you know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all types of dislocation is so that the sick person may sit upright, so that he may extend his leg over it and bring his heel to his face: and place his foot between your feet.
Then fasten the person's knee to your palm, and place your fingers straight over his knee. Then apply your two palms with strength to both sides of his knee. And another person will extend his leg until the knee returns to its place.
And the sign of its return is that the leg adheres to the hip with ease, not with effort.
Then wrap him up, and fasten the leg to the hip. Then bind them together with bandages for three or four days. Then loosen them.
And the sick person should not walk for a few days after, until he is healed.
But if it does not return to you on its own, then administer a strong extension with ligaments, of which there is a description in the treatment of aching joints, until it returns.
On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Ankle Joint.
The calcaneus are sometimes dislocated with a slight dislocation and sometimes with a second-degree dislocation. And this dislocation of the calcanei occurs either internally or externally.
And the sign of this dislocation is that you see the calcaneus swollen and protruding toward the side to which it is dislocated.
The treatment for this dislocation is easy; it is reduced by extending it with the hands and then making it steady until it is reduced.
But if you are curing it when it is dislocated second-degree, you should make the sick sit upright; and hold it firmly from the rear part of its back, in the middle of it.
Then grasp it with your right hand from the upper part of its foot, and with your left hand from the lower part of its foot, near the nail.
Then drag the foot toward you with your right hand. Then with two fingers of your left hand.
Then extend it with your left hand and push the chest of the foot toward the leg with your right hand without effort.
Do this twice, as we have described.
Then push the chest of the foot toward the leg with your left hand in a third push, and pull off the nail with your right hand.
If it then returns with a slight force or two, and you see the foot even, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation on it: for it will recover.
But if it is forbidden to you to reduce it with the method we have described: then let the sick person lie on his back on the ground, and place a firm nail firmly on the ground so that he falls between his knees: and now you have wrapped a cloth around him, so that he does not hurt himself.
Then let the assistant take the sick person's leg: then the other assistant extends it with his hands or with a band that is tied around the leg at the knee. Then all the attendants shall stand against his extension, and a nurse shall hold him between two thighs, so that his body is not drawn downward during extension.
Then the physician shall adjust his hands, and another attendant shall hold his leg from below. For the dislocation returns with speed.
When, therefore, the dislocation returns, and you find that he has recovered his health: then place a splint and a strap, and tighten it with ligaments, and tie the foot to the leg with a ligament.
And it is necessary that you be cautious or afraid of the nerves, which are above the heel, after the calcaneus posterior, so that they are not torn by a harsh ligament and hurt them.
Then let him go for two days, or three. Which if the ligament becomes soft, tighten him up: then solve him on the third day, or fourth: and prohibit the sick from walking for forty days. But if he attempts to walk before that space, there is no security except that the dislocation is dissolved, and it corrupts, and does not receive cure after that.
Which if he should have a swelling that is hot: then you shall administer to him in a sedation that which we have spoken of elsewhere in the cure, and a poultice, until it cools down.
Of the dislocation of the digits of the foot, and its cure.
It is necessary that he should be adjusted which is dislocated from them with a little extension without work: and this is not difficult, it is even easy.
But if the dislocation is in some of the nodes of the dorsal foot: then it is necessary that he should make the sick foot stand on an equal place of the earth, or on a board: and it stands as one who walks.
Then you shall stand still, and put your foot on that which protrudes from them by the joint. Then, with your foot, hit that calcified bone with force until it turns red, and the surface becomes even, and no eminence appears in that place.
Then, place under the foot's sole the plate that catches the entire foot, which has two heads. Then, tighten it with a ligature for three days. Then, solve it, and allow it to rest from walking for many days, until it is tightened and secured from the reduction.
In regard to the species of dislocation with a broken ulna.
When something like this happens, and he chooses to treat and restore it, many times death succeeds: and for that reason, you should not dare topresume over his treatment, which is of this kind, unless you are prudent in the art of long-term use, merciful, gentle, slow, not bold, and arrogant: and use medicines that sit on the warmth of the apices only: and dismiss the sick with divine judgment. Except you hope for salvation from destruction with compassion for the severity of the illness, and where there appears to be some hope. So consider the reduction of it at once, before the warm apices sit.
If then the limb returns, according to our instructions, then administer a regime that sits on the apices: and care for the ulna with what suits it from the dry ointment.
If the dislocation is with a break, and they happen in the bone of the leg that is separated, then consider the removal of them, and do in it what we said in simple illnesses from what preceded in their places.
And be careful according to your strength, and guard yourself from the entrance into a state of fear: since my prediction has come to you.
For that is better for you with your Creator, and more lasting to your glory, and more saving to your body with them in your time.
