After I have completed to you, my son, this book, which is the last of the science of medicine with its supplement, and I have finished in it from its expositions and its declarations, it has seemed to me that I complete it to you with this treatise which is a part of surgery, that is, chirurgical manual.
Because the operation with the hand is laid out in our region, and in our time it is private at all times: until perhaps the science of it has perished, and the trace of it has been lost: and there remained from it only a few descriptions in ancient books, which hands have changed: and it happened to them error and hesitation, until their intentions were closed, and its vision was extended. It has seemed to me that I can make it clear with this order of this treatise in it according to its exposition, declaration, and abbreviation: and that I can bring it into being with the forms of tools cautery, and the rest of the instruments of work: for the sake of adding a declaration, and properly establishing what is necessary.
The reason why there is not found a good workman of his hand in our time, is because the art of medicine is long, and it is necessary for its author to be exercised in the science of anatomy which Galen narrated, until he knows the joints of the limbs, and their forms, and their connection, and separation, and has a knowledge of bones, and nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and their emergence, and beating pulses, and quiet, and places of exit.
And for this reason Hippocrates said, that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little, especially in the art of the hand.
But we have already spoken about it at the beginning of this book.
Because he who is not aware of what we have said about anatomy, does not clear up, but falls into error, which are produced by the humans: as I saw many of them who formed themselves out of this science, and cast themselves down upon it without knowledge, and without experiment.
What is, for I saw a dull physician cut an aposteme scrofulous wound on the neck of a woman, and he wounded some arteries in her neck: why did the blood flow from the woman until she died between her hands.
And I saw another physician, who presumed to extract a stone from a man, which had lodged in his body for many years, and the stone was large.
So he came to him, and extracted it with a twig of holly.
Why did the man die on the third day?
And I too had been called to extract it: and I saw from the great size of the stone, and the care of the nurse, that he would die.
And I saw another physician, who was taking a fee from some Duke of our land for his medicine: and there happened to be with him a black eunuch, who was by his side, and broke his thigh bone near the heel: and the physician went on, through his ignorance, and bound up the fracture on the knee with strong bandages, and did not cease from his operation.
Then he discharged him according to his desires.
Then he dismissed him after a few days, and he commanded that the ligaments should not be loosened: and so it stood until his leg was broken at the knee, and his ankle, and he came to ruin.
So I was called to him: and I set about loosing the ligaments: and there resulted peace, and he was free from his pains.
However the corruption had already taken hold in the limb: and I could not restrain it.
So the corruption ceased to wander in the limb, until it died.
And I saw another physician, who pierced an aposteme cancerous wound: and it became a ulcer after a few days, until the malignancy of it was manifest to his lord.
That is, for when it is a cancer pure from the melancholic humor, then it should not be cut with iron at all unless it be in a member which can bear it, that it may be completely cut off from it.
And for that reason, my sons, it is necessary that you know that surgery is divided into two parts: namely, the operation which is associated with health, and the operation where there is danger in many dispositions. And I have already excited in every place of this book, where came the operation, where there is fear and fright.
Why it is necessary for you to beware of that, and to decrease it: so that you may not find stupid speech when you speak, and dishonorable.
Therefore receive with carefulness and protection, and give your patients with ease and strength, and use a better path leading to the grace of God for salvation and worthy succession: and remove from you terrible diseases with difficult healing: and take away your souls from there, which makes you fear, so that it may come upon you hesitancy in our faith and comfort. For this remains more remaining to our glory, and higher in the world so that afterwards to the quantities of you.
For Galen has already said in some of his advice. Do not call disease a bad one: do not name the doctor as bad.
Chapter One:
Chapter Two: On the cutting and piercing, phlebotomy and venesection, and wounds: and on the extraction of arrows, and things like them: and all the Treatise, arranged in the shapes of instruments.
Chapter Three:
On the restoration, and dislocation, and cure of torsion, and things like them: Treatise divided into three chapters, arranged from the head to the feet, and in the shapes of instruments.
To God alone be glory.
Liber Chirurgice Albucasi.
I, 1. The art of surgery is twofold, practical and theoretical. The practical concerns what must be done; the theoretical, why it must be done. Thus one should not only study the art in order to practice it, but also understand its principles. Consequently, knowledge without experience is incomplete, and experience without knowledge is dangerous. There are two kinds of surgery: that which deals with the body as a whole, and that which concerns separate parts. The former is called general surgery, the latter, special or local surgery. Under the first heading come such operations as amputation, ablation, resection, ligation, and puncturing; under the second, those concerned with specific organs, such as the eye, ear, nose, throat, breast, groin, anus, and genitals. Among these last are included the various kinds of cataplasm and poultice, as well as the treatment of wounds and ulcers.
I, 2. In respect to cauterization and incisions, it is necessary to know which parts of the body require them, and at what time; also, whether they are to be made with iron or gold.
I, 3. The first principle in surgery is to know the nature of the flesh, and the causes that bring it to disease. The nature of the flesh is fourfold: blood, nerve, fat, and bone. These are its basic elements, but it also has other ingredients, such as muscle, sinew, lymph, and serous fluid. Blood gives life to all parts of the body; it is the most vital part, and without it death ensues. Nerve controls all the functions of the body: therefore, whatever affects it must be carefully considered. Fat contributes to the nourishment of all the parts, and so does bone, which also gives support and protection. Muscle performs various movements; sinew binds together the bones; lymph circulates through the vessels, carrying food to the parts, and taking away their waste products; serous fluid fills the cavities and spaces, maintaining the balance of the body's fluids.
But before I proceed to speak of the different kinds of operations, it is necessary that I should explain the qualities of cauterization and incisions, and at what sort of parts they are to be applied.
I therefore say that the speech concerning the quality of cauterization and the operation is long, intricate, profound, and full of secrets and mysteries.
A multitude of wise men also spoke therein, and disagreed among themselves; but for me a little from their words is sufficient, I am afraid of protraction.
I therefore say that cauterization applies to all kinds of tissue, whether it be with or without substance; I except two kinds of tissue, which are hot and dry without substance, and dry without substance.
In the hot and dry complexions with substance there was a difference:
Some said that cauterization is applied to the warm and dry complexions with substance.
And others said the opposite of him, namely that cauterization is not suited in a disease that is from heat and dryness: for nature's quality is heat; and it is not suitable, so as to heal from a hot and dry disease, when it is hot and dry.
And he who speaks contrary to him said: That by means of cauterization a remedy is made for all hot and dry disease that happens in human bodies: because when you compare the human body, and its humidities, with the complexion of fire, you cool the human body.
And I myself also say by my speech: because from experience I have already found that.
However, it is not necessary that you should argue about that, unless he who has already been proven and exercised in the exercise of the last chapter of cauterization, and knows the difference between the complexions of men, and the disposition of diseases in himself, and the causes thereof, and the accidents thereof, and the space of time thereof.
From the rest of the complexions there is no fear for you; and above all in cold and wet diseases. For all physicians have already gathered on them: and they did not disagree in the remedy with cauterization in them.
And know you children, that from the secret of the cure by means of cauterization with fire, and its goodness with cauterization while burning is: because the fire is simple, whose action does not penetrate, unless to the limb that is cauterized: and it does not harm another member connected with it, except with a little injury.
The action of medicine that burns peruses to the part that is prolonged from it: and perhaps makes happen a difficult cure of disease in the member, and perhaps destroys it.
But fire, because of its subtlety and goodness of its substance, does not do that, unless it overflows.
For this has already been made known to us by experience, because of the length of service and study with art, and the standing on the truth of things: and for this I excuse myself from the length of speech.
And know you sons, that they differ in the time, in which it is to be done cauterization, and put better time for the wound.
And I say, that cauterization is to be done at any time: for the damage, which happens by time, is hidden in the juice, which is attracted with cautery.
And above all, if the cauterization is because of pains from necessary pains, hard, festivities, which do not tolerate delay: for they are afraid of them, that evil happens, which is greater than a small damage intrans to time.
And do not fall in the minds of you sons that they are not careful, unless the common and stupid doctors: namely, that to them the sickness, which is healed by cauterization, is not always a return: and they put this consequence, and the thing is not as they think: for cauterization is not, except in place of medicine, which changes complexion, and dries humidities, because they cause pains.
But the cauterization is too much on medicine by its velocity of its virtue, and the strength of its operation, and the quickness of its lordship: and it is possible that it brings back disease at some hour of time according to complexion of sickness, and place of sickness, and virtue of its operation: and that it is prepared in his body from aggregation of excess in him: and that it attains to itself in acquisition of its from food, and similar things from causes, unless it happens sickness, in which cauterization is administered. The subtle sickness in a member of few excesses and humidities, as the cauterization of tooth, because of pain, and similar to it, is possible indeed, that it does not bring back in him that pain.
But that is fitting for few.
But that is fitting for few.
But this is contrary to what they intend, and the intention, that the cautery is the last resort of medicine, is not, unless when we administer ways of cure in some diseases, and these do not confer the medicines: then we administer at the end of the thing a cautery, and it confers: then from there it falls, that the cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and many of the doctors understand.
But the ancient ones said that when it comes to gold, the cautery is better than the cautery with iron: and they did not say this except because of the equality of gold, and the limitation of its substance: and they said that there is no place for a cautery. But this is not absolutely so: because I have already tested it, and I found that it does not do it in certain bodies without others.
And the cautery with itself is good, and better than the cautery with iron, as they say.
But when you ignite the cautery from gold in fire, it does not appear to you, when it ignites according to the quantity that you use, because of the redness of gold: and when it is appropriate for it to cool down, and if you add ignition on top of it, it melts in fire, and turns into sheets.
Why does the craftsman fall from it in business: and because of this it is fitting that the cautery with iron is faster and closer to us, according to the straightness towards the operation.
And I have already arranged this chapter in the Cautery, according to chapters: and I arranged it from the head to the feet: so that those who seek it may find it from it. About the way of cauterizing the head in the commissure of the crown.
Chapter Two.
Chapter Two: Here is a treatment for the excess of heat and cold in the brain: These two are the causes of headaches and a multiplicity of fluxes of humors from the head to the eyes and ears, and of a multiplicity of dreams, toothache, and sore throat, and universally all ailments that occur from cold, such as paralysis, spasms, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar ailments from those ailments.
The method of cauterization is this, as you have ordered to the sick: that he be emptied with liquid medicine, and his head be washed three nights or four, according to the strength of the illness and its age, and his custom.
Then order him to rub his head with a warm cloth.
Then let him sit between your hands square, so that he has put his hands on his chest.
Then place the root of your palm over the root of his nose between his eyes. Therefore whenever your middle finger touches any spot with difficulty, mark that place with a brand. Then light the cautery with olive oil: whose this form is. Then place the person himself on the marked spot with the brand, and let your hands compress him slowly, and he will turn away from you.
Then quickly lift your hand, and look at the spot.
If you see there a quantity of salt from the bone, or a quantity of herbs, then lift your hand quickly.
And if not, repeat the compressing with iron, or with something else when he grows cold: until you see the bones, which I told you.
Then take some salt and dissolve it in water, and immerse it in a cloth, and place it on the spot: and let him go for three days.
Then place over the person the cloth immersed in butter, and let him go on the spot until the fire is extinguished. Then that care with the four-part ointment, until it is healed.
I have said, that as long as the wound remains open, it will emit puss: therefore it is better and more salutary.
And some of them said, let the skin be cauterized all the way down to the bone: and let the cautery be held, until a certain hardness of bone is attained.
Then let it be rubbed after that which is burnt from the bone, then let it be poulticed.
And others say, that it should be done with the cautery all the way down to the last, until an impression is made on the bone like a mold: or an instrument which women put in with a letter-board: and they determine, that vapors from this place are exhaled when one exhales through this opening for a long time.
Then let it be poulticed, until it has hardened.
But these two kinds of cautery are not known to me at all unless in some men according to the second for fear.
And let it be removed, for me it is better with the health of it.
For the head is weakened by continued solution of its natural substance: as we have testified in the other members: and especially when the head is feeble with nature: and the kind of cautery first is more salutary and better with me, and I use it: therefore let us operate while it is healthy.
Regarding the mode of cauterizing the head in a case of headache throughout the whole head.
The Head, Chapter III.
When chronic pain occurs throughout the whole head: and it is prolonged in a sick person, and uses herbs, and poultices, and washings, and oils, and medications.
And above all if it has been cauterized with one kind of cautery which we have mentioned, and gives no benefit from it: then consider.
For if the head is healthy with strong nature, and is not feeble, and finds a sharp cold: then cauterize under it a little with another kind of cautery.
Then he cauterizes himself on all the horns of his head with his own cautery, and does not let the skin pass through, and lets a quantity come out from the bone, which we have said.
And he cauterizes himself with one cautery in the nape of his head, in the place which is called a canal; and it is a place in which the wind is put; and clean your mind in this place, and do not let your bone come out.
For that pain is found through it, and is far from the pain of all the other parts of the head.
And I will call this Cautery in its place: and it is necessary that it should be a cautery by which the horns of the head are cauterized, and the nape of the head is more finely cauterized by which the middle of the head is cauterized.
And this is its form.
De The mode of cauterizing in headache, whether with the medicine alone, or with iron as well.
Head 4.
When it is in a part of the head pain and salt, or extends the pain all the way to the eye, and washes out with cleaning medicines, and gives the remaining treatment which I have spoken of in divisions of diseases, and does not bring that whole one: then the cauterization in him is according to two ways: either the cauterization with sharp burning medicine: or with iron. But the Cautery with sharp burning medicine is, that you take one of your teeth, and saw it out, and cut off its ends from both sides.
Then cut the place of pain with a blade in the time when the phlebotomist cuts it from side to side, until it is made in him a place under the skin, in which the bone is captured.
Then introduce it into him under the skin, until it is hidden: then tighten it over it with a constricting thread that comes down, and let it out by the quantity of fifteen hours, and then dissolve it, and take off the other, and let it lie for two days, or three: then put on it a cotum immersed in butter, until a pus place is made: then cure the place with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish to make it with some medicines that burn, which I wrote in the twelfth treatise, on medicines applied to the middle parts.
The cauterization however of that with iron, is according to this manner.
Of fire the cauterization, whose form this is.
And it is called a clavis: because the form of his head is like the form of a clave, in which there is some little eminence in the middle.
Then put the same on the place, and hold your hand: and you shall turn the iron little by little with velocity: and the quantity that is to be burned of the thickness of the skin, as it were a half of it.
And take your hand away, lest you burn the artery that is below, and there happen to be a flow of blood.
Then dip the cloth in salt water, and put it on the place, and leave it three days: then dip the same in butter: afterwards take care with an unguent until it is healed. And if you wish to make a wound, cauterize this headache with a sharp knife the second time of the cauterization.
And do not cure from an incision in this headache, not an old one on his own.
As for the mode of cauterizing in a headache that is old.
The head.
When you cure a headache, when with this that we said before of curing, and what we said in the divisions of sicknesses, and there is no cura: and you shall see from the sickness, that it is not sufficient to him that we said of cauterization first with medicine, or with cauterization with fire, then you should turn the fires of cauterization little by little, until it whiteneth after the signs on the place of the pain with a line, whose length is half a finger, or almost so: and put your hand away with force one way, and squeeze it till you hit the artery, and go on to the mouth. However you should cure from the continuing of the jaw, which moves when it grinds, lest it burn on the side, or the nerve that moves it, from where comes a spasm.
And this is on the guard and caution against the flow of blood from the artery, which has been cut off.
For fear of the cutting off of that artery, and more so to him who knows not what he does, and is not studious, nor experienced: and dismisses the operation with it at first.
And I come to talk about the treatment of an injury from a blood vessel, according to its method, and in the place of this book.
That if you see from sickness that it is not sufficient to this Cautery, and you see the body bearing the cautery in the middle of the head, as we have said, care for the wound, until it heals.
And if you see, administer the cautery, which we have said in the chapter of cutting the artery with a cautery having two scissors.
For the cauterization is better and gives more help in this way. Regarding the method of cauterizing the ears.
Chapter VI. When a pain happens in the ear from cold, and is healed with solutiuns, and the remaining cure as we have said in the division, and the pain does not remove, then to the fire Cautery: and this is what is called a Puncture, of which the shape is this.
Then the punctures with it after its igniting around the whole ear, as it is relieved: or in the circumference of either, if at the same time a pain is in both.
And lengthen it with the cautery from the root of the ear slightly, after you have marked the places with encaustic: and let the amount of the cautery be ten points all over the ear, and almost that same amount.
Then care for the place, until they are healed.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in torture.
Chapter VII.
Torture which is healed with cauterization, is not except from the species which happen from phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of illnesses. And cauterized the species which happened from drying and muscle spasm.
When you treat this species of torture with hyoscyamus and calamine and gargles and your treatment does not bring about a cure, then you should cauterize the sick three times: one at the root of the ear, and second slightly below its edge, and third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the weak part.
For the softening does not take place unless in the part that seems healthy.
And the form of cauterization is so that you cauterize yourself with the Cautery in the direct extremity of the upper ear under the corner of the head a little bit: and another in time: whose length is according to the length of the thumb.
And place your hand with the cautery, until half the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and its species is from a chisel, whose shape is precede: verumtamen non est subtilior ea parum, sicut uides: et oportet ut sit chisel in ea superfluae grossitudinis parum. Then care for the place with what preceded it: until it is healed.
The method of cauterizing in ancient apoplexia.
Chapter VIII.
When an ancient apoplexia is treated with what we have said, and your treatment does not bring about a cure, and the sick person has no fever, then you should cauterize him four times all over his head, and one in the middle of his head as we have said, and one at the back of the head according to what preceded it: and the mode of the cautery is according to what preceded it.
Also cauterize with the cautery on the jaw: and it is more last.
Then care for it with what preceded it.
The method of cauterizing in a hernia.
Chapter IX.
It is necessary that, in the first place, the great hymen should be put on the sick man, and that the pills to clean the brain should be given.
Then, all the head must be rubbed with the ointment of myrrh described in the treatise on ointments: and him himself should be put on occasion. This is the method of Cautery: and let it be done according to the order which I have there described it. If then he is cured by that, it is good.
If not: then do to him three cauteries in the posterior part of his head, which are descending from the upper part of the head down to the lower part of the eye: and put between every cautery a thickness of finger.
Then take care of the Cauteries, with what has preceded.
If, however, you wish to add anything, and the sick man bears that: then do to him a cautery in the middle.
That if you wish to add anything: then cauterize him himself above two horns.
Then take care of him, until he is cured: and let the Cautery be oiled according to the form which I have aforesaid.
The mode of cauterizing in Paralysis, and softening.
Chapter X.
It is necessary that you should proceed in the cleansing of the head with the hymen, and with what I have said.
Then, all the head must be rubbed with the hymen: then do to him a cautery in the middle of the head, and a cautery on every horn of the head, and three cauteries behind it.
If, however, you are not indigent in the softening of the body to many things, and the sickness is strong, and the sick man bears it and the sickness is not very great: then do to him four cauteries on the spines of the back, and the last with a cautery, until it burns from his skin much of it, and wash your hand.
Then take care of him, until he is cured: and so do to the Cautery, Oil.
If the patient has epilepsy:
De modo cauterizandi in Epilepsia.
Do not cauterize an epileptic person unless the epileptic fit is caused by a fever. Then the wounds on his brain and all the rest of his body, as we have said in the division, must be treated; for a sick man is great or is tolerant to the reception of medicines.
But if he is a boy who does not tolerate medicines, then give him a gargle and a chewing that cleans the brain, many days before that.
Then rub his head well; afterwards cauterize him with one cautery in the middle of his head, according to the manner above described; and with another cautery at the back of his head, and on all the horns of his head.
If the sick man is strong and tolerant, then cauterize him with the medicines which I have spoken of in having paralysis, and with molifying the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the spine: and let the cautery be applied with oil according to the manner above described. But if the sick boy is, then place the cautery finely, according to this manner:
If the patient has melancholy:
De modo cauterizandi in Melancholia.
When the cause of melancholy is corrupt humidity and thick phlegm, then cauterize him with the medicines which I have spoken of in having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is a secret discharge into the body causing melancholy, and the body is wet with humidity, then give him in a drink something to clean his brain, according to what we have said in the division: afterwards rub his head well, and then make a twist of linen turned inside out, like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of his head: and the sick man should sit with his back to all parts.
Then present the liniment. And it is better from old butter.
Heat your finger over a moderately hot fire until it is warm enough to be comfortable when inserted into the wound.
Then wash your hand in water at room temperature and allow it to cool before applying any ointment or dressing to the wound.
Do this to the sick person once a week, with the rest of his regimen being good, until he is cured.
Or, if it is a vein that needs to be cauterized, make small marks on it, keeping your hand away from the fire: smell it out.
This kind of cauterization moistens the brain with its quality.
Then put a cotton wisp soaked in butter, or bird's fat, on top of it.
This method of cauterization is done while looking down at the water.
Chapter 13
When you see the beginning of the water in the eye by the signs I mentioned in the division, then begin and drink the medicine while he washes his head.
And keep the wound away from all moisture, and let him sit in a bath, on a few days' fast.
Then order him to wash his hair, and cauterize it in the middle of his head. Then cauterize the wound over two timora (spikes) with two cautery tools, if the beginning of the descent of water is in both eyes at the same time: or from one side, if the beginning of the water is in only one eye: and cut off with the cautery all the veins and arteries that are under the skin: and let the cauteries be long in width: and caulk up the flux of blood.
If you see anything of it, then cut it off immediately with whatever medicine is possible: and I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and their cutting off, and careful not to let the blood flow.
And when it is cauterized with ceruse, between two bones, with two cautery tools at the very end.
This method of cauterization is done in ancient tears.
Chapter XXII.
When the tears of the eyes are old, frequent; and are on the eyelids, and the arteries which are in plain view of the outer head, it is verified that this is from superfluities of cold, phlegmatic: then cauterize cauterium with what I narrate in incisions water descending, cauterium in the middle of the head, and two cauteriums over two temples, and two cauteriums in the cheek under two bones.
And if it endures with addition, then cauterize himself in all side with care eye, over the extremity of the eyelid with a small cautery.
§ On the mode of cauterizing in the fetor of the nose.
Chapter XV.
When you treat it, with what I have said in the division, and the medication does not profit: then approach, and give in drink to him three days of the sickly diet: afterwards shave his head, and cauterize himself cauterium medium, with cauterium oliuary.
Then cauterize himself cautery clavus two cauteriums, over the two eyelids under the hair a little.
And watch the artery, lest you fall into it.
And this is the form of the cautery Clavis.
§ On the mode of cauterizing in the softening of the eyelids.
Chapter XVI.
When the eyelid of the eye softens from sickness, or humidity: then cauterize the eyelid cautery one, with this lunar cautery.
And if the sight, cauterize himself above the two eyelids a little with two cauteriums on all parts: and let them extend from the two temples: and let the length of every cautery, be according to the length of the eyelid: and do not move your hand with the cautery, but according to the quantity which is burned the third eyelid.
And this is the form of the cautery after this manner of lunar cautery.
§ On the mode of cauterizing the eyelid when the hair turn in and sting the eye. Caput XVII.
The head of the dissection table is to be made of two kinds of fire: either with fire alone, or with medicine.
But in the cauterium with fire, order the patient first of it, so that he lets go of his hair, if he is from those who wash them, until they grow long and are even. But if he is pricked by it at his root: then tighten his eyes with vitriol, so that they do not move, until they are born.
When they are born and evened out, then place the head of the dissection table in your lap: next mark on the eyelids of his eyes with encaustic, a mark that is according to the figure of a leaf of myrtle: and let the beginning of the mark be near the hair.
Then place a damp cloth dipped in albumen, or in psyllum mucus, on his eye.
Then set the fire-cauterium, whose shape is this:
Then cauterize over the figure that you marked little by little on many spots, until it is burned up all over the surface of the skin, which is like the shape of a leaf of myrtle, completely evident to itself.
And the mark of your work's success is this: that if you squeeze the eyelids of an eye together, and remove the hair near the eye's point, then the mark will be seen.
So now stretch out your hand: and let him go for several days.
Then place on the man a cloth dipped in butter until the eschar is eradicated.
Then take care of the wound with ointment until it heals.
If any of his hair returns after the hour and softens the eyelid: then repeat the cauterium on that spot, as you did before.
But if the hair is in the lower part: then cauterize on it, until it turns back to its own place: and make even so that the hair does not prick his eye.
The mode of cauterizing with medicine that burns.
Chapter XVIII.
To a sick person, it is necessary to remove hair from the head until the disease subsides and becomes stable.
Make in the form of a leaf of mulberry paper.
Then take a goodly soap and from the same weight of one pound or almost that quantity: then dry it all at once with a good rub, and make it with speed, so that it is not chilled.
Then from this itself, on the paper which you have made in the form of a leaf of mulberry, and place it on the eyelid of one or two eyes.
And place under the eye a cotton wet with albumen: and let the head of the sick be in your lap.
And place your finger, index, on the medicine, and press it slightly.
And you shall move it whenever the sick person feels a tingling sensation from the medicine; for its bitterness is like fire.
While he persevered in this because of what he found to be the bitterness, then dismiss the medicine, and move it with your finger yourself.
When the bitterness quiets, then remove the medicine, and wash the eye with water.
Then consider, if you see the eyelid go down, as if it were going out with fire or with an incision, it is good: and if not, then repeat on top of it from the medicine to the place where it does not print and does not harm, until your operation has equated it, and the eye has clenched.
Then place on top of it a cotton with butter, until the dried-up skin is removed.
Then take care of the eye with the ointment diaphanous, or other, until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you, during the operation, to keep the last guard, so that nothing of the medicine falls into the eye.
If the eyelid becomes soft after a few days, and fights with some hair in the eye, then repeat the medicine on that place, which has been softened by the lid of itself, as you did before.
Then take care of him, until he is well.
And this is the shape of the myrtle leaf.
And you know that the eyes of men differ in size and shape.
Therefore, according to this, your consideration: and let not the way of straightness be hidden from him, which is the study of this art.
De mode cauterizandi in fistula lachrymali.
Chapter XIX.
When you treat a fistula, along with what we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatment is not effective: then you should cauterize it according to this method.
Prescribe to the sick person that he should put his head in your lap, and hold it between your hands so that it does not move or be disturbed with his head.
Then put the coturnic Infusum on the white of his eye, or on psyllum mucilage over his eye: then apply the cautery to it, whose form is this.
It should be round, as the shape of a knife's blade from one end, which makes the cautery: and if the blade goes down to the other end, and if the blade is raised like this.
However, this round cautery is better for your work.
Then put on it the cautery, which is kindled well.
And hold it near the eye, toward the nose side, so that your hand does not move or be disturbed: and put the cautery into the fat of the eye, and disintegrate it.
If then there is pus in the beginning of your cautery up to the mouth, it will be good.
And if not: then repeat the cautery once or twice, if you can bear it: and dismiss it for three days.
Then put on the cotton with butter, and treat himself with an ointment of drying, until he is healed. If he does not heal after forty days, then put on him an acute corrosive medicine, until he detects the bone: and then read it according to what came in his chapter.
And another method of cautery is a funnel, which some said first.
Intend to the place of the funnel, and find it: then put into it a thin cannula, that is to say, A thin tube, whose shape is thus:
And pour into it a quantity of lead liquid, and hold your hand with the cane firmly, so that the sick man does not move at all, lest he run or the liquid lead gets to his eye.
And you should put on the eye of the sick person a cotton poultice in milk or water.
For lead burns the place of the funnel and heals it with a wonderful cure.
If the funnel is healed, with what I have said about cautery and cure, is good.
And if not, then it is necessary to administer the nose hole, and reduce the funnel to the course of the nose, according to what comes in its own place to itself.
The mode of cautery in the cracks of the lips:
Chapter 20.
Often cracks occur in the lip, which are called hairs, and especially in the lips of boys.
When you treat these cracks, with what I have said concerning the distribution of diseases, and the cure is not effective, then a small fire cautery with a chisel-like instrument, according to this form:
And set it on edge according to the sharpness of the chisel.
Then treat him with a green ointment, until he is healed.
The mode of cautery in the mouth hole:
Chapter XXI.
When an aphorema occurs in the root of the gingival or palate or teeth: then pus and rupture ensue, followed by a crust that bursts and forms a fistula: afterwards one should treat it, and there is no cure for it; then one must apply cauterizing fire to the quantity that enters the fistula.
Then introduce the lit fire itself into the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand, until the fire reaches its depths, and burns out: do this once or twice.
Then care for it after that, until it is cured as we have said in the treatment.
But if the pus is severed and heals, it is good.
And if not, then one must remove the affected area, and remove the corroded bone according to what enters into its head.
The way of cauterizing in the gums and softened teeth:
Chapter XXII.
When the gums are softened by moisture, and the teeth move, and do not cure with medicines: then place the sick head in your lap.
Then take the fire-cannon whose shape has been set up here, and introduce it into it quickly with the lit fire: and hold your hand slightly, until the sick one feels the heat of the fire reaching its root.
And rub your hand: then repeat the fire a few times according to what you want.
Then let the sick one fill his mouth with salt water, and hold it for an hour: and spits it out.
For the teeth are made steady by the movement, and the softened gums are drawn together, and the corrupt moisture is dried up.
Chapter XXIII.Quando uis pro cure Dentium, cum illis feris, et non curat, facit pus: deinde facit fistulam, et rupit, et antiquatur, et currit: tunc oportet cauterium applica
When you wish to cure the teeth with coldness, or when the pain is in the tooth itself, or when it is sore, and there is no cure with medicines: then fire applied to it is second only two ways: either with butter-fire, or with fire-fire.
But the wound should be cauterized with butter, so that you take white butter and carry it on a iron scraper or on clothes.
Then take a cloth, and rub it on the end of the tongue.
Then dip the wound into warm butter: and place the wound on a painful tooth quickly, and hold the wound until the heat of fire has reached the root of the tooth. Then repeat this several times, until the power of the fire has reached the root of the tooth.
And if there is a pimple, dip the cloth or a cloth in cold butter, and place the wound on a painful tooth: and place an iron heated to heat on it, until the fire reaches the depth of the cavity of the tooth.
But the cauterization with fire, so that you are directed towards a pipe of air, or a pipe of iron. And let him sit in some bodily grossness, so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the sick.
Then take the fire cauterization, whose shape you have prepared: and place it on that tooth: and hold your hand, until the cauterization has cooled down.
Do this several times, for the pain will be relieved, or do it on the same day, or on another day.
And let there be a good butter with which to fill the cavity of the wound, so that the sick mouth is filled with butter and hold it for an hour: then open it widely.
This is the form of cauterization.
Cauterize with any part of the body as you can: and this is the form of the tube.
The way to cauterize a struma.
Head XXXVII.
When the struma are full of phlegm, and from cold and humidities, and do not submit to digestion by medicines, and wish to digest them quickly: then take a fire cauterization, whose shape is this.
Has two open ends, so that the smoke can escape from one end of cauterization: and place the fire-lit wisp on the wound once, and again, if you endure it, until it reaches the depth of the abscess.
If the apoplexy is small: then place the cautery according to the quantity of the apoplexy.
Then let him be left for three days, and place over him a cloth soaked in oil, until what was burned by the fire comes out.
Then care for the man with the tooth ointment, until the wound heals in the form of a cannula.
The way to cauterize a sore throat and a constricted breath.
Chapter XXV.
When there is moisture on the lung canal and especially when the complexion is cold, then it is necessary that the sick person be discharged in the first days with dissolved medicines.
Then cauterize the man at the root of the throat in a depressed place: and be careful, so that you do not go too deep with the cautery on the throat or skin, unless there is something of it.
Then cauterize the man with another cautery at the joint of the neck in the last part of the spine, and lastly: and place the cautery by a peg according to the manner that preceded it.
Then care for the man with that which preceded it, until he recovers.
The way to cauterize when there is sickness of the lung and a cough.
Chapter XXVI.
When the cough and the sickness of the lung are due to cold humidities, and the sick person does not have a fever, nor is there an old phthisis or ancient sickness: then cauterize the man with two cautery wands above the jaw in depressed places, gently and lightly.
And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between two breasts: and place the cautery in the form that preceded it, like a cannula.
And if the wound needs to be probed with the cautery, which is called a Probes, of the same form that preceded it in probing the pain of the ears: and let there be probes from thirty probes up to almost another.
Then care for the man with that which preceded it, until he recovers. And it has also three branches for the cautery: in this form.
Why should one be healed with this cautery when you use only one of three cauteries?
§ On the mode of cauterizing in the Titilli, on dislocation of the humerus.
Head XXVII.
When the adductor has become wet due to a blow and does not return to its place at once after the dislocation, but it becomes accustomed to returning of itself, then dislocate it with a slight movement, which we have already mentioned, then it is necessary that you reduce the dislocation in the beginning.
Then let the patient lie on his back, or on his sound side.
Then smear with oil, which is within the internal Titilli, towards the upper part with your left hand fingers: and if the shoulder joint has become displaced inwardly.
Then take the cautery with two handles. Which is this form.
Then cauterize with oil, until it penetrates to another side, and the shape of cauterization will be made with four cauteries.
And when it is made with a cautery having three handles, why does the shape of the cauterization then become six cauteries? And the handles are according to the fineness of the needle.
This is the form of the cautery having three handles.
And when one is added to this mode, why are there then eight cauteries?
Then put on the cautery fine brushes with salt.
Then make it adhere to the tranquility of the member so that it does not move at all, until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is upward and does not occur often, then cauterize it on top of the shoulder with a clauus cautery, or with many points by puncturing.
For the joint becomes stable, and the moisture is dried up: and the sick one is healed.
§ On the mode of cauterizing the stomach.
Caput XXVIII.
When cold and great moisture happen in the stomach, until they have taken it out from his skin, and there are many catarrhs to it, and they persist with the ways of cure, and do not confer: then one should lie down on his back, and extend his legs, and his hands.
Then cauterize with six cauteries, a cautery the size of a finger under the chest, and two cauteries below on either side, a cautery each, until you get a triangular figure.
And lengthen between the two so that they do not join together, when they make pus. And there should be a depth of the cautery as great as two-thirds the thickness of the skin.
And there should be the figure of the cauteries without addition to this form: and if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and let there be a cautery with which one does this cautery according to the form of a circle.
And the stomach should be cauterized by piercing it with a needle that trembles from this cautery: and there is, as to signs on the stomach's point according to the quantity, which you wish to use with the caustice: then cauterize it with the needle-piercing: then care for the body with the cure that preceded it until it heals.
The way to cauterize a cold body.
Chapter 29.
When it happens in the liver that there is pain from cold and moisture, or from a coarse wind, until it has gone out from his skin by natural exit of the wastes, and he is cared for with the way that we said, and does not profit in him: then one should lie down on his liver, and mark with an encaustic three cauteries according to this form, and this quantity the same over the spar below the hypocundry, where the bed of man reaches: and there should be space that is between every cautery according to its thickness, a finger: and there should be a cautery according to the length of the body, and do not compress your hand greatly with the cautery.
And let there be a quantity of what is to be burned from the thickness of the skin, a quantity of half of it not added: and let the sick stand on his feet.
But if he is not standing, then let him lie down, who has already extended his limbs, and raised his arms. This is the form of the caustic.
And you also may do this caustic with a knife-caustic, when there is subtlety and wisdom with you in the art.
And guard yourself, that you do not proceed too far in the cauterization, and that the thickness of the skin is burned throughout, because the skin there is thin, know that one.
De mode cauterizandi apotema epatis:
[30] Caput XXXI.
When an exitio is found and you know, if that apostema is in the liver, or in its tunic: then if it is in the liver, there is a dull pain, and there is acuteness of sensation: and you will see that the treatment of the liver fatigues the doctors.
Therefore let the sick person lie on his back on his bed.
Then the figure of the place of the apostema with the caustic: then the fires of the caustic which are absorbed by the radii.
And this is its form.
And cauterize with that one caustic until the skin is burned throughout, and reaches the sipho, until it emerges in its entirety: then take care of the cure of the exiting ailments, until it heals.
And it is not necessary that this form of the caustic be used, unless the study of medicine is prolonged in someone: and because sometimes with some experience diseases of this kind are encountered: then let him dare to perform such an operation.
But I prefer to send it away.
[31] De mode cauterizandi in pleurese:
Chapter XXXI.
The ancients said that they used to apply a wound with the roots of aristolocheia to pleurisy in a cold way according to this method.
And it is as if you should take from the roots of aristolocheia dry long roots that are found in it and should be like the thickness of a finger.
Then immerse him in oil: and light it on fire.
Then apply cautery with one cautery on him that is between the point of a fork and the neck, and two small cauteries under the chin slightly inclined on either side, which are under the beard.
And two cauteries also in him that is between the fifth and sixth ribs slightly inclined towards the back: and one cautery in the middle of the breast, and another above the stomach.
And three cauteries from behind: one in him that is between two spatulas: and two cauteries from the sides of the breast, lower cautery that is between two spatulas.
And your hand should not be compressed with cautery, but rather it should be in open skin smelling. And some ancient men said that they used to use a cautery made of iron like a wire: and light it up, and put it inside him that is between the ribs until it reaches the bile, and let the pus come out: as we have said in the bilial discharge.
But in this piercing with cautery there is a fear that either the weak one immediately dies, or a hole occurs in which there is no healing.
Regarding the method of cauterizing the spleen:
When you cure the spleen disease, when you have divided the disease as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatment does not help, then cauterize it according to three methods, all of which are correct.
Of which one is that you make three cauteries, or four lined up according to the length of the spleen according to the shape of the cauterii of the liver, whose predecessor was the figure.
And [the quantity of] gruel between all cauterizations is the size of a finger, or more or less.
And let there be a mode for the caustics, which we have said in the caustic of the liver equally.
And do not compress your hand with the caustic; and let the sick person lie on his back.
And another mode of cauterization is that the caustics have two edges, which we have said in the chapter on shoulder dislocation: and dry up the skin, which is in the direct splen, where it reaches the cubitus on the left side of the sick person: and let your elevation be raised according to the length of the body, so that the caustics fall according to the length of the body.
Then introduce two burning edges keenly, until they penetrate the skin from the other part: then remove the caustic: so there are four caustics. And if you wish to cauterize with a caustic that has three edges.
Then treat the caustic, after you have removed it, with emollient for many days: for it is more helpful than each preceding one in the course of cure.
On the mode of cauterizing in Hydropsis.
Chapter 33.
The caustic does not fall in Hydropsis, unless it is properly raised.
When you treat Hydropsis with the modes of cure which we have said in the division, and there is no effect from the treatment, then let there be four caustics around the navel, and one caustic on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the spine, and one in front of the heart, and another in front of the stomach: and let the depth of the caustic be proportionate to the thickness of the skin.
Then remove the caustic while it is still open, that it may emit pus after a long time.
And do not wet the sick person again after the caustic, with that same one: for it is necessary that two purposes be combined with it; and he will soon recover health with the help of God.
The form of the caesarian section where the abdomen is opened, sits on a bend: according to the fact that it precedes in form; and its back, where it is caesarian, sits on an olive, according to the fact that it precedes in form.
De mode cauterizandi pedes et crura: [Head of Chapter LXXIV.]
When they are laid up with the hydropic disease, and become filled with a yellow liquid: you must cauterize over the back of the foot in the nocrati, which is between the auricular and the ring: and wet your hand with the cautery, and do not twist it: then wet your hand: and do not repeat it at all.
For the yellow water, and sit the cautery according to this form.
Then make over the two legs the two cauteries in all the leg, and let the cautery be made with the edge of a chisel-shaped cautery: and let the cautery be made according to the length of the leg, one under the knee, and the other lower down that way, about halfway through the leg: and over all the pelvis two cauteries: and do not close the cautery at once for a long time: so that it is relieved from it some water: then care for the wound with the rest as we have said.
De mode cauterizandi in solutione ventris: [Head of Chapter LXX.]
When the belly is loosened from cold and moisture, until it has lost its ability to retain virtutes and digestion, which are in the stomach and intestines: and cure it with the modes of treatment, and does not heal: and you shall see that it bears the injury of the great power of cauterization, then cauterize it with a big cautery over its own stomach, according as it was preceded in cauterizing the stomach with a cautery in the form of a circle, and four small cauteries around the navel, with a small edge-shaped cautery: and a big cautery or two cauteries over the alcatins.
And if you see moisture exuberant, and that it bears the injury of that, then cauterize it with a cautery over the ribcage, and a cautery over all the pelvis: and possibly you shall add two small cauteries by the side of the big one in the stomach.
For healing is the work of one who knows his business well.
The mode of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Chapter 36.
When there are many old hemorrhoids, or one, and they are of gross humor, cold, or corrupt humors, and they are treated with that which we have said in the division, and the cure is not effective: then cauterize three cauteries on the lower part of the back spine under an egg-shaped triangle, and a cautery under the navel almost like two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is cold, and his food is not digested, and you see that his face is pale, then cauterize him on the back of the stomach with a large cautery, according to what has preceded: and a cautery on his spleen, and another on his liver, with a clove: and leave the cautery open for some time: and then take care of himself, until he is healed.
The mode of cauterizing athel (a small blood vessel) after its amputation.
Chapter 37.
When you cut off the athel, then set fire to the cautery which is absorbed by radiation.
Then introduce the fire into the athel that has been cut off: and with your hand, until the cautery reaches the opening of the anus, from which runs blood: do this once, or twice. If there are many athels, then cauterize each one with a separate cautery, as we have said.
Then take care of them, with the oil that is effective for them, until they are healed.
And if you cauterize him with a large cautery on his back, it is more painful in the cure.
The mode of cauterizing a fistula in the anus.
Chapter 38.
When the patient does not submit to the section and the operation that we have described in its place, and trembles at it, perhaps he will be healed with a cautery.
And so, when a fistula occurs in someone and it is old, pus runs out of it, and corrupted humors flow out.
It is therefore worthwhile that one should probe it gently with the hand.
Then recognize the depth of its extent by probing.
Then apply a hot cautery, which is like a ray of light.
Then insert yourself into the fistula with fire and recognize how much it enters by observing the closure. And repeat this cautery on it until all the corrupted bodies are burned, once, twice, or three times, according to your need.
And guard yourself from the heat of fire if there is any nerve there or large veins: or if the fistula leads to the body of the womb, or the body of the intestine, then guard yourself from all these places.
And do not perform this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place: and be aware, for it does not pierce through.
Then take care of the place until it heals.
But if the place is sealed and material has been cut off from it and remains for a long time in this condition: then know that it has already healed completely.
And if material is not cut off from it, then know that it is penetrating or has a corrupted opening within its depth, or nearly so: whose memory will remain in its own place.
The method of cauterizing the Renes.
Chapter 39.
When pain in the kidneys occurs from cold, or from gross wind, and is assuaged by urination, then one should cauterize the kidneys above the mesh on the kidneys, cauterizing each kidney with a cautery knife, whose precursor was memory.
And perhaps we can cauterize it again in the same place.
Why are there three lines drawn?
So that they will be longer in the cutting.
The method of cauterizing the Vesica (Bladder).
Chapter Ten. When weakness and softening occur in the bladder because of cold and moisture, until the sick person does not retain his urine, then cauterize him on the lower part of the penis above the bladder, where the hairs begin to grow, and cauterize with one cautery from the right side, and another with a cautery from the left: and let the length of that cautery be according to the length of the thumb knuckle: and cauterize him with two cauteries if you wish so. And let it be according to what preceded the cautery with a claw.
The way to cauterize the womb: Chapter Eleven.
When cold and moisture occur in the womb, and it is prevented from being impregnated by that, and her menstrual flow corrupts and delays their time, and pain occurs for her during intercourse, then three cauteries should be used around the navel as we have said in cauterizing the bladder, and one cautery above the lower back with a knuckle, or two cauteries: and let it be according to what preceded the cautery with a claw.
The way to cauterize the anus in a dislocation:
Chapter Twelve.
When the mucous membrane of the anus flows with moisture towards the rectum, and there is a cause for its exit from its place: its sign is that the crust prolongs itself over the other when they face each other: and the location of the dislocation is found in it.
Therefore it should be that the sick person is cauterized over the anus with a similar circle of cautery: after you have found the signs with the fire in the circumcision of the anus, as it turns: and so that it falls on the middle of the circle.
And let the shape of that which preceded the cautery in the cauterization of the stomach be.
If this cautery is not present with you, then cauterize him with three cauteries, with a large olive cautery: and let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the skin of all.
Then the care for him, until he is healed.
The way of cauterizing in sciatica. Head XLIII.
When pain occurs in the shank of the leg, and there is cause for his coldness and moisture: and the care for the sick one is joined with it, which we have said in the division, and there is no cure, and it becomes old: then it is necessary that you separate the sick one from gross humors with foul pills, or with artificial pills, and similar things.
Then cauterize him.
And the way of the cautery is according to two ways: either with the cautery with burning medicines, or with the fire.
The cautery with fire is according to many ways.
Of which one is that, that he cauterizes above the shank of his leg three triangular cauteries, according to this form.
And make their depth good, or bad.
And there is space that is between every cautery of the quantity of the thickness of a finger: and there is an olive-oil cautery.
When, however, the cautery is made in the middle on the top of his leg.
Why are there four cauteries?
And if you wish to cauterize with a circle, whose predecessor is the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the shank, one: that there is a circle containing the whole shank.
And burn the thickness of the skin of all.
This is the way of cautery in sciatica, when pain adheres to the shank itself, and does not extend up to the hip and the leg.
But if it extends up to the hip and the leg, then cauterize him with two cauteries on the hip, on the place to which the pain extends, and on your own cautery over the back of four fingers slightly: and there is a cautery-knife. And make the depth of the cautery according to the depth of the thickness of the skin.
If the patient complains that the pain extends up to the fingers of the foot, then cauterize him at that place with a point, line, triangle, or square, as needed.
And if he complains of pain under the knee towards the thigh, then cauterize him at that place with a single knife cut.
And let your cauterization be such that you do not hurt with the cauldron as it burns nerves, or a large artery, and do not attract it to the bad injury of the sick person, or contraction.
And I have already seen one and the other, those who cauterized above the knee and ended with cauterization, and the leg was swollen, until the tumor became attached to the foot, and it was corroded all over; and then the blood of the wound was dissolved, and death after that.
If the pain is in two parts at the same time, cauterize each one according to this mode.
And some wise ones have said in the cauterization ofanchae, whose cauterization is this mode.
Make a similar model from iron, the diameter of which is half of the palm: and be at the opening of it according to the size of the nail, or less than more: and within that model there is another model.
And be a space that is between each model by the quantity of the thumb's nail: and let the openings be on two sides: and make their height almost like a knuckle, or two knuckles: and let them make handles out of iron that are crookedly adapted in the models.
And this is its form.
Then let it be heated in fire, until it turns red, and let sparks fall out: then let it be placed on a flat stone of theanchae lying down on the sound side.
Then cauterize him with three round cauterizations in one direction.
Then let him go for three days.
Then bind it with butter: and let the hole be left open for many days.
Then the care of the wound with ointment, until it heals.
Albucasius replied, With this type of burn, we are not very skilled, because of its frightening appearance: and therefore, because there are few who wait on it.
However, a good scarification is what the patient needs, and his place remains with him.
But the cauterization when you apply medicines is, so that you make two threads with a piercing ring, in which descends the pin of his door from brass or iron, whose length is equal to the depth of his walls: of which there are two knots, or almost the same as himself.
And there should be space between each one, equal to the thickness of a finger, and both open downward and upward: and that they should contain themselves against the side opposite, in this form.
Then put it on the patient's back, lying on his sound side.
And press your hand firmly on the patient's back.
Then fill between the two circles with warm water, slightly heated with fire, and hold it for a time: and let the patient bear his pricking, and his burning, because he feels the pricking like fire, until it is calm.
Then wash your hand with an instrument, and rinse all of it thoroughly with sweet water: then let it go for three days.
And put butter on it, until it comes off due to the burning; and let it go for a few days, and wash away the pus.
This is the latest in healing.
Then care for that wound with ointment, until it heals.
If the pain extends to the hip or leg: let him have a position in it that contains water, according to what you did in the width, evenly.
And this is the way of warm water: and I have already written about it in my book on the rectifying of medicines.
Take alkaline and un-extinct lime on both sides, turn them over, and put them in a new bowl, the lower part of which is pierced with a small hole, according to the quantity that goes in: and put under the base of the bowl another bowl upside down: and pour water from the two, so that it immerses each one with a finger: then grasp them with your good hand: and set them aside, until the sharp water comes out on the lower side of the bowl.
Then put together all the water, and pour it over another stone: and tie it up, until it has healed.
For herself will then be strong and keenness of her own, which is used in many surgical operations, and in the cauterization of the remaining members.
Since it will effect the operation by its own fire.
And from medicines are used, with which they cauterize the broad, also as therapeutics, and honey of anacardium, and lime mixed with soap, so that both are mixed.
And Galen himself reported, of a certain man from ancient healing, who was cured of pain in the anus and sciatica: and he praised that it was great.
And he said, "He did not like any other treatment," and that he was cured from one ass because he reported: "Perhaps he entered a hot bath, and came out already well. And it is, to be taken from the seat of a man: and if it is not found a woman, it is taken like this, recently: and it is heated much with some fat, and placed on the anus, where there is pain, or in the crotch: and it is tied up, and is left for the quantity of three hours, or per quantity that he feels weak sedation from heat.
Then introduce it into a bath.
When the body then becomes red-hot, introduce him into the soil.
For the pain has passed away, and he is healed.
And you should know that it is not necessary to use any cauterization with these medicines, unless after evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides who said that when sheep manure is burned with it, it is good for the sciatica, and it makes a second-type cautery.
Take the wool, and let it soak in old oil, and place it on a deep place, which is between the thumb of the foot, and between the heel, and is closer to the fire.
Then take the dung of goats and mix it with fire, until it becomes charcoal.
Then place the mixture on a woolen cloth and leave it there until it is extinguished.
Then repeat this process.
So do not cease to perform this, until the sense has become accustomed through the medium up to the tip of the nose, and the pain rests.
This mode of treatment is called the Vacca's cautery.
[¶] On the cauterization of dolor dorsi.
Chapter 42.
When pain occurs on the back from various causes, either from accident, or from impact, or from excessive drainage and similar things, then the cauterization should not be done unless in this single case alone, which is done with cold and wet material infusions.
Therefore after the drainage of the nurse with foetid pills and similar things, let them be placed on the back where there is pain, three lines according to the length of the midline affected, having first marked with encaustum in each line five cauterization, or more according to the quantity which has come from the tolerance of the nurse's virtue: and let the cauterization be done with a cauterizing needle.
And if there is need, cauterize three cauterizations, or four, with the middle clauwile, in this form:
[¶] On the mode of cauterizing in the gibbosity.
Chapter 50.
This disease frequently occurs in small children.
And the sign of the incipient stage of this disease in children is that which occurs on him a stricture in the anus during defecation and movement: and an inflammation in the last joint of the back and the nodules of it, which has already begun to emerge over the other joints.
Therefore when you see this, and wish to treat it, then let the cauterization be made with a needle which is a circle according to this form:
And he took the cautery and applied it equally to all parts of the spine; and if the cautery was used around the spine with two or three points of the needle, and the needles were close together.
Then he cared for the place until it healed with that which I have said.
And do not apply the cautery to the hunchback, which is made in a spasm of a nerve.
The way to cauterize in podagra and pain of joints. Chapter 46.
When the pains of the joints are from cold humidities that flow into any member of the body, then when pains occur in the feet, it is the custom of the doctors to name this podagra properly.
So then how to cure podagra caused by cold with the methods of treatment, and do not remove the pains, then remove them with the cautery.
And it is so, that he cauterized him after evacuation around the joint of the feet with many needles; and let the cautery be Oileus.
This is its form.
And if you can endure that the needles are on the face of the foot, then do it with a single needle.
That if the pains ascend to the knees or other joints, and often happens that, then cauterize him over all the knee with three needles, or four from all parts, with this same cautery of Chlorius. But if you need more of this cautery, then cauterize him. And do not submerge your hand with the cautery, but let there be a little bit of thick skin only on the skin around it.
But if the pains ascend to the knees and back: then administer that which I have said in my book from the cautery.
That if the pains are only in the hands, then the points around a small flame, as two lines rotate.
But if the pain remains in the fingers, then point them out, over every knot a point, and over the palm of the hand.
If however the pains rise after a few days at the shoulders, or at the arms, then cauterize both sides at all parts.
And do not make the sick person sweat from good regimen, from reception of medicines.
For if the regimen is made good, and the phlegm is made to sweat, it will be healed with this cautery and the help of God.
The mode of cauterizing in ruptures.
Chapter LVII. Head.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, and the intestine has descended, or has touched the testicle, and it is beginning to become close: then you should order the sick person to abstain from food on his own day.
And let him use laxatives, so that the stool may come out of its own volition from his belly.
Then make him sit between your hands on his back; and order him to hold his breath, until he has gone out, or appears the buttock, or the intestine.
Then reduce him with your fingers, and mark with the caustic under the rupture on the crest of the pelvis, with a mark whose extreme is similar to half a circle to the upper part of the body.
Then hold the caustic fire, which has this form, until it is white, and let it fall off little by little.
Then reduce the intestine, or the buttock to its concavity.
Then let the minister put his hand on the place so that he does not exit the intestine: and you have now opened between the ribs, and placed under it the pole of the bed, and one serves as a lever by holding the foot of the patient, and another leans over the pelvis, and holds the hands.
Then let the caustic fall on the patient with the right hand, while holding the caustic fire upright.
And hold him, until you have joined his jaws: or repeat with another lever, if you do not succeed with him on the first attempt up to the mouth.
And carefully observe from the exit of the intestine at the time of your cauterization, lest you burn him, and let it go through that into the body, or death, or great malice.
And you shall know that when you do not achieve a closed wound with the cautery, your operation will not succeed.
It is necessary that the cautery for infants be subtle, according to their measure.
Then take care with the remaining unguent until it heals.
And let him lie on his back for forty days, until the scar is closed.
And it is necessary that you put food for him according to the length of his curing time, which softens his belly: so that he does not vomit up what he has eaten and has no bowel movement.
Then when he wants to get up after forty days, then administer a loose ligature and let him hold it for another forty days.
For when he uses this regimen, he heals with whole health.
When, however, Torns happen in the rest of the body, and are beginning, and do not add to one another, then cauterize his Torn with round cautery according to its quantity: and let it be what is healed from then on as the third one.
Then take care for him, with him who we have said: and do not add to him.
And some have said first: that the Torn should be cauterized with triangular cautery, according to this form.
Afterwards, it is signed with wax, and a line is put which is across the width at the back of the Torn, and another line to the front. And place your hand in the middle with the clawing cautery.
But the first cautery is easier and better. The way to cauterize in cases of pain, or percussion.
Chapter 58.
When it happens in some member by accident, or by percussion: and this pain persists for a long time, and your treatment does not succeed in it: then it is necessary to cauterize with Pointed cautery.
And let there be a cautery for every member according to its size, and its health, and its weakness, and its strength, and its location of twisting, and the pain from it.
If then is healed by the first cauterization, it is well.
If not: then repeat on the same place the cauterization.
For from the custom of these pains is that they should be changed from one member to that which approaches it.
Why it should be that these should be followed with cauterization, until the weak one is healed.
On the manner of cauterizing for leprosy.
Head 49.
And for leprosy, whenever they are increased, let them be cauterized with the greatest care.
And especially the species of leprosy, which is made by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy: so that when you are cauterizing it, consider well its shape.
If then is insistent leprosy, and you have treated it with care when it comes down, and has not stood, and has covered the whole complexion: then cauterize it on top five cauterizations: one in the middle of the head's knot, and the second lower than that going towards the forehead at the end of the hair, and two above two horns, and one behind the ear.
And the last hand with a little cauterization, until it presses on the gums a deep impression, and the membranes are dislocated from them: so that the expiration of thick vapors comes out of it, and cauterize it with cautery also on top of the spleen, according to what preceded.
But if leprosy has already spread on the weak one, and it appears clearly: then you should cauterize it with these cauterizations, which we have said in the head, and a cauterization on the extremities of the nose, and two cauterizations on each of the cheeks, and two cauterizations on the two bones of the neck, and one great one at the bottom of the throat, and one above it: and two on the two shoulders, and two on the two hips, and two on the two breasts, and one on the whole body, from the joints of fingers of both hands and feet, and one on each heel of the feet, and fillets of the hands.
And because of the nerves that are above the last bone of the foot, so that you don't burn them. And when the cautery is applied with fire to the ospectines, and to the os stomachi, and to the osépar.
And you should know that the more you apply the cautery, the greater the benefit, and the more it confers.
And you should know that a sick person does not feel pain in the cautery, as he feels it when he is healthy: therefore, because his body is already stuporified.
And let the tools be of proper size and shape according to the limbs and joints: and because they have been preceded by the appearance of the instruments of surgery.
(Head)
When a limb is stuporified and treated with medicines, oils, plasters, and is not healed, then cautery the limb that is stuporified with cauterias, according as the magnitude of the limb is increased, or its parity is diminished.
And let your cautery be applied a little into the thickness of the skin.
Then take care to apply the medicine on it with ointment, until it is healed.
And when the cautery is applied to some kind of stupor that occurs in the hand or foot at the exits of the nerves that move that limb: and the stupor disappears.
But he does not presume over it, unless he is wise in anatomy of limbs, and knows the exit of the nerves that move the body.
The mode of applying the cautery in Albaras:
(Head)
When Albaras is applied to the head and does not confer any benefit to it with medicines: then apply a deep cautery on it little by little, according as there is thickness of skin, until the skin is bleached and its color changes.
Then the cure itself with wheat flour, and lentil oil with rose, and leaves of arnica, and pigeon's blood, and hynd's blood: from each one let there be a part: all these things are mixed together, and they are spread out on a cloth, and they adhere to the place until it is healed.
The method for cauterizing cancer:
CHAPTER LII.
When the cancer is beginning to appear, and to press upon it: then cauterize it with a circular cautery, as it turns.
But the wise men have said that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle.
But I do not choose that one, because I am afraid that it will burst out: and I have seen it sometimes. And it is better to cauterize it all around with a circle, as we have said: or with many cautery's. The method for cauterizing a pustule:
CHAPTER LIII.
When anyone has a pustule, and it is delayed in its maturation, or because it is making too much of a mess, or because of age, when it is feeble with little blood, or because of time, and the pus is running ahead in its maturation: then cauterize all around it with many small punctures.
Then let it go.
For it will hasten in its maturation.
But if you are going to pierce it with a cautery, then take this kind of fire.
And lay the fire upon it in the middle of the pustule, until it enters the skin: and let the cautery follow it, so that the course of the pus may be eased.
Then take care of the pustule until it is healed.
The method for cauterizing a gangrenous wound: CHAPTER LIIIII.
Gangrene is not anything but corruption in a member that walks, and it corrupts the part itself: just as fire eats dry wood.
If therefore you see corruption in the place which tolerates cautery with fire, then many cauteries of fire, small and great, and cloys in the place where the corrosion is.
Then cauterize him himself from every part until you root out all corruption, and nothing remains of it within. Then let him be left for three days, and put over the places cauterized sulfur trodden with oil, until all the escarres are eradicated, and all corruption is gone.
Then care for him with ointments generating flesh.
If therefore you see that after three days the flesh is born healthy, in which there is no corruption, it is good.
And if not: then again cauterize him over the places that remained from the corrupted parts.
And the corrosion is treated sometimes with acute medicine.
For it itself rises up in the place of cauterization.
However, cauterization with fire is faster in its action: and I have already said above cauterization with acute medicine in division: so take it then there when you can bear it.
The way of cauterizing in small places and warts. Chapter 50.
This disease often occurs in the lower parts of the feet: and it is a gross, filtered, infection that affects the foot. And there are two ways of cauterization: cauterization with fire, and cauterization with warm water.
As much as it is with fire, so that the fires of small cauterization are like the flame of a hair-comb: which let it be made from iron, according to the quantity which contains a clove completely: and let it be subtle at the edge.
Then put the burned one on the clove. Then roll the hand with the cautery around the clove, until the cauterization reaches the depth of the clove: and let him be left for three days, until it begins to emit pus. Then apply the plaster to the wound with silk threads, crushed with salt: and let the plaster rest on the flesh during the night. For himself will be rooted out from his roots.
Then care for the place with a poultice of flesh, until it heals over.
If they are not turned and often happen on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet: then apply cauterization with warm water: and there is, so that you take a tube from bronze, or iron, or a feathers of a vulture: and lay it down over a claw, or a thistle.
Then pour into the tube a little quantity of warm water: hold your hand over it, and rotate it slightly so that the edge of the tube is pressed into the claw root, and let the warm water come to the surface, to the claw root: and let the sick person wait a little while on the sensation of the warm water.
Then release him, for the claw will be rooted out with its roots.
Do so with one at a time, until you have finished with all of them in the body.
Then care for them after they are rooted out, with that which generates flesh from the ointment.
The way of cauterizing in a tremor:
Head LVI.
When it happens to anyone in a tremor from cold in the nerve, or from the quartan fever, or otherwise: then one should cauterize the person four cauterizations, or five on the back vertebrae, and between each vertebra a cauterization, and in his chest a cauterization, and over his stomach a cauterization.
A tremor quiets down with the olive oil cauterization, and the health of the disease of cold quiets it down quickly. The way of cauterizing with Al-Bahri:
Head LVII.
When they are expelled from the body Al-Bahri food, that is, pustules which are formed from coarse corrupted materials.
It is necessary therefore in the first place that, when it appears, they be cauterized over the whole head of the pustule with a fine cauterizer made of myrrh wood, whose end is inflamed with fire.
Or, when it comes to the root of artichoke, long.
Or, when it comes to a lenticular cauterizer. And when they are cauterized with the emulsion, at first its expulsion according to this mode: and if it does not increase, and breaks up the superfluity making them, and heals out of them.
However, it is necessary that that be done after the evacuation with phlebotomy.
On the mode of cauterizing in a flow of blood from an artery in the ulna.
Head LVIII. It often happens that the blood flows out from an artery which is cut in the ulna, which occurs externally, or at the incision of a pimple, or a cauterized member, and such things: and it happens difficult to remove it.
But when it has happened to anyone of this, then take with your hand at the opening of the artery, and put over it the thumb: and tighten it much, until the blood is overcome under your thumb, and does not emerge from it anything. Then put in a fire a little olive cauterizer, and great number more: and blow over it, until the fires are very hot.
Then take out of them one, or small, or big, according to the ulna and the place where the artery is broken, and put the cautery over it, after which you move your thumb quickly: and hold the cautery, until the blood is cut off.
That if it is driven out with the fingers from the opening of the artery, and the cautery is extinguished, then take another cautery quickly, from the cauteries which are prepared in fire. Therefore do not cease to be doing that with one after another, until the blood is cut off.
And beware, lest you burn the nerves which are there, and some other evil befall the sick. And you shall know that when blood flows from an artery, it is then impossible to cut it off: especially when the artery is large, unless with one of four measures.
Or with a caustic, as we have said.
Or with extraction, when it is not extracted. For when it is extracted, the extremities of it are bruised, and the blood is cut off.
For when it is extracted, the extremities of it are bruised, and the blood is cut off. Or is bound with a strong ligature.
Or are laid upon the part by virtue of its medicine, which makes it necessary to cut off the blood, and is strangled with a constricting poultice.
Whoever applies the incision with a ligature, and constriction with a poultice, or the positioning of burning things, and others like that, does not give him relief unless it is rare.
But if this happens to anyone and there is no present doctor or medicine: then let the digit of the index be placed upon the orifice of his wound, as we have related, and constricted with great force, until the blood from the upper part of the wound is stopped, and applied to the artery.
And let the finger not be moved away from it, always with cold water, until the blood is congealed, and thickened, and cut off. And while this is being done, consider what is needed from a caustic, or from medicine.
[The First Part Ending]
(The Surgery Book of Albucasis Part II) (On Incision, Puncture, and Bloodletting on Wounds and Similar Matters)
We have already spoken at length in the First Chapter of all sickness where applicable, and of fire, of medicine, and the causes thereof, and of the instruments, and of the forms of cauterization. And there I placed those chapters from the beginning to the end.
And I will proceed in this chapter in the same way: that it may be a help to him who seeks it. And before I begin that, you should know that in this chapter it is from a terror that is in the first chapter on cauterization.
And because of that, a greater caution is needed in this chapter, since in the operation which is in this chapter, the fall of blood often occurs with the opening of the vein, or the incision on the pustule, or the opening of the exiture, or the cure of the wound, or the extraction of the arrow, or the incision on the stone, and those are similar: from all of which, tremor and fear associate themselves, and death often falls in many of them.
And I warn you not to fall into that which is a stumbling block, for when sometimes those who have fallen into this art of men with types of diseases come to you.
For from them is one who becomes angry with his illness, and is lighter with him death: because of the vehemence of his illness that he finds from his disease and the length of his wickedness.
And when the illness is from fear which means death.
And among them is one who gives you a gift, and promises you with it, hoping for health, but his illness is pernicious. Therefore do not consent to him who comes to you from them, whose way is such.
And be a greater caution on our part, than our greed and our avarice.
And do not presumptuous about anything from him, unless after certain knowledge, which confirms with you that success is worthy of praise.
And so you will do in the care of all your sick people, forecasting and indicating about it to where healing is appropriate.
For in it there is an aid for you in acquiring fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you, O sons, with his understanding, and may he not take away from you his guidance and inspiration: for it is in his hands.
And I too have arranged this chapter by sections, according to what preceded it in the chapter on cautery, from the neck down to the feet: that you may find what you seek from it and that which you need.
On the treatment of water that is gathered in the heads of boys.
Chapter I.
You should know that this illness often occurs in boys at the time of birth: or when the midwife grips the boy's head without any lightness.
And whenever it also happens for an unknown reason which is not known.
And I too have never seen this disease in anyone other than boys; and I have looked into every one of them who had it, for that reason I thought it right to leave the operation alone.
And I too have seen a boy among them whose head was filled with water; and his head grew larger every day until he couldn't sit on his own, because of the size of his head; and his moisture increased until he died.
And this moisture, or it is gathered between the skin and the jaw: or it is gathered under the bone above the jaw.
And the operation on him, if it is moisture between the skin and the jaw, and a little swelling there; then you should find in the middle of the head a single crevice in width: and the length of the crevice is almost like two knots, until the moisture runs out.
And this is the form of the incision.
If then the moisture is increased and the swelling is larger; then place two incisions, according to this shape.
And if the moisture is under the bone, and the sign of it is that you see the scalp's edges open from all sides: and when you press it with your hand towards the inside, it doesn't hide it from you; then you should find in the middle of the head three creases, according to this fashion.
And after the incision, remove all the moisture.
Then, wrap it in a swath of cloth soaked in wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then, loosen the ligaments, and care for the tendon with tar and linseed oil.
And do not stop binding the head with equality.
And feed the sick on dry food with little moisture, until the limb is healed and the wound has healed.
Another kind of incision is this: you should take into consideration where there is a lot of blood vessels, and where the accumulation of blood is great.
For when it is in the back, more or less, on the right or left side.
So then with the incision where you see the blood vessels and the accumulation of blood: and cut it according to what is possible for you.
And pay attention not to hit an artery, so that there is no flow of blood, and the sick person dies from that flow with the evacuation of moisture.
Regarding incisions in the arteries, which are behind the ears.
The second head.
When a discharge occurs to the eyes, or to the chest, and it does not respond to medication: then the last resort is to cut these two arteries.
So you must do this when you want to make an incision on them, so that the sick person does not turn his head.
Then, cover the place with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear.
Then the sick person should tie his neck with any of his own cloth.
Then consider where the pulse is beating.
And the places are those that are behind the ears depressed: and rarely hides, except in some people.
Then mark with encaustic on either side: and cut each one with a chisel so that the incision reaches to the mouth: and let it go across the width of the head.
And if you wish, introduce the chisel under the artery, and cut it from above with an incision.
And let the length of the incision be as two fingers joined together.
For when the new wound is incised, there gushes out a pulsating blood flow, which rises to the inside with a regular jump.
But if the artery does not appear by feeling, then one should measure from the edge the quantity of space of three fingers' length.
Then mark with a caustice, and find until the nose.
And that which needs to be emitted from the blood, is six minutes, and perhaps you emit more or less of it. All this is according to the quantity which appears to you from the pulse and the filling up of the artery.
Then consider towards the joint.
And if there remains to the nose from the siffar [a kind of surgical tool] something, then incise that so as not to cause a swelling of heat: and then tighten the joint with liniments of linen cloth.
Then take care of himself with ointment, until he is healed.
As for the extraction of arteries, which are in the temples.
Chapter III.
When it happens to a man that he has an old headache, or acute catarrah by reason of the acrid and moist humors, and heat in the sockets of the temples, or ancient soda, stinging, and similar things: and he is treated with the methods of medicine, and does not send that: then we are skilled in these diseases in the extraction of the arteries from the temples, or cauterization of them, as we have related.
And the method of operation in extracting them is, that the sick person shaves the hair which is in the temples, and extends it towards the artery which appears in the socket.
For it shows itself to you from its pulse, and rarely hides unless in a few people, or when there is a great coldness.
If it hides itself from you, then let the sick person tie his own head with any of his clothes: and then make the hole with a rough cloth.
Or make the place warm with hot water, until it appears to you by a manifest appearance. Then take the spatulum, which I made a little before. Then scrape with it the wound with ease until you reach the artery.
Then insert into it a hook, and remove it from above, until you remove it from the skin, and make it ooze with blood from the tunics that are beneath it on all sides.
If, however, the artery is thin: then wrap it up with the hook's end.
Then cut from it on that side according to how long its ends are, and turn them inward, and do not allow the blood to flow.
For if it is not cut, and if it does not come off, the blood will not rise deeply. Then make it ooze with blood from above six ounces up to three.
Now if the artery is large: then it should be tied with two pairs of double thread, strong and silk: or with horsehair, so that it does not become putrefied before the wound heals over, and allow blood to flow.
Then cut away the excess, which is between the two ties.
Make it so at that hour, or after another hour. And if you wish, burn it with a knife until the wound is dry, using a surgical knife; until the ends move to their own place in the operation.
And this work is better if the patient has no fever, or if his skin is warmed up.
For the knife is made of those things that remain to dry out the humidity.
Therefore it is better to cut with a knife.
And after drawing out the arteries, so that the place may be filled with old fat: and they are placed on top of the flesh, made to swell a little.
And after applying the medicine with dry herbs, which cause new meat to grow, and with liniments, until it heals over.
Now if while you are working blood comes out from the artery, then close it up with the knife, or fill the place with wax: and tighten your hand, until the blood stops.
If there is nothing of them present with you now, then place your finger on the spot, until the blood has dried up.
And moisten the place with water of coolness, until the sharpness subsides, and bind it according to what is necessary.
And from that which is lighter and easier to extract the artery, that is, as if cutting with this cauldron having two knives: so that the sharpness of the two knives is like an almond.
However, they are much less sharp than the two knives.
Since if they are sharp like the two knives, it is fitting that each has coldness: and do not strike flesh with velocity.
But since there is a little coarseness in them, heat from fire is held in them, and flesh is severed quickly: thus this work is better in every way, lighter, and easier to do.
And there is a space between the two knives which is the quantity of coarseness of the finger, after you have marked the two spots with fire: and place both of them on fire well, until they come to the tip, and strike only in the two spots: that what is between their extremities may be increased.
Since they do not congeal deeply with this cauldron.
This is the form of the cauldron.
In terms of the care of sharp, painful, and burning tears from the eyes.
Chapter IV.
When the tears are persistent and the course of the tear-ducts from the eyes is on the outside of the skull: and there is no benefit to this remedy with the medicines of physicians, and the face becomes red as it walks, like the walking of ants: and his eyes are exhausted, moist, so that his hair has been corroded with corrosion: and his eyelids are heated with the heat of the tears: then the ancient people were accustomed in this cure, and called it Ense's Cure.
And it is, so that you instruct the sick to shave the hair on their forehead.
Then cut three slashes in the forehead that are evenly spaced according to the length of the forehead; and let the length of each slash be almost as long as two fingers, and let one slash be evenly spaced from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and let the second be at about the same length as the movement of the lacertus, and let the third be from the other side: and make sure you cut the arteries that are on both sides; and extend your hand out from the joint of two jaws, and let the space between each slash be the amount of three joined fingers; and have you prepare a sponge fragment or many dry cloths with which to soak up blood.
Then insert the spatula from both ends, whose subsequent form is as follows:
From the incision that is from the temporal side to the second incision: and scrape off all the skin that is between the two incisions with a blade, which is above the bone. Then do the same from the middle incision to the second incision.
Then remove this spatula and insert into the first incision again another tool called a sharp chisel, which is smooth on one side and acute on the other.
This is its form.
And this is its form: and place the sharp side against the attached flesh along with the skin, and the smooth side against the bone; and push it until it reaches the middle slash: and cut off with it all the tools that descend from the head to the eyes: except that it continues the incision as far as it appears from the skin.
Then do the same in the middle slash to another slash.
And when an equal amount of blood has flowed, express the clotted blood from the frond. Then place in every slash a strip of cooked leather, and place on them wicks soaked with wine, oil, or vinegar.
And watch out so that there is no fever.
And on the third day, حل the ligaments and administer a lot of infusion with warm water.
Then treat that wound with the basilicon ointment, and with the other remedies for wounds: until it heals.
De cure of acute lacrimation and cataracts on the eyes from within the head.
Head V.
When any acute, biting, persistent lacrimation or cataracts occur on the eyes from within the head; and the eyes are weakened, pale, and their appearance is already dim: and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hairs fall out of them, and there is a sharp pain in the deep part of the head, causing sneezing: then remove these accidents, for those materials do not come except from many causes.
And the best treatment for them is this.
And it is as if he shaves his forehead.
Then cut into it a fissure in the middle of the forehead, or somewhat more along the length, and begin at the fissure from the left time to right: and go down to the bone: and extend your hand from the temporals that move during chewing: until it is detected the bone: and you will dry up all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate the two lips of the fissure with cooked old cloth, or with linen liniments.
Then tighten it from above with flour: and immerse the flour in wine and oil so that a hot puss does not occur.
And when you dissolve it, and you see that the hot puss is about to come out: then you must stop the flow of blood, until it begins to form a nose.
Then treat the man with dry regime that makes the nose grow: as if you took two parts of wheat flour, and four parts of colophony: and prepare an ointment from them, and administer it to the birth of meat in these wounds.
De cure of him who falls in gold. Chapter VI. All that goes into gold is one of four kinds: either mineral stone, or a similar rock, such as iron, and all other metals; or it is from a plant, such as beans, and peas; or it is a liquid substance, such as water, and vinegar, and things like them; or it is an animal.
But when a stone goes into gold, or any kind of stone that does not contribute to gold and does not grow in gold, expose it to the sun; if you see a stone, then distill into gold some of the oil that has been cooked, or the mustard seed.
Then administer the extraction and make it steam with vinegar, and polishes your ears towards the sun at the time of steaming, after you have put on the cloth around the ear, or wool, and extend the ear towards the sky.
This is often done with this treatment.
But if it does not respond to this treatment, then administer the extraction with gest, that is, with subtle piggy fat: whose form is this.
If it responds well to gest, it is good.
And if not, then administer the extraction with a little bit of caustic powder: its form is this. But if it does not respond to this, then make a tube of brass, and insert the end of the tube into the ear hole a lot, and polishes that is around the tube with soft caustic powder mixed with oil, so that there is no steam going out of the ear unless through the tube: then extract it with your strong steam. This is often done with this treatment.
But if it does not respond to this way either: then take from the hair-bath, or from the water, that is, with gluten prepared, which is used to wash the hair, with which they wash their hair, and put it on the end of the hair comb after you have turned your head to one side: then insert it into the ear with ease, after you have dried your ear with a towel.
If then he does not leave with all that we have related, then approach to be split, before it happens poultice warm, or spasm.
And the mode of the wound is, that as the phlebotomist takes away blood from the head first: and then draw out from it according to the measure of his virtue.
Then make the sick one sit between your hands, and turn his ear to the upper part, and find a small hole in the base of his ear next to his fat at the depressed place: and let the hole be lunar-shaped, until you come to the stone; then take it away with that which is possible for you from the instruments.
Then follow the wound at once with your speed, and attend to it, until it is healed.
That if the thing falling into the ear is from one grain, which grows and swells: then administer extraction of it.
But if it does not obey you to the exit, then take a thin spatula, subtle, according to this form.
And administer with it the cutting away of that kind of grain which falls into the ear, and do not consider that grain already moistened by the vapor of the ear, until you put it off by many blows: then take it out with a hook, or with a gentle hand, or with suction, as we have said, for the extraction of it is facilitous.
In water which is put into the ear, it is necessary that he should use sternutation with condiments at first: and already it fills his ear with some of the old water: and it lies on that ear where is the water.
If then he leaves through that, it is good.
And if not: then take many stones, according to the length of a finger, light, soft, and heat them with fire a little, and introduce one from them into the hole of his ear: and let it come out at the bottom of his foot on that part, and hit against a stone with another stone which is in the ear.
Therefore, cease not doing that with stones and with stones, until he has gone out entirely in water.
And now he has gone out so, that you take from the firebrand, or from the cart one, and insert the end of it into the ear: and you light up the other end with fire, until it is well burned.
Then repeat the same with another cart, and do this many times, until he has gone out entirely in water: and take it out with a tube according to what has been said before in the stone.
In extraction however of an animal that is entered into it, if it is a small body, like a piglet, and similar to it: be careful of the body as I have said in division.
But if it is a large body, which seems to the sense: then administer the extraction of it with gestures and a hook: and the work is easier for all that hold in the ear.
But in extraction of a foetus in the ear, when you take care of it with that which we have said in division, and in the book on distillation, and your care does not avail: then you should look into the ear with your finger in the sun.
But if it seems there anything of the foetus, then extract it with gestures, or with a thin hook.
But if anything does not seem there, then take a tube, which has this form, narrow below, wide above: and insert the end into the ear according to the quantity that it bears up: and then suck it with strong suction.
Do this many times, until all the foetus have gone out.
But if they do not obey you to the exit, then you should cover around the tube with wax, like I said in the stone.
Which if they do not go out with that which we have said: then administer the distillations which the ancient ones have already used in the treatment of foetuses: and you will find it in the book on distillation.
And let your oil and medicine flow out with this instrument, whose form is depicted here.
As you see that the face is made of silver, or brass, lower part is rigid, in which there is a small hole, upper part wide.
So it should be as you drive what is in the concavity of the cannula, should be made of brass slightly twisted.
And if you want to take the radiation, and rub it with a cotton ball in a decent involution: then pour oil, or juice, or what you want from these medicines into the cannula: and let it sit in the ear: then insert the radiation with the cotton desuper, and squeeze it with your hand tempered, until it drives out the oil in the concavity of the ear, and feels it inside: and that which is infused in the ear, should already be warmed a little with fire: and beware there is no medicine that tolerates this.
On the treatment of ear infection with gold.
Head VII.
When some children leave from their mothers' wombs not pierced.
And it also happened to some people that there is an ear infection in the jaw bone, or born of the flesh in it.
And this infection when it happens in the deep cavity of the ear, which does not result in hearing: and when it sometimes happens to the external foraminis a little, and results in it hearing.
So that which happens in the deep cavity of the ear, and what is not understood by sight, is in many dispositions difficult to heal.
And in that which results from hearing, you should put gold in the sun, and look into it: then if you see that there is an infection appearing, open it with a fine awl, whose form is this that follows, has some small width, some of its parts are sharp: and the other end of the awl is made of two sides soft: so as not to hurt the ear.
If then a swelling is born in the meatus auris from the flesh: then hold it with a delicate hook, and cut it easily with a sharp scissor, until all the flesh is taken away.
That if a swelling is in the deep meatus auris: then take a thin ray, a wisp, and heat it slightly with fire: then put it into the meatus auris.
If then you feel a swelling with it, that it is with the weight of hearing weakened: be careful to open it easily: and carefully, so as not to wound the nerves of the ear.
Then put into the ear a wisp according to the quantity of the width of the foramen, which you have introduced into the Egyptian ointment: let it remain for several days, until you are certain that the swelling is healed.
Or take a wisp and dip it into rose water, and powder it over the swelling, and use it.
That if you see the ear already blistered: then it is necessary to take out the wisp, and let it with another wisp that you have introduced into the green dye which you made with rose water, until the blister cools down: then take care of the swelling until it heals.
If then there is a flow of blood: then dip a sponge or cloth into cold water and put it on the ear: and continue with the remaining cure, which stops the predicted flow of blood in the treatment of distillation.
De cura Altheli palpebrarum.
Chapter VIII. This is from the Latin translation of the 10th-century Arabic medical textbook by Albucasis: "Althelil which occur in the eyelids when they are moist and dry.
It is necessary that you hold them with tenails: or with a hook, and cut them with a sharp knife from their roots.
Then put on the places powder.
If then there flows blood from them: then burn them with a thin lens-shaped cautery.
And to cauterize them, it is better after an incision.
For many times they run away when some of their roots remain.
And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned up, and they do not run away.
On the treatment of eyelids.
Chapter IX.
This often happens in the eyelids that there is something which hardens and becomes tough, and for this reason it is called Granum; and it is an aggregation of moist gross matter in the upper lid and lower lid.
So the operation on them is to consider then, if there is Granum proceeding out of it, which appears from the eyelid, and moves on all sides, and its substance is easy.
Find then over it a groove across its width.
Then scrape off the skin from all parts with ease until it bleeds.
Then suspend it by a hook and cut it off.
But if you are not prepared to cut it off, unless after you have made a slight incision in the eyelid, then it will hurt you and weaken that spot.
If the groove is wide: then aggregate it with a stitch: and take care of it, until it heals.
And if it is small, do not cause a bad appearance from it.
The wax will restore it and turn it into flesh again.
And if Granum is falling into the inner part of the ear towards its surface, then invert the eyelid and hang up the Granum by a hook: except that you cut it off with an incision and press it on all sides.
If the lid is elongated by an incision, then it will not hurt in any way.
Then wash the eye after the incision of Granum with salty water: and take care of the place where it is turning red, until it heals up.
On the treatment of eyelids.
Chapter X.
Axirnath is a sweat that is generated in the tunics of the eyelids: and it often happens to boys; and it weighs heavily on their eyes, and they get cataracts in the morning, and they cannot look at sunlight, because their tears run towards them, and because of this their eyes lie on their faces all the time, and fall asleep, and their eyelids are wet with sweat, which has now been dried up: and there is a noticeable Axirnath in the eye, and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel Axirnath between them.
And the mode of his operation is, that he should put the sick man's head in your lap.
Then take a piece of linen cloth and prepare it with a line, and make from it a circle of the second size that contains the axilla from all parts.
Then place him on it and squeeze him with your fingers from all sides so that the axilla is compressed in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle of his body with a wet spatula incident cracks across the width, and there is no larger crack that is made in phlebotomy in the deep.
Or it should be that you find the entire skin, until you reach the axilla, for in many dispositions the axilla comes out of the crack in the form of a white scale.
Then remove it with the cloth that you have soaked between your fingers to the outside: and you shall move your hand to the left and right until it spreads out: and carefully, do not add to the crack, so that you do not reach with a spatula to the eye, and let go of it.
But if the axilla does not appear to you at first crack, you shall add to the crack a little bit with ease, until the axilla comes out.
Then remove it as we have said.
Then immerse the cloth in vinegar and water, and place them on the spot, and squeeze him with flour.
And there are people who grind salt, and put it in the crack, so that what remains of the moisture is liquified.
Then take care of him until he is healed.
But if it happens in the place of a hot swelling, then take care of the person with bandages made soft, until it heals over.
Regarding the methods of Ataxmir for the eyes: that is, when the eyelids are made soft to the eye, from which it comes as if it were a pull: and so should not be.
Chapter
When they grow in the eyelids of the eye hairs added beyond their course under the natural hair, and grow out: then they are hurt to the eye, and make the causes of afflictions, such as continuous tears, and softening of the eyelids, and scaling, until it is the cause of destruction of the eye.
And Ataxmir also cures the eyes according to four modes. Or by means of cautery with fire.
Or with acute medicine, according to that which was said in the chapter on cautery.
Or Ataxmir cures by means of incisions and sutures.
Or with canes, according to that which I say.
It is necessary that you place the head of the patient in your lap.
Then with your left hand turn the eyelid of the eye.
If then it is turned, it is good.
And if not: insert your finger in there, in which sits the hair from the lower part of the eyelid, and let it penetrate with the thread from above, and let it be next to the very hairs themselves, that is, next to the edge of the eyelid, where the hairs grow out: and pull the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn it upwards with a ray.
Then find on the inner side of the eyelid beneath the hairs added with a spike incident from the greater tear to the lesser tear.
Then remove the thread, and put under the eyelid a small piece of tow or cloth: then mark on the eyelid with encaustic, which is like a figure of a leaf of myrtle.
However, it must be that the figure is made according to the quantity and elevation of the eyelid: for this varies very much in human beings.
From these, there is one who needs to be incised from the eyelid a great quantity, according to the quantity which is softened by the eyelid. Then with the spike find on two lines which you have marked, and begin from the greater tear to the lesser tear, and let there be a groove next to the natural hairs, as is the girth of a ray.
Then insert a hook into one of two angles of the skin. Then scrape all of that. Then join with a suture the two lips, with an aiguille and a thin thread: and wipe away the blood, and let adhere what overflows from the hairs on the two eyelids, with some viscous things, if you wish to do that: and if not, I don't cure it.
Then let go of the suture and thread it up to three days, or four: then take care of that. And if there is a wound, let go of the suture and leave it alone, and take care of that with it, which dries up and tightens itself.
For the eyelid should be away from the wound's sealing and its aggregation: but the future is better.
In this way of treating Ataxmius taught the ancient doctors.
But there is a concern about the sick person, and it is from a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And another way is with Ataxmius too: and that is, as signs on the eyelid, which are like a leaf's figure, as we have told.
Then wash the eyelid with three separate or gathered hooks, according to this form which follows, then cut off what is in excess with small scissors, according to this form, with an equal incision.
But if you cannot hold the hook, and it does not fit: then take in hand where the thread is, and put it into the middle of the figure: and put another thread next to the tear' eye, and a third thread next to the smaller tear' eye: and gather the threads between your fingers with an equal gathering.
Then wash your hand with an equal washing: and wash the skin over which is marked the cot, as we have told.
Then gather together the two lips of the wound with a suture: and take care of that, until it heals.
But if there should happen a wound' crack or hole in your incision, or your hole: but that crack with green things, and these like it, from an ointment sitting.
And when ever there is a eyelid, so that its hair turns round.
De cure Ataxmius with dogs.
And it is, as you turn the eyelid over, and cut off the crack which is within, according to what we have told.
Then make two canes or two thin woods: the length of which should be according to the length of the eyelids, and their width should be less than the width of a spatulum: and you have already incised on the extremities of each of the two parts where you hold the thread.
Then bind together each with care on the part that goes beyond the eyelid of the eye, and tightly press together the two canes from both sides by means of a strong strap, and leave it for a few days. For the skin is tight and will die and decay, and rot, until it falls away by itself.
If then there is a delay, then cut it with scissors.
Then take care of the wound, until it heals.
When then has it hardened, remove the eyelids: and the hairs do not sting.
And this is the form of the two canes which you shall make according to this figure, and as regards quantity in length and width.
Regarding the raising of the stinging hairs in the eye with a needle.
Chapter XII.
The operation in this is so that you take an acute needle, and insert it into the thread of silk which is fine. Then bind together its ends with a single knot of fine thread: and make the length of the threads the width of a palm.
Then compose on top of the two threads another fine thread under them, and bind together their ends with a single knot if you wish.
Then place the sick person's head in your lap, and bring it near to the light so that the operation may be declared: for the operation is subtle and minute.
Then insert the needle with the linement into the root of the eyelid, and make it enter quickly into the eyelid until it comes out again through the natural hairs.
Then draw the hair up above the linement: and insert it into the linement; if there is one, or two, or three, not more.
Then draw your hand with it, until the hair comes out with the linement in the eyelid with the natural hair.
If, however, the hair has been torn off and does not come out with it: draw the hair out from below with a thread that you have prepared in it until it comes out of the upper opening, and cut off the hair; then remove both of them, and shut the eye: but release it after two or three days, until the hair has grown back into place, and has grown on top of the flesh.
That if the hair is short, then either join it with a long hair from the natural hairs, and draw it out with it: or release it, until it grows longer in space, and then draw it out.
On the treatment of an injury to the upper eyelid.
Head XIII.
When it happens to the eye, this is called Leporina.
And this Al-Alxatri is either natural, or accidental.
So the accidental one is caused by the congestion of a wound, or a cut, or a caustic, and like things.
And the method of operation in it is, that you should find the congestion, and that you separate its lips, and place in it what is between them a bit of linen, and bind it, until it heals.
And it is not necessary that you should use in its treatment the things which dry and tighten: for if you do so, it will return worse than it was: but use in it the things which soften, such as foenugreek; and dunk with water, in which has been boiled althaea, flax seed: and anoint with it a little oil, and apply a poultice made with it.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you should guard against all invention, so that it does not become congested, according to the form which it had in the beginning.
And this operation which we have described is only a certain correction of Al-Alxatri, so that it does not return to the form of the place at all. On the treatment of a bump on the lower eyelid, and it is a rumpling or contraction upward to the right and left.
Chapter XXII. On the treatment of a bump on the lower eyelid, and it is a rumpling or contraction upward to the right and left.
This of Alxatri which is done below, is that which is truly called Alxatri.
And it is natural, and it is accidental.
And the accidental one is caused by a wound, or a crease, or a scar, and the like.
And the route of operation in it is, that you take an acorn, in which there is a double filament, and you hold it in the flesh, and make it penetrate from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the filament reaches the two ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh upward with a sharp instrument, and cut it with a chisel from the side.
If therefore the shape of the eyelid returns according to what is needed, it is good.
And if not, take a radium, and put it in the crease, and turn it with it the eyelid: and find two creases on the inner side of the eyelid, and their ends are from two angles of incision, until they meet and make the shape thus: and when they have come together let them form this figure, and it is a Greek letter.
Then take away that flesh according to the amount, which is the acute lower side of it, from the one that follows the eyelid.
Then gather together the separate parts: and sew them with wool.
Then treat them with what I have said, concerning soothing medicines, and liniments, until they are cured.
And if the Alxatri happens from a crease, and stitching, or caustic: then you must find a flat crease under the eyebrows, also according to what preceded it.
Then separate the two lips with a liniment, according to what we have said.
And the whole discourse on the treatment of Alxatri, when it is upward, or downward, is that it runs according to the operation, according to what is prepared from the form of Alxatri.
For it is diverse in form: and the prudent workman prepares his mind with any means that may be fit to bring the form back to the natural form, or near to it; and himself also infirm, according as may become him from the operation and instruments, in divers ways.
The adhaerentia of the eyelid with the conjuctiva, or cornea.
Chapter XV: On the attachment of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
When this consolidation happens to many persons, so that the upper eyelid is consolidated with the white of the eye, and prevents itself from its natural operations:
Then you should insert the tip of the radius under the eyelid, and lift it up; or extend it with a hook: then cut the adhesion with a very fine scalpel, which is not sharp in cutting the sclera, nor somewhat blunt: so that the infirm may not be disturbed at the operation, and remove the scalpel, and hurt the eye with its keenness: and make your incision as if you were taking away that adhesion with ease, until when the eyelid returns to its natural form, and heals the whole adhesion.
Then pour into the eye the salt water, washing it with water; or distill into it from a distilled liquid, dissolved from zinc with water.
Then separate the eyelid from the eye with linseed; and place on the eye wool immersed in alum, and after three days use the distilled liquid, and also with solids, until it is healed.
On the incision of the nail and the eminence of the flesh of tears.
Chapter XVI: On the incision of the nail and the eminence of the flesh of tears.Incisio enim unguibus non est, nisi ut superuntur ungulæ ad carnem lachrymarum; cumque superant, et tangunt carnem, ita ut lachrymae non possint effusis in os: sed si superent secum, et non tangunt carnem, lachrymae effusi possunt in os.
You see that the incision of the nail is not made, except it is so placed over the flesh of tears; and when it lies there, and touches the flesh, so that the tears cannot flow into the mouth: but if it lies with them, and does not touch the flesh, then the tears can flow into the mouth. You should know that the nail has two aspects. It is a nerve: and it is similar to the hard siffac substance, delicate.
Or it is not a nerve: and it is similar to the white frozen humidity: which when it touches iron, or is taken with a hook, comes off, and does not stick to it.
And both species do not begin until they have come from the larger tear, until they have slowly come to the point where they have covered the vision, and prevented light and eye movement.
And the mode of operation in incising it is: that he should put his sick head in your lap.
Then open his eyes, and raise his eyelids with your hand.
Then take a small hook with a little hook of little use, and extend it towards the top.
Then take a pin, and insert it in it from the horse's hair, and pierce or twist: and make the thread strong, and double its end slightly, and fix it in the middle of the nail: and penetrate it with the needle, and bind it with the thread on the nail, and extend it towards the top: and scrape it with a hair of the nail that follows the pupil, as if you were holding it with a hair until it reaches its tip.
Then incise the remnant in the root of the tear with a sharp knife, or with small tweezers: and let go of the natural tear meat, so that the tear stream does not run because of its incision.
And when the nail is extended with a hook alone: or with a thread, as we have said.
Then scrape it with a soft knife, whose shape is this.
And be careful, so that the scraper does not touch the horny tunic, and does not cause a tear, and pierce the pupil.
Then, after the incision, pour into the eye some crushed salt, or make a paste from the ash of herbs, and let it rest until another day.
Then take care of the eye with what is necessary, until it heals. If the nail is not nerived, and you cannot put your tool into it, nor cut the nail, then this kind of nail wound should be treated often with medicines, and it will heal as told in the division.
If you want to cut into it, then open the eye of the wound and take a sharp, thin, dull, mild instrument, gentle in its sharpness, like this one.
And pare the nail from top with subtility.
If you see that it itself is rarified and contracted, and presses on it with the file, then distil from your hand into the eye a fluid made from ground pepper, or red pepper, or salt that has been ground: and cover the eye until the next day.
Then repeat this operation again and again until you have completely removed it.
Unless there is a hot puss in your eye: for then let go of that, and deal with the puss until it is healed. Then repeat the operation on the nail with the file until it is healed.
Except that the flesh of the eyelid hurts very much, if it is suspended with a hook, and cut from that side: and do not make the last cut, so that the course of tears does not run.
Then distil in the tears ground pepper, or made from cayenne, until it is healed. Regarding the incision of the aluin and the flesh that has grown in the eye:
Chapter XVII
It arises when there is a red flesh in the eyes of some men, either placed above, until it covers the pupil, or approaches it, or tightens it on the eyelids, and possibly turns the eyelids outward: and it is absorbed into the pinkie.
And the operation on it is also that he should put his sick head in your lap.
Then open the eyes of it, and take all that flesh with a hook, suitable for it: and hold it with one pair of pliers, or grasp it.
Then cut the flesh first, until the whole of it is finished with the incision.
And let the eye not be damaged, so that you do not hurt yourself during the operation: and let your incision be where you incise it, or with a spoon, which we have described in the incision of the nail: or with small pliers, with which Abel is gathered, according to the form of it after this chapter.
When your incision is complete and all the flesh has been removed, then wash the eye with crushed salt: or distil into it red powder, and such like from medicinal corrosives: and put on top of the eye a woolen cloth with Albaquine, so that it is protected from the hot vapor.
That if any of the flesh remains, and a hot blood dominates you, and you fear a hot vapor: then let go of the eye, and take care of itself with what soothes it when the vapor has settled.
Then repeat the operation on the flesh, until it heals.
And do likewise with the meat that has been added which happens to the eye of this kind.
However, it is necessary that you do not apply any cure to a weak eye from natural or accidental cause, operating with fire: and do not put your hand into any of these operations, until it has been closed, for that member is tolerant of that operation.
De collectione Sebel ex oculo.
Collection of Sebum from the Eye. There are red sebum that grow on the eye, which prevent it from an operation: and weaken the eye with the passage of time.
Therefore it is necessary that you first consider, if the eye in which Sebum is, is strong, and there is no kind of disease in it, except for Sebum: then collect Sebum from it.
And let him put his head in your lap.
Then hang those sebum with a single hook, or two according to your prudence: and let the hook be thin, according to this form, or may be there be two hooks on one body, according to this form.
Then gather those fine forcipices and those fine new veins with subtlety, and wipe the blood away hour by hour until those new veins have been removed from the eye, and have healed over; and do not leave the eye with the spatulilla tips.
And let your operation be in the middle of the day, and be strong in your operation, that you do not fall except on those veins.
And when you have emptied it, then pour into the eye siefe viride or red: that its own sharpness may corrode what remains of the scar.
If you are not able to gather all of that in that hour, then patch the eye with something that soothes the pain of the eye: and dismiss it for a few days, until the pain of it is gone: and protect it from the heat of the sun: and then repeat on top of it the same way, until it has healed over.
This is the form of the forifice.
De reductione Arissati ad nasum.
Chapter XIX.
The doctors say that the Arissati Fistula, which is in the nose, should be reduced with a caustic or an acute medicine, according to what went before in his narration.
And if it does not heal, then there is no skill in it: unless you find out about the discharge at the birth of it, and drain out all the moisture that is in it, and the pus, until the hole is revealed.
When, therefore, the hole has been revealed, and there is corruption or blackness in it, then scrape out that with an instrument, whose form is this:
And it is called the asper of the head.
Let it be made of iron and let the head be round like an asper, so that it is dotted with the file's dots, or with the dots of a fine awl: and place the asper on the site of the corruption of the bone. Then roll the asper between your fingers and press your hand down upon it, until you know that that corruption is now shaved: and do it sometimes.
Then roll the asper between your fingers and press your hand down upon it, until you know that that corruption is now shaved: and do it sometimes. Then restore the place with dry poultices of strychnum.
But if the place has healed over and a bone has formed within it and the wound has closed and does not break open again or suppurate or become infected: then you should know that he is already well.
And if not, then there is no hope, unless you reduce the fistula to the nasum, according to this form.
And it is, so that you can grasp the second bone with a pin, or with sharp medicine: and when you have discovered the bone, then seize the terium according to this form, let the end be sharp, three-sided: and let its wood be an elongated pyramid up to the end, as you see.
Then place it on the bone itself: and let it be near the lacrimal: and stretch your hand a little from the eye.
Then rotate your hand with the pin, until it enters the bone, and feels pain: by this you will know that there is a feeling of heat when he holds his hand over his nose.
So then restore the place with drying poultices of strychnum, as I have taught you.
But when the bone has formed and the place has hardened: then the substance which flowed outward returns to the nose: so it is lighter on the sick one.
De reductione eminentiae oculi, sicut docui te. Head XX.
When the eye emits its whole essence, and no injury happens to the vision or decrease: then you should let go of the sick one: then bleed him: then put vaporous poultices on his cheek without scraping, but with suction.
Then place over the eye a liniment made of acacia, and aloe, and myrrh, and saccolla.
Then tie the eye down above a plaster with many powders.
And the method of the powders is: that you take soft cloths, many, and double all the cloths together on four: make them many: then place them one over the other, according to the quantity which the eye requires: then tie them strongly together with a hard cloth, with a strong knot.
And again, flowing with suctions without scarification.
Then remove the flowing ones, and release the tight one day and night.
But if the ligament again softens, then it should be tightened a lot: then remove the ligament after a day and night, as we have said.
But if you see that the eye has already healed with the new skin, it is good: and if not, then again apply the paste, and the dust, and the tighten, and the flowing ones, until it heals.
Regarding the incision of the skin.
Chapter 21.
When a rupture has occurred on the skin of the eye, then let it be cut and go outside the eyelids as a grain of sand does, and join it to the shape of a man because of this, and let it be pushed into the root of the eye from the lower side to the upper part.
Then insert another one where there is a double filament on the side of the lacrimal, and let it penetrate: then release the first one according to its position.
Then cut the place where the double filament is, and bind a part of the eye to the root with a thread: and tighten it a lot.
Then remove it now, and put on the eye wool soaked in the white of an egg: and release it, until the filament with the eye drops.
Then take care of the eye with it, that it may comfort itself, until the sore heals.
And when the eye is tightened with a circle of cloth from all sides, until it adds a great prominence to the eye.
Then it is pierced with a thin awl that reaches to the depth of the eye, and wetty white of the eye runs down, and the eye drops down, and enters immediately: then tighten it, until it heals.
Regarding the treatment of Almohad.
Chapter 22.
This disease called Almohad, is not except for being a lump that is gathered in the eye, similar to water dropping down, and it itself is not.
And the method of operation with it is, that you make the sick person sit on a prepared or straight seat.
Then take his head in your hands from both sides, and move it until you see that he is coming to a state of health before your eyes.
Then tighten it, and do not let it fall down, and release the light: and let the sick person see things as he used to see them: and if it does not go down, know that it is water.
If the descent is not prepared for the sick person with him as I said, then make him sit between your hands. Then take a thin spatula, and find with it on the top of the horny flesh a little bit near the junction with the coral skin at the crown, until the disease comes out.
When it has come out, then distil into the eye hot water in which you have mixed honey: or water in which you have already boiled hayseed and honey: and then treat with the remaining cure, until it is healed.
Regarding the care of the water that comes down into the eye, or a waterfall.
Head 23.
We have already spoken about the kinds of water, and that which is suitable for cutting out with a 선언 and explaining it: then take the same one again according to health.
Then it is necessary that you make the sick person sit between your hands square-wise, opposite to the light, near the sun: and tie his healthy eye, and tighten it well: then with your right hand close the eyelids of his eyes, since the eye in which the water is is the left one: or with your left hand, if the eye is the right one.
Then take with your right hand an alum, if the eye is the left one: or with your left hand, if the eye is the right one.
Then place the end of the alum near the crown by the thickness of the radius in the same white of the eye apparent tear: then push the alum with force: and you will feel, that the alum has already come to the state of dripping: and you will see, that it is coming out into the bag of the eye.
It is necessary that there be a measurement of the route of the Almagbad to the depth, a measurement of space which is from the pupil until the end of the blackness; and this is the crown of the eye.
You will see it in itself in the pupil of the vision of the eye, because of the clarity of the membrane of the cornea.
Then put the Almagbad until the place where is the water.
Then press it itself with a firm push after another one.
If then has descended the water immediately, then at once it sees that which is open its vision immediately, and the Almagbad in his eye.
Then rest a little.
If then has descended the water, then put it second, except that it exits the Almagbad.
When then is formed, and does not rise: then remove the Almagbad with ease: and you bring back your hand little by little. Then dissolve in the water some of the salt clear of the jewel: and wash with it the eye inside.
Then put outside all the eye stub, or wool infused oil and wax: and bind with it the eye healthy.
But we and those who are our time, put on him the powder ground with wax:
That if it does not obey you the Almagbad in the entrance to the eye because of its hardness, since it is of a man, whose eye is very hard: then it is necessary that you take the powder called Alberid, which this is its form.
Open then with it the union little only, and not at once your hand in the hole: and is there is not but that you do make the eye open to the place of the Almagbad fine.
Then introduce the Almagbad, according to what we have said.
And at the complement of your work, is prepared sick bed to be done, in which sleeps on his back in a dark house: and is forbidden all movements, and a cough: and put food for him that which nourishes nature: and does not move its head to the right, nor left at all.
And let the second ligament be placed according to its position until the third day. Then unfasten that in that dark house, and test his vision: and make him look at things.
Then reduce the ligament until the seventh day.
And it should not be necessary for him to make that journey during the period of recovery or immediately after the incision: but rather, he should keep away from it, because the blood quickly rises through the rapid moving eye.
But if it happens that there is a swelling of heat: then it is necessary that you unfasten the eye before the seventh day: and correct it with him when he sits down, so that the swelling subside, until it has subsided: then restore his vision, and place over his eyes what keeps his vision open for a few days, while he remains in that dark house.
Then let him leave the house little by little, and let him turn around in his bedroom.
And you should know that the pupil is not exempt from vision when it comes to the student: then he should dare to look at the operation.
And indeed it has come to our ears from some of those who are from Al-Ahl-Ya-Shuhri that a man was pierced with an arrow in Al-Aylah, so that the blood comes out.
But verily I have not seen anyone in your land who has done that: nor is it written in any of the old books: and it is possible that it is new.
And these are the forms of the eyes from the magic, so that they stand on top of those who do not know them.
Let them be made from pure brass: and let their ends be with this same subtle triangle shape, and the acute end.
The forms of magic.
About the care of the birthmark that is born in the nose.
Chapter 24.
When and because different types of flesh grow in the nose, some of which is similar to the flesh of the scorpion of many feet: and from that same is the flesh of cancer, lead-colored, black: and from that same is the flesh of the sloth, not lead-colored.
In ea ergo quae ex istis carnibus est lenis, non fraudulenta, neque cancerosa, oportet ut facias sedere infirmum inter manus tuas oppositum soli, et aperi nares eius, et proiice uncinum in illas carnes: deinde trahe eas ad exteriora, et incide quod comprehendisti ex eis cum spatumili subtili acuto a parte una, donec scias quod caro tota iam ablata est.
If any of it remains after having cut it away with a sharp and fine instrument, then you should cut it away with another sharp and fine instrument until there is none left.
If blood is dominant over you, or if there is a fever: then oppose it as necessary: or if it is from malignant pustules, then approach it with cauterization, until the blood stops flowing, and all the flesh is gone.
Then, after incising with vinegar, or water, or wine,
if it opens and moisture proceeds from it all the way to the palate, then you should know that he is already well.
But if the moisture does not penetrate, as necessary, then you should know that there is flesh born within the upper bones of the nose, to which the incision instrument does not reach.
Then you should put a thread of linen with some thickness, and make many knots in it, and place a quantity of the finger between each knot, or less: and the sick person should let one end of the thread hang down into the nose with a hairpin, or with whatever is possible for him to do after he has done it himself similarly: and he should pull his odor at the same time until it reaches the palate, and he should get rid of it into his throat.
And this is often done by boys in school: and it is an easy task for him who wants to do it.
Then you should place the two ends of the thread, one end that has come out on top of the nose, and the other that remains inside the nose.
Then, as for the surgical treatment of hernia, with the help of a thread tied around the navel, cut through it, and remove the hernia. Then do this until you know that the flesh has already become attached to the thread.
Then pull out the thread: and put into the nostril after the stopping of blood that you drank in the Egyptian ointment: do this for three days, or more, until the ointment has completely eaten away all that remains of the flesh.
Then put in the end of the matter in the nostril with a lead cane, for several days, until it is healed.
If, however, the cure does not proceed as should, then use that one.
For the purifying of the head, when it is distilled with oil, and other medicines in the nostril, make it of silver or brass: which should be like a little lamp, opened as it were a shell-fish: and its opening also.
And if you wish to make a cane closed, like a cane.
And the shell of the instrument for purifying the head should be full, closed: which has a handle at the end, so that you can hold it in your hand, when you heat it with oil, or what you wish to apply and fluid things.
And this is the shape of the instrument. ## Of the cure for a nosebleed.
Head XXVII.
The ulula often begins to form in the nostril, and it grows bigger, and increases with the days, until it is as large as a fawn's head.
And for this, at the beginning of its appearance, you should cut off all that part.
Then put on top of the place, or a cautery, or medicine that burns where it is.
If, then, the incision is delayed until it has grown bigger, then consider it, if it is of stone, hard, and black in colour, few in sense: then do not touch it with iron: for it is a cancerous wound.
For the vision often sees, which has incised the flesh, and great evil happened to him who had it: as much injury as there was on his own flesh.
And if the apothema is gentle in touch, not bloody in color, and you see that an incision may be made on all of it, then wash the sick person well, and make the incision without fear or dread: and care for the place along with it as it dries up and tightens, until it heals.
On the suture of the nose, and lips, and ears.
Chapter 26: On the head.
You should know That when a break in continuity occurs in one of the cartilage bones, the operation is not very successful, unless in certain people.
Therefore, when it happens to someone that there is a wound with its blood: then add the pain of the wound along with the suture: and care for the person, until he heals.
And if the break in continuity of the lips has already separated them, and one side is made whole: then it should be cut out all of its skin from the outside, until it bleeds.
Then add the two lips with a suture, and tie them tightly, and sprinkle on it dragon's blood and crushed olive oil: and put over the powders a piece of plaster made from lead, or some other hardened plaster: and let the person be tied up for two days, or three.
Then loosen him, and change his medicine: and let him go, until they fall off by themselves. Then care for the person with ointment, until he heals.
The method of the suture is that you add the solution of continuity, or with a thread, as we told you about the suture of the eye: or you add the solution with a thread, as I told you.
On the extraction of nodules from the lips.
Chapter 27: On the head. Many people have hard nodules in their lips, similar to small grains of grass: and some of them are small, and some are large.
Therefore you should open the lips, and find out on all of the nodule, and hang it by a thread, and cut it off from all sides.
Then fill in the space between the incision and the third day, until the blood has stopped flowing.
Then soak it with vinegar, and treat the spot with it where there is a stenosis, until the wounds heal.
The incisions in the flesh that have been made on the gums.
Head XXVIII. A lot of times a tooth arises above the gum which the ancients called abuluss.
Therefore you should hang it by a hook: or hold it with tongs, and cut it at the root, and let the sap flow freely, or the blood.
Then place on the space between the incision and the third day, or other dry powders, to dry up the spot.
If that tooth returns after treatment, as it often does, then cut it again, and cauterize it: for it does not return after cauterization.
Of the grinding of teeth with iron.
Head XXIX.
When they aggregate on the surfaces of teeth from within and from without, and between the gums there are rough spots, and sometimes they wear away, and turn yellow, until the corruption spreads to the gum, and the teeth become rotten because of it.
Therefore you should make the sick person sit between your hands, and rest his head in your lap, and grind the meat and tooth, where you can see the nerves, and such like sand: until there is nothing left of it, and likewise do with the blackness, and yellowing, and sourness, and other things until they are cleansed.
If then that which is in them from the beginning of grinding is taken away, it is good: but if not, then grind them again on a different day, and a second time, and a third time, until you have finished the care in them that you intend.
And know that the teeth respond to different shapes of grinding, and many forms: moreover, that the grinding tool with which the teeth are ground from below is different from the one used to grind between the teeth, according to the shapes.
And these forms of razors are prepared for you, which you see.
§ On the extraction of pain from teeth.
Chaps 30 - On the Extraction of Pain from Teeth
It is necessary for you to heal the tooth from its pain with all effort, and be careful in eradicating it.
It is not that the tooth can be made whole when it is eradicated: for the substance is subtle; until such time as there is no excuse for the eradication of it, then it should be considered to be eradicating it when it is weak, so that it may grow firm, and be certified by you, the pain-suffering tooth.
Many times the pain deceives the weak one, and he thinks that it is in the tooth and eradicates it: then the pain does not retreat until the weak tooth is eradicated.
We have already seen this from the operation of bloodletting.
When therefore the pain-suffering tooth is certified by you, then it should be made a sacrifice on the edge of the tooth with the tweezers, in which there is some virtue, until it has healed the gum from all parts: then it should be moved by your fingers or with subtle forceps little by little, until it has been shaken.
Then the places then should be made sore in it with good position, and the head of the wound between your knees: which you held firmly, so that it did not move: then draw the tooth along its length, so as not to break it.
If then it does not come out, then take some of their instruments and insert it underneath it from all parts with ease, and try to move it, as you did at first.
If then the tooth is pierced or corroded: then it should be filled with cloth: and you should squeeze it with a slight turn of the forceps, so that it does not break at the time of your constriction on top of it with the tweezers.
And it should be, that you should make a sacrifice with scarification around the gum from all parts much.
And keep thy strength, lest thou break thyself, and some part of it remain, and return upon the sick from that malice which is greater pain to him first.
And beware, do not do what the phlebotomists do in their haste, and the boldness of their hands in eradicating it, except that they administer what we have related.
For often they bring great sickness upon men, which is more difficult to break than to break, and all the roots of it remain, or some part of it: or as they take it out with certain bones of the jaw: as we have been often testified. Then he is to be covered after its eradication with wine, or with vinegar and salt. That if a flow of blood should come from places (for often it comes): then you shall wipe some of the blood away, and fill with it the place: and if not, cauterize it with fire if it does not give you blood.
Form the pincers should be fine and sharp, so that they move easily in the first place, having long ends, short handles, large and thick, lest when pressed against a tooth they double themselves: they are like the broad handles of an ax, until when you press them together they do not bite one another, nor double themselves: the short ends, and let them be made of iron bar or cast iron bar, straight-ended, and in their ends should be teeth, some of which should enter others, and should clench by constriction, firm.
And when they are made into ends like the form of an ear called a cicada, and are strong constriction.
Of the Eradication of Teeth, and Extraction of Bones of the Mandible of Fractures.
Chapter 31.
When, after the eradication of a tooth that is broken, some remains, then you should put it on the cot with butter for one or two days, until it softens: then enter into it with an awl, or a pin, whose ends are made like the ear called a cicada.
Forma autem haec est forcipum.
The shape of these is like a pair of tongs. Either made like a grater: or like an iron file.
If then he does not obey you at the exit with these tongs, then it is necessary, that you keep on the root, and remove all the flesh, and introduce an instrument which is called a little hook, whose shape is this.
Let the length of the handles be shortish, longer a bit: and let it not be dipped, lest it should break.
If then the root is removed by this, it is good: and if not, it is necessary to assist with these other instruments, the shapes of which are these.
The shape of the first triangular extremity, in which there is some bulkiness.
The shape of the triangular extremity is slim.
Also assist with this instrument having two branches, whose shape is this. And with other instruments and tools which have preceded in the text regarding the preparation of teeth.
Also sit the handle with this instrument which resembles a large hook, of the shape of the triangular extremity which is bent, in which there is some bulkiness, so that it should not break; and let it not be dipped, lest it should break.
And know that there are many instruments for teeth: and likewise the other instruments do not count; and the skilled artisan, subtile in his art, discovers the instrument himself according to the operation and diseases themselves.
Since from the diseases there are many which the ancient instruments did not name, because of the diversity of their species.
If then the jaw breaks from the tooth, or from any other bone of the mouth, or is rotten: then examine carefully on top of it in its own place with that which suits it out from instruments and tongs which I have spoken of in extracting the root, and assist with these movements, whose shape is this.
Let there be some bulkiness in it little by little, so that it is held fast, or touched with it the jaw, and does not move and rub, until the jaw is removed: and restore the place with suitable remedies for it.
If however there is pus within the bone, then then cut off that bone from the pus and cure it until it is well.
Of the locking of the prominent teeth on others.
Chapter 32: Of the lock between the teeth.
When prominent teeth do not move in their normal course, they become rotten through the shape of the jaw: and especially when this happens to women and girls, that is, young persons.
For if the tooth has come after another tooth and does not fit into its place, or if it is possible to lock it or trim it: then remove it; and if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, whose shape is as follows.
It is like a small chisel, and is made of iron, having a sharp end.
And your cut should be deep, and because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that it does not disturb another tooth.
If however he is exposed and his trim is sharp: then trim him with a chisel made of iron, whose shape is as follows.
It should all be made of iron, and the end of the chisel should be small and sharp, like a point on an ace: with which the tooth is trimmed little by little over several days with ease, so that it does not disturb other teeth and falls out: then soften the tooth, and then cut off the tip with some rasps.
If it is a tooth that breaks off a piece and hurts the tongue: then you should also trim that piece until its sharpness is gone, and make it even: and then smooth it over, and do not hurt the tongue or spoil the speech.
On the retention of teeth when they have golden fillings.
Chapter 33: Of the retention of teeth when they have gold fillings.
When the anterior teeth are injured and disturbed by a blow, or fall: and cannot be held fast on it so as not to drop out: and they have treated them with stringency, and the treatment does not help: then there is ingenium in them, that they may be held fast by gold wire: because silver changes color, and腐ers after a few days; but gold never changes.
And let there be a thread of moderate thickness between the teeth according to the quantity it takes up.
And the form of the retention is that you take a thread and insert it between two healthy teeth: then tie it with both ends of the thread between the teeth, or one, or more, until you reach the end with the thread up to the healthy tooth on the other side.
Then you will return to the texture until you have reached the part from which you started: and tightly grasp your hand with care and wisdom, so that it does not move at all: and the tension of your grasp where you tighten the thread should be near the roots of the teeth, so that it does not wiggle.
Then cut off the excess ends of the thread with scissors: and join them together, and bend them into a loop: and hide them between a healthy tooth and a tooth that has come loose, so that they do not hurt your tongue: then let go of the tension so that it remains tight.
If it should loosen or break, then tighten them with another thread and keep them fixed for a long time in this way.
And this is the form of teeth, and the shape of two healthy teeth and two teeth that have come loose, as you see it.
And when one tooth has fallen out and comes to rest in its place, leaving two teeth behind, it should remain as we have described, and does not do this unless the craftsman is careful, skilled, and experienced.
And when one of the bones of the jaw is broken, it takes on the shape of a tooth and is set in place, surrounded by bone as described above, and remains fixed there, joined to the other teeth with a thread that we have described: it endures and is held fast for a long time.
Regarding the cutting of the tongue ligament under the tongue, which prevents speech.
Chapter 34.
If there is anything of hard and stiff material and consolidation of the wound: then throw into it a hook, and cut through it across its width, until you strike the ligament, and thus release the nodulation.
But if there is a flow of blood, then put on the spot a damp cloth. But if you are hurt by the blood, then cauterize the place with a piece of burning coals that is suitable for it: then care for yourself with the rest of the cure, until it heals over. On the extraction of the wound under the tongue.
Chapter LXXV.
And when under the tongue there occurs an aposteme that absorbs a small wound, preventing the natural movement of the tongue: and perhaps it is increased so much, until the jaw is filled up.
But if you see that it is a dark-colored pustule, or black, and hard, to which the sick person does not have a sense of touch: then do not touch it, for it is cancer.
And if it declines towards whiteness, where there is moisture: then throw into it a hook, and cut it with a fine chisel, and free it from all parts.
If you are hurt by blood during your operation, then put on the spot a damp cloth, until the blood is separated: and then go back to your operation, until you have taken out all of it with its appendages.
Then rub with vinegar and salt; and care for the rest with due care until it is healed.
§ On the treatment of pusses in two almonds.
Head XXXVI.
And then either you pierce the body: or it ruptures by itself.
But if it is white in color, round, and its root is thin: then the body should be struck.
And the operation in it is, that you consider before your operation, whether the puss of his body is hot and quiet complete, or is about to diminish somewhat: then do so make him sit before the sun, and place his head in your lap: and open his mouth, and let touch his tongue lower with the instrument, which has this form. Let it be of silver, or of brass, that it is thin like a knife.
But when you press it with the instrument and show me the puss, and a sneeze comes out of it: then take a hook, and fasten it in an almond, and pull it out to the outside as much as you can, except that you drag with it some of the tunics.
Then cut it with the instrument, which has this form following.
It is joined to the forks: however, its ends are curved, so that the opening of each of them is in a sharp angle of the other: wherefore take care that it be not of iron, or pewter dipped.
But if this instrument is not present, then incision should be made with a chisel, whose shape this is.
Sit acuto ad unam partem, non acuto ad alteram partem.
And when you have made an incision on one side, make an incision on the other side following the same shape of the incision.
Then after the incision, the patient should gargle with cold water or with vinegar and water.
But if he has a flow of blood, gargle with water in which you have boiled the bark of the oak: or leaves of myrtle, and similar things from astringents, until the flow of blood stops: then take care of the wound, until it heals.
And when the apothecaries arise in the throat from one side, besides the two amigdalas.
Then make an incision on them as I have said for the incision of the two amigdalas.
And I have already healed a woman of an apothecary that had grown up between her throat, which she choked on, little sense, so much that it was almost closed her throat: and the woman breathed through my throat, and she had already stopped eating, drinking water, and was close to death, if she had remained one day, or two days.
And the apothecary had risen only so much that it had removed two branches, until they came out of two openings in the nose.
Then I hastened and fixed one of my hooks on one of them.
Then I pulled it out, and a large piece came out with it.
Then cut off where it was caught in the opening of the nose.
Then I made the same thing that came out of the other opening of the nose.
Then I opened her mouth and pressed her tongue: and then I fixed the hook on the apothecary: and then I cut off a part of it, and there was little blood flowing from it: so that the woman's throat was completely healed, and she immediately started drinking water, and then she began to eat.
Therefore I did not cease to strike it after a long time: and the scar which I struck followed his place until it was prolonged too much with that.
I therefore made an incision through it, and cauterized it between the gums.
Therefore it stood from the addition: then I walked away from her side, and did not know what God did with her after me.
On the Incision of Scabs.
Head LXXVII.
When a catarrh has descended to the scabs, and is incised and long, then it is called the perpendicular; and if it is in the lower part thick, round, then it is called a wart.
When you cure it with that which we have said in the division, and the cure does not succeed: and you see that the scar has become cool from it, and is thin: then you should strike it.
And that which is gathered together from it is round, and has no length, and is bloody or fawn-colored or black, and has no sense: then you should strike its incision.
For fear is in it over the weak one.
Therefore you should, when you see her like the white one and like its length, cause the sick person to sit before the sun; and press her tongue with an instrument whose predecessor we have described: then fix a hook in the wart, and pull it down: and strike it with one or two instruments which I said in incising the two cheeks.
And you should not strike it out of it, unless that is added to the natural end without addition.
For if you strike it out more, you hurt the voice and speech.
Then after the incision use what we have described in the incision of the two cheeks: and tend to it, until it is healed.
But if the sick one shudders from the incision: then you should use a device in cauterizing it without fear and worry.
And the way of cauterization is not with her, except with sharp water; and it is, that you put the head of the nurse in your bosom.
Then press her tongue with the instrument which we have said.
Then take from the water which I told you in the chapter of cauterizing, and bind it with a damp cloth not extinguished, and put it on her mouth thick or thin, and fill it with this instrument, which is its form.
Sit the extreme of her where the medicine is placed congealed, like congealed ear-drum.
And place the instrument with the medicine on the wound itself: and the sick man sit lying on his side, so that heal may flow from her mouth from within the medicine, so that it does not go down in his throat anything, and may hurt him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine.
And you from the first put on her on the wound half of the quantity of the medicine every hour, until you see it has become gray, and is soothed by the tingling of the medicine.
And if you want to take a pill and roll it up on the edge of the ear, and pour the pill with the medicine, and insert the ear-drum with the pill into the tube from above, until it adheres to the wound. Make this many times, until you get the result that you want of cauterization.
Then let go of her: for she will dry up and fall away after three days, or four.
Which if you want to drink the medicine again, repeat it: and after cauterization wash off in the circumferency new with the oil, and clean up with it what is in the circumferency of her from the medicine: and let it sit with cold water.
And treat outside with brooms, and inside with gargles, until it is healed.
This therefore kind of cure is more healing than incisions, and longer lasting from fear.
And when it is cured by suffumigation, which is finer than cauterization and incision: for it is cured by the following way.
Sumac, and calamentum, and hyssop, and origanum, and rutam, and sseah, and chamomillam, and abrotanum, and similia eis ex herbis: and aggrega ea omnia, or quaedam eorum in olla, et submergantur cum aceto, et bulliant: et olla sit lutata cum luto decenter: et sit in medio ollae foramen, super quod componatur instrumentum concauum secundum hunc modum.
Make it of silver or of brass; and the end that hath the grain enter into the hole of the wound, until the steam ascendeth to the ear-hole, until it be much darkened.
Then put it on many times, until it hath grown cold.
And let not this cure be begun at the first coming of apoplexy.
For this cure shall not be made, except in the cooling of his fever; and it is not fit to make it save when his heat hath abated a little.
But if you have not this instrument with you, then take a cannulum, and fit the end thereof to the wound, so that it burn not his mouth; for the cortex of the tree doth not allow the steam to burn his mouth; and this is of good cure when there is health.
As concerning the extraction of spines, and of bones from the throat.
Chapter LIII. On the removal of spines and of bones from the throat.
Many times an item hath been stuck in his throat, or a spine of fish, or some other thing.
It is needful that thou shouldest draw forth that which hath entered into his throat, being apparent above the point whereto it descendeth; after thou hast pressed his tongue with an instrument against the light, and shown unto thee what is therein.
And if that which hath entered hath not appeared before thee, and is hidden in his throat; thou shalt make the sick man fast from food, ere he digesteth in his belly.
Per chance doth that which hath entered pass forth by way of the bowels.
Or the sick man shall swallow a piece of string, or a leaf of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread; or he shall take a sponge of the sea dried up and soft; and bind it about with a thread, then let him swallow it.
And so when he came to the place where the spine is, or the bone, and it was extracted, then he left. But if you do not use the instrument with it as we have said: then use this form of the instrument.
Let it be larger than the radius a little, and at its end let there be a curve that he can easily insert into his throat: and let him hold his head raised up.
And he should be careful with his epiglottis so that it does not hurt him and it is forced with it the bone, or he inserts himself with the doctor's hand.
But if the sick person inserts it, that is better: because of his knowledge of the place of the thing: and he should push it downward, or he should hold up his hand with the instrument upward, all of this according to the quantity that has been prepared for him until it comes out.
On the extraction of blood from the wound.
Chapter XXXIX.
When the leech is treated with it that I have said in the division of curing with medicines, and does not give, then consider in his throat before the sun, or by the sun after you have pressed his tongue with the instrument that I told you.
But if your yawn falls on the leech, then extract it with a small hook, or with subtle gestures.
That if it is not possible with them: then take a narrow tube and insert it into the wound up to the wound: and then insert into the tube an iron that has been heated with fire.
Do this many times: and let the sick person refrain from all water for a day.
Then let him take a full drink of cold water, and open his mouth to it: and let him move his mouth with it, and let him not swallow anything from it: and let him move the water for one hour after another with his hand.
For the leech immediately falls when he feels the water.
But if he does not come out with me as I have described, then suffumigate the sick with fumigators, or with an asa as a instrument that I have described for suffumigation.
Do this many times, because it will fall off itself.
And the method of operation in suffumigation is that you take a bowl, in which are placed the branches of the plant with fire: and all be covered with a cover, in whose middle there is a hole: and place the end of the instrument in that hole.
Then throw the suffumigation, and let the sick person put his mouth on the end of the cannula, and close his mouth, so that it does not come out of the suffumigation until you know that the suffumigation has reached the blood-vessel.
For because the leech immediately falls away.
Now if it does not fall, then repeat the suffumigation many times.
And let the sick person bear hunger, and eat broths, and other things, and do not drink water. So it is necessary that he should go out with this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument from which the leech is taken out of the throat when it falls on top of the uvula.
It is similar to pincers, as you see: except that there is a small opening which enters into the throat.
And its end is similar to a little bird called a "cicosa", in which there is a roughness of a file: and when it grasps anything, it does not let go at all.
Regarding the opening of the esophagus, and its sectioning, and care in general.
Chapter 40.
There are many species of leeches, and many kinds, according to which their remembrance comes: that is one, and one in this book: and they differ in the perforation of them, and in the sectioning thereof out of two kinds.
Of which one is a species of leech on itself, and because it grasps from moist things.
The second mode is because of places, in which it occurs from the body.
For the injury that occurs in the head is different from the injury that occurs in the anus; and the injury that occurs in a meaty place is different from the injury that occurs at the joints; and each of them has its own judgment according to the operation.
And from the injuries there are those that do not need to be pierced, unless they have matured blood in them, and their completion; and from them are those that need to be pierced when they are raw and do not mature according to their completion.
As the injuries that are close to the joints.
For when the injury occurs close to a joint and is prolonged, until the decay of what is around it maybe the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corroded: therefore this is the cause of the closer contraction of that member.
Or it is an injury in a main limb; for if you delay the piercing of it until it has matured, it will harm him or damage it through that main limb.
Or it is close to a limb, pierce it then when it is immature: and do not need to pierce an injury that is raw and incomplete, unless it is close to a limb so that it does not decay deeply, and extends towards the inside of the anus, and becomes a fistula, or remains at the end of it so that it does not heal. It is necessary that you know the time of piercing an injury, which has matured according to its completion; and it is at the time of the removal of pain, the receding of fever, and the decrease of redness, and pulse, and acuteness of head: and the other signs. And it is necessary that you make the same piercing in a lower place of the injury, and more prominent; and let the piercing be longitudinally along the body, if the injuries are in the parts of the hand and foot, and in the places of the joints, and of the chordae, and nerves, and arteries, and up to the last in all equal places, in which there is no reflection.
In illis autem quae reflectuntur, uade cum perforatione secundum illud membrum.
When, however, there is a hemorrhage in the flesh: then it is better that you shall omit the piercing of it, until its digestion is confirmed, as we have said before, according to the supplement.
For if you pierce it before that, the course of the virus will be prolonged from it, and there will be much corruption and filthiness, and perhaps its lips will harden, and its depth.
And certain hematomas are pierced according to the width of the body in necessity: or according to that whereof the member needs.
And it is necessary that you administer a small piercing in hematomas and a large piercing in hematomas, or sections of different sizes according to the size of the hematoma.
And there are hematomas from which the skin must be closed together: and it happens when it has already been done like a cloth, and has reached its limit, which is already dead: such as that happened to many, as if it were torn, and buboes.
And there are those that cut by three angles.
And of these is one in which it incises like a figure of a fern.
Such as an hematoma of the groin.
And of these are those in which a round cut is administered, and a lunar one, and similar ones from sections.
In fact, where there is no head, such as are the superficial hematomas, it is necessary that you pierce it with a superficial piercing, or just a flat one.
And it is necessary that, when the hematoma is large and has already collected a lot of blood, you pierce it so that it does not come out with all the pus at once: but extract a part from it.
Then cover the hematoma until another day.
Then extract something more of the pus again.
Perform this frequently according to a gradient, until it comes out: especially if the person is weak of vitality, or a woman pregnant, or a young boy, or an old man decrepitous: for the animal spirit resolves from the animal with the exit of the blood: and perhaps the sick one dies, and you do not perceive it.
Therefore let this chapter be a great warning.
And after you have made the incision, where you make these incisions, it is necessary that you clean the wound: and consider.
But if there is a small wound incision, or it is a flat section, then you should administer liniment from linen, or with an old cloth.
And if there is a large wound incision, and there are many fissures of the incision, then you should at that time insert liniment into all the fissures, until they have been made smooth.
And if you have cut off a part of the skin in the wound, or if you have wrapped it around: then you should fill it with an old cloth, or as when the flesh is dry, or is covered with hair: and firmly tie it up until the third day.
Then you should throw it away, and take care of that with it what needs to be done with ointment, until it has healed.
But if blood flows during your operation, then you should administer cold water and vinegar, after it has been soaked up into it by a cloth: and place it on the site of the flow many times.
But if the flow of blood persists, then you should administer a regimen, and a cure, and the powders that are mentioned in many places in this book of ours, and from a mixture.
But if it is in the cold season, and the wound is in a place of many nerves: then you should pour in powders with wine, and hot oil: and place them on the sites.
And if it is in the summer, and the places are fleshy: then you should place powders that have been soaked in water, and oil, or with wine and oil, and all of this cold.
Until the third day, as we have said, then you should remove the wound, and clean it up, and administer to it what is beneficial for its healing, until it has healed.
This is therefore what is necessary from the understanding of the cure of wounds in general.
According to the half of the distinction, I have already said about all the aphorisms, which is a way to cure his capitulum singulariter.
§ On the sections that occur on the skin of the scalp.
Head 31.
The small sections that occur on the skin of the scalp are of two species: they are noduli, which are surrounded by tunica, which are sacs: almost like the hen's feathers.
And there are many kinds of them.
Of these there are some that are thin; and of these there are those that contain a moisture similar to the lime; and of these there are those that contain a moisture similar to the froth and the pulvis; and there are similar ones, and among them are those that are hard stones.
And in all the sections, and in their extraction there is no danger, provided you do not make opposition to the arteries when you are extracting them.
And the operation on these sections is such that you experience it with an instrument, the shape of which comes after this, which is called Intronium, until you know what it contains.
For if that which contains moisture, then dry the section according to the length of the superficial section: according to this form.
And begin with the section from line B to line G. And when you drain off the moisture, then remove the skin that contains this moisture, and do not leave anything of it inside.
For many times if there remains anything of it. Then immerse the wound in egyptian ointment if it is present, and if not, in water and salt: and fill it with the ointment, and leave it until another day.
For this will eat up whatever remains of the skin. Then repeat the application of the egyptian ointment to the wound a second and third time, and if you find it bearable, until you are confident that there is nothing left of the skin, then the care of the wound with the ointment, until it is healed.
If the apostema contains a nodule that is large and swollen: then dry it out according to this form, cutting it in the shape of a cross: and throw away the hooks between the clefts of the cut, and scrub it well from all parts: and try your skill in removing the tunica which contains it.
But if it makes you opposite to the artery, then do what I will tell you after.
And do likewise in the apostema, if it is hard, from the cut, and cure in the same way, as we have said. And the cut on a hard apostema is easier: for there is little blood and moisture.
And sometimes there are some of these apostemas which are in the head of certain men, where there is no moisture at all.
Or put a hole in them always from their lower part, that the course of blood may run to the lower side.
Then take care of them with that which is appropriate for them from cure.
On the section of Struggles in the neck.
Chapter LII.
These apostemas often happen in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin: and sometimes they happen in the whole body.
And over those which happen from them in the neck, there is one kind, and many: and they spring from a common root: and every Struggle comes from its own tunica, as we have said.
And the kinds of these Struggles are many.
For some of them are hard, and some contain moisture: but all of them are malicious, and do not submit to cure.
In that which you therefore see from them a good disposition in the touch, whose color is clear to the near skin, and which moves in all parts, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck or to the soft part or to the artery, nor is deep: it should be that you separate it from the superficial section from the upper part to the lower part of the body from line, b. To the line, g. And scrape it off completely from all parts: and extend two skin lips with a hook, or with many hooks if you wish, as we have said in the scalp, and take it out gradually.
And is on guard that it does not hurt the new, or the nerve.
And let the knife be not acute, that it may not give you pain with the cut, or trouble you who are ill, and you fall into it, for it is not necessary.
But if you cut the new, or the artery, or prevents you from the operation, then put in a wooden peg broken, or some powder that stops the blood, and tighten the peg, and let it go, until the sharpness of the scar is gone, and the peg softens: or he begins to decay.
For the blood is stopped by the poultice. So bring it back to your work, until you are finished.
Then care for yourself.
If you cut a strophulus all around: then you should gather the lips of two wounds together: and clean them immediately, as soon as you see that there is no余分な余分
If you see that there is excess because of the size of the Staphula, then it is necessary that you understand how to cut off its root and extract it: and administer the stitch which we have said.
And which of the Strophula contain humidity, pierce it with a superficial hole: so that you appear to be the place of maturity of it: and put the hole from him that follows lower in the body, as we have said.
Then administer after the perforation lighening with ointment, and like things, so that it corrodes what remains of corruption, until when you see the scar already healed: then care for him with a generate ointment of flesh, until it heals.
§ On the section of the epiglottis from apoplexy within the throat.
Chapter LIII: On the head.
The ancient ones said that this section of the epiglottis, and no one in our land has done it, and this is a writing of their words.
But if there is a synecdemus, it is necessary that the section of the epiglottis be removed: with the exception that it is not done: because all the nerves and lung are feeble.
In those who have a hot apoplexy in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both mandibles, when there is no disease in the canal, it is necessary to use the section of the epiglottis, in order to escape from the destruction which is done from pre-formation. It is necessary therefore when we wish that thing, let us fasten the epiglottis with a small circle of epiglottis, or four, sectioned by a small width from between two circles from the quantity, that sits in the section of the sifac and not in the cartilage: and this place is convenient for the section, because it is private of flesh, and the blood vessels are far away from it.
If the doctor is timid, then it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat with a hook.
Then find the skin, until when it reaches to the canal: remove the blood vessels, if he sees any of them.
Then cut the soft part that we have mentioned; and this is signified in the section of the canal from the phlegmon that is issued therewith, when it is broken up, and with the dissection of the vocal cords.
And discharge the wound at some time.
When therefore the hour is come in which there is fear of a hernia, two leaves of the skin-flap are gathered together, and it is sewed up itself alone without cartilage.
Then apply medicines which cause flesh to grow, until it has healed.
Says Albucasis.
Says Albucasis. The summary of this speech which we have related is that it is not an exposition unless it is made clear that one of the things which are mentioned has now been healed, for the throat becomes swollen when the wound begins to heal, and the sick man rises up above death, and his anhelation rises up towards him; they cut off the epiglottis in order that the sick man may breathe on the spot where the wound is, and save him from death: and for this reason they prescribed that the wound should be left open until the malice of the illness has passed away, and it is a malice of three days, and almost itself; then they prescribed that the wound should be sewed up, and that care should be taken of him until he is healed.
And this which I saw through myself is that a maid-servant took a knife, and put it into her throat, and cut off with it a part of the canal of the lung.
And I was called to cure her, and I found her muttering as one who is dead mutters.
Then I loosened the wound, and I found blood flowing out from the little wound.
I was therefore confident that she had not cut her tongue or throat, and that there would be no change; but wind came out of the wound.
I therefore sewed up the wound, and I took care of him until he was well: and nothing happened to the maid-servant except that her voice became hoarse; and she returned after a few days in better condition of health.
Hinc ergo dico: quod in sectione epiglotis non est timor.
¶ De sectione herniae gutturis.
Caput XLIIII.
Hoc apostema nominatum hernia gutturis, est apostema magnum, secundum colorem corporis: et est in mulieribus multum.
Et est secundum duos modos: aut enim est naturale: aut est accidentale. In naturæ certe non est ingeniŭ.
Accidentalē verō est secundum duos modus: quīmus ünus est símilis nodis pinguis.
Et modus alter, est similis apostematĭ quod fit ex nodatione arteriae.
Et in iċo Ĭst timōr, et non oportet ut praesumptio fāti ad ipσμ cum ferro, nisi in eo quod est parūm: et tu proba ipsum, et investiga ipsum cum intramesso.
Si ergo invēnis iċum simiĭe nodo pingui, et non est suspensum cum aliquā venarum: tunc seca iċum, sicut secantur nodi: et exćrēre iċum cum eo quod contīnet ex kisti, si est in kisti: et si non, tūnc perscrutare totum eiŭ.
Deinde cura locum cum eō quod oportet ex curatione, donec sanitur.
¶ De sectione super specią nodorum.
Caput XLV. Cum sīt dubitatio fāciēns. Dico ergo, quod cum exitura est caliditas, et febris, et dolor uehementis, donec sedat ebulliťio superfluitātis, et completur putrefactio: tūnc enim quiescent fēbris et calor.
Cum nodo uero non est caliditas, neque febris, neque dolores, et continet eos kistis sifachin, qui est eis sacium proprium, et est secundum colorem corporis: et est incaēptio eorum sicut cicer, et fit sicut batecha, et maior et minor.
And they are of two kinds: either they are thin: or they retain moisture.
And the colors of moisture are many, as I have said in the division. Therefore, when you are treating a nodule, you should try it out and inquire about it first with the instrument called Intromissum, according to how its shape comes out in the chapter that follows after this one.
And the method of inquiry about abscesses and all nodules is that you take this instrument and insert it into a moist place where you suspect an abscess: and you move your fingers slowly with it until you know that the instrument has penetrated the skin.
Then, when you have reached the last limit of the size of the abscess with your hand.
Then remove the Intromissum, and consider what comes out into the hole.
But if there comes out running moisture, whatever its color: then dry up the area by a superficial cut, as I have said for other abscesses.
And if there does not come out moisture in the hole of the Intromissum, then you will know that it is fat: so dry up on top of the area with a shape of a cross, following this form, as I have taught you: and suspend it with a hook, and scrape off the skin from all parts with ease: and guard the cruciform shape well, if you can, over it, so that you may extract it sound with a Node.
But if the cruciform shape is broken during the operation, and it is not possible to extract it soundly, because this often happens: then remove it roughly, until there remains nothing of it.
For if it remains a little or a lot of it, the Node returns according to many.
That if it wins you, and remains a little of it: then fill your wound with some powder of acute corrosives: and tighten the bandage, and put it over the spot where the abscess sits that is hot, and take care of the area with the rest of the cure, until it heals.
If then there is a large nodule, then cut it in two and care for it along with the ingrown part. If however the new one is opposite to you, pulsatile or not pulsatile: then approach, and fill the space that has been opened with dried earth, and leave it bound for two days, or three, until the sinew has rotten, and rest has come to the effusion of blood: then return to cut that which remains from the nodule.
§ As regards instruments for cutting and drilling.
Chapter XLVII on heads.
The forms of intromission are three:
From them there is a great one, and from them there is a middle one, and from them there is a small one.
Let there be made from iron four-squared extremities that recede from the entrance so as to guide the intromission into the abcess.
These are the forms of experience, and they are three, namely perforations: one is called a bore, that is, a perforating: and they are three species.
From them there is a great one, and a middle one, and a small one.
They agree that they may be examined by the abcesses, and exitæ, and fistulas, and bubones from him who is between them from the bones.
And others are round, three-sided, smooth, like the large needle with which the seats are supported, made of amber or of brass or of iron or of silver. And better ones are made from amber.
And there are experiences also of lead, black, which agree in that they examine the fistulas with them, whose edges are soft, so as to reflect themselves by their softness with those reflections.
And again they are three species. Since from them there are long ones, and from them medium ones, and from them short ones, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the strictness of its edge. The form of a ring, and there are many species. For they are simples, that is, those in which there is one length: and there are three kinds as you see, great, middle, and small.
And from them are blind vines: and there are three kinds.
And from them are hooks having two lengths, and they are three kinds: and from them are hooks having three lengths, and they are three kinds: and all of these are necessary in their place.
These are the shapes of Scalpel, with which they cut and burn nodules, and sutures: and there are three kinds: for from them is great, middle, and small.
Their extremities with which they make the cut are acute, and other extremities are not acute: and they are not set so as to cut, unless it is to cut into a nodule at the risk of an incision in the skin, or in a nerve: and that it may heal through it by a little burning, rather than by burning off a nodule.
These are the great, and these are the middle, and these are the small.
They are made of iron, and they are similar to the radio with which alcohol is made: and in the long end there is a hidden pin: and it runs into the inside, and outside when you see it, as you see.
The shape of the pin which hides between the fingers at the perforation of sutures: and they are not felt by the touch: and there are three kinds, great, middle, and small.
The shapes of the blades with which they cut off a flow of blood: and there are three kinds, great, middle, and small.
Let them be made of iron, or brass, round, to the length as you see: and let them be subtle.
And let these kinds of blades be with you great, and small: so that you cut off blood from it with speed at the need, and then when there is no medicine present for you.
However, do not use them to cut off blood in any part of the body, and do not use them except in tender parts: as with livers of legs, and hips, and wrists of arms, and breasts, and hands, and groins, and similar ones from tender parts of flesh, from tender livers of legs, humerus.
And when they are made from them small instruments similar to the fistic cortex, according to their form: with which blood is cut off when it flows from the place of phlebotomy, or near the incision of the vein, or of an artery; and when they are made from them round ones according to this form.
De cura Mammillarum hominum quae mammillis mulierum assimilantur.
De cure mammillarum hominum, quae mammillem mulierum similare sunt.
When and at the beginning of sleep some people's breasts swell and remain lumpy to a woman's breasts.
Whoever therefore loathes this, should he should cut off the nipples by means of a lunar section, according to this form from the line, b to the line, g. And then scrape the whole nipple.
Then fill a wax with an incarnated medicine.
Then gather together the two lips of the wound with a suture, and take care of it until it heals.
But if the nipple sways towards the lower part and softens because of its size, as happens to women: then it should be found in its two sides at the top with two lunar sections similar in form, each of which is joined with the other at the ends, so that it forms a larger line containing the smaller one, according to this form from the line, b to the line, g. Then scrape the skin between the two lips, and remove the nipple, and administer what we have said about the suture and the powders, which is necessary in the cure, until it heals.
But if you do not want to cut it as is necessary to cut it, because of unease or because of a flow of blood: then you should fill the nipple with an浸merged corrosive unguent, and leave it, until it corrodes what remains of the nipple.
Then take care of it, until it heals.
Regarding piercing of the areolas, which happened under Titus.
CHAPTER LVIII. ON THE DIFFERENT KINDS OF SURGERY. CHAPTER LVIII. ON THE DIFFERENT KINDS OF SURGERY.
These wounds that occur below the nipple are of a hard kind of strophula, which contains a sac, and from these are those that contain moisture. Now, since they are of this kind that contain moisture, it is necessary that they be opened with a lunar section, according to this form, from line b to line g; and when all that is in the wound has been drained out completely from the poultice, then fill it again with fresh poultice and leave it until another day.
Then remove the poultice, and treat it with a suitable ointment for that wound until it heals.
If the sore is of the kind of nodular strophula, then cut over it, as we have said in the section on strophulas that are equal.
But if it extends a nodule so that it discharges pus, then administer cauterization to it, as we have said in that which precedes.
§ On the Section of Sores That Occur Due to Artery and Vein.
CHAPTER LIX. ON THE SECTION OF SORES THAT OCCUR DUE TO ARTERY AND VEIN.
When an artery is severed and the skin that is above it becomes hardened, often a sore will develop from it; and also for the veins, as for that sore and swelling.
And the signs by which it is recognized that the sore and swelling are due to an artery and a vein, are these: for when the sore is due to an artery, it is long and swollen in the body; and when you press your fingers upon the sore, you feel as if it were full of air.
And that which is due to a vein is round in the visible part of the body.
And the section upon this sore is a mistake, and especially if it is under the armpits, and in the groin, and on the neck, and in many other places of the body; and it is a great mistake.
It is therefore necessary that his care should be with iron, and that what is also in the extremities, or in the head, should be operated on.
On this therefore, since what is also in the extremities, or in the head, has to be operated on, find in the skin's section along its length.
Then open the section with the hook, afterwards the artery: and free it from the tunics, until it is detected.
Then introduce a pin underneath it, and let it penetrate until it reaches another side, and tighten the artery with a double knot in two places, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
Then pierce the place between the two ligaments with a needle, until all the blood in it has gone out, and dissolve the puss.
Then administer the cure which generates puss, until the ligaments fall: afterwards, treat it with ointments suitable for it, until it heals.
If there is a puss because of the section of a vein, then you should hold your hand, as far as possible, away from it while it is coming out with the skin.
Then introduce a pin under the place which you held with your hand, and let it penetrate: and let it remain in it a double thread until you have extracted it from the other side.
Then bind the puss with a good ligament: according to what I told you about a ligature, from both sides, with its two extremities, of a thread. If you are going to extract the thread, then introduce a pin with another thread under the puss completely by the incision of the needle: press it down, and tighten your threads in four places.
Then dry the puss from the middle of itself, until it has gone out what is in it: then cut off the excess skin, and let go what was bound to it.
Then put on the pulp which you immersed in wine, and oil.
Then administer the cure, which is done with ligatures and ointments, until it heals.
On the apoplexy which follows from a twist of the nerves.
The head.
As happened with the apoplexy in the artery and vein, so it has happened with the nerves; that which has happened in them is a blow, or it has happened from excessive work, and similar things: and it often happens to them in the places of support, or calcanei, and in all places where joints move: and it is a grave apoplexy. Its color is similar to the rest of the body, and it is in many dispositions without pain: and when it is squeezed with a pulse, it feels in it a similar dullness.
And this apoplexy is not aggregated in the depths of the body, but is under the skin, and itself moves in all directions, and does not indicate toward the front, or before, or behind.
So, since it is in joints, it should not be moved with iron.
Perhaps, however, it happens because of contraction.
But in that which is from them in the head, or in the forehead, find skin with a hammer.
If then it is a small apoplexy, then hold him with pliers, and cut him off at the root.
And if it is a large one, then hang him with a hook and scrape him off: then take it away, and aggregate the knot with a stitch: and care for it, until it heals.
On the section of apoplexies which occur in the abdomen.
The head. Some people often have a lot of wind in their bellies, and in the rest of their bodies, which they call fungi, because of the similarity of these to mushrooms.
The root of these is thin, and their heads are thick, and their lips are swollen.
And it is from them a little: and it is from them that it increases greatly.
And indeed I have already seen a man, and in his belly were two fungi, which were more than other things like mushrooms: there was no difference between them, they had white roots, and their lips turned inward, and they were always moist.
So cut them, and I found in weight one as X and VIII uncia and in the other as VI uncia And the operation in their incision is, then, if weak is damp, and color thelil is albus, humidum, subtilis radicis: then cut him with a broad chisel, and let the cautery be in your presence on fire.
For often expels at his sectioning much blood: so close then if you are defeated by blood, then cautery yourself.
That if you see weak weak and timid from the incision with iron, then take a thread of lead poorly made, and bind it with him athel: whose way is what we have said, and let go himself two days.
Then add to the constriction of lead.
So do not cease to bind lead, when it presses on the lil, until it is cut off, and falls by itself without work.
But if the lil is gross radiceps, then in its incision there is something of fear and fear: above all, because it is in the belly.
Nevertheless, possible is that you cut half of him.
Then cautery himself, so that he does not return.
Then care for him, until the wound heals.
And do not suspect to cut the lil that is of a dark color, few senses, foul appearance: for it is an ape-like cancer: and I come with a reminder of Cancer after this.
De cure of eminence of Umbilical cord.
Chapter LII.
Fit eminentia umbilical cord from many causes.
Or from fissures of the stomach, which is above the navel: and comes out of it lead, or intestinal, according to what happens in other ruptures.
Or from blood that flows from a vein, or artery, according to what has been said above.
Or from constriction of the cord.
But if it is because of a sivac fissure, and the exit is healthy: then it is a color similar to body color: and it is soft, without pain: and appears in various places.
And if it is due to the exit of the intestines, then its site is with that which we have described, a greater diversity.
Now when you press the fingers on your own belly, it is hidden away: and then it returns, and perhaps it is with it a rumbling: and it makes itself very evident at the entrance to the bath, and works a great deal of pain.
But if it is due to humidity, then it is soft, and then it does not get hidden away when pressed with your own hand, nor does it tighten, nor does it increase.
What if it is due to blood, then with these signs appears a black spot at the tip.
But if it is born of flesh: then it is a dark grey, thick, hard, and figures according to the quantity one.
But if it is due to wind, then its touch is gentle. And the operation on it is, that you should then, if there is eminence of the navel due to blood of an artery or vein, or wind, then you must refrain from curing it.
For in that is fear and dread, as I taught you in the chapter where I said about apostemas due to an artery or a vein.
What if the eminence of the navel is due to intestines or gas: then you must order the sick person to hold his breath and stand with his arms spread out.
Then signs with the caustics around the navel all over.
Then order him to lie down between your hands on his back.
Then with a sponge wet on one side around the navel over the spot you have marked with the caustics.
Then extend the middle of the pouch towards the top, with a large hook.
Then bind him firmly around with a strong thread, or with silk string: and let the knot of the binding be relaxed.
Then open the middle pouch that has been extended above the ligature.
If therefore you have already found him taken by a ligature: then draw out the alenxotati, and insert the index finger into him, and push the intestine to the interior of the abdomen: and if you find the zirbum, then take it with a hook, and cut off his excess.
If however the contrary is for you, the artery, or the new: then surround him much.
Then return to your operation.
And take two accus, and insert in them two strong fillets: and insert two accus around the one you have made around the apostema in the form of a cross, which you make to penetrate.
Then tighten the apostema in four places on the accus: and if there is a desire, remove the accus, and leave the place, until the flesh extends which has putrefied: and let it fall by itself: or cut it when it thins out and putsrefies.
Then take care of the wound with the ointment, as is necessary, until it heals.
That if there is eminence of the umbilicus out of flesh in him, or out of moisture: then it is necessary that you tighten the apostema, as we have said.
And draw out the blood, or the moisture, which you have found in him.
Then take care of the wound with him, as it solidifies the place.
Regarding the treatment of cancer. Chapter LIII.
For I could not heal anyone from it; and I did not see anyone before me who had recovered from it.
And the operation, when it is placed as we have said, is, as regards its method, such that you should go before it and heal the sick from black cholera sometimes.
Then phlebotomy itself if it is evidently filled with blood.
Then prepare the sick with preparation in which the operation is placed.
Then throw into the cancer the hooks that are suitable for it.
Then wrap it all around with skin, according to the examination, until none of its roots remain: and let the blood not flow, and do not tear it quickly, except to express the places, and wipe away the gross blood altogether by your hand, or with whatever is possible there;
But if the opposition makes you flow blood from the incision of an artery or a vein: then causticate the blood, until it is cut off.
Then take care of the wound with the remaining cure, until it heals.
Of the treatment of hydropysis.
Chapter LII.
We have already spoken at length about the division of the species of hydropysis and how water is aggregated; and we shall now speak about the signs of each species, and its cure with medicines.
And that which is cured by the use of iron, is not but one kind of hydropesis: and it does not approach the iron of timpanitis: nor does it go deep into the hyposarcous: for that would be fatal.
When you have already tried to treat this species of hydropesis with medicines, and your treatment has not been successful: then reflect.
For if the sick person already has a general weakness, or there is another kind of weakness along with hydropesis; such as if he has a cough, or a watery bladder, and things like that: then be careful not to treat it with iron: for there is a fear of that.
But if you see a sick person with abundant strength and vigor, and there is no illness other than hydropesis: and he is not a boy, nor an old man: then the method of operation in him is this, that you should stand him before your hands, and let him express his wind by hand toward the lower part of the pineal.
Then take a spike-shaped spatula, shaped like this.
Take two acute parts, one long, the acute end like a spike-shaped spatula.
However, in it there is something that narrows gradually so that it does not interfere with it during the operation up to the intestines and does not damage it.
Then consider.
For if there is a generation of hydrops on the part of the intestines, then it should be extended with a section of three fingers' width from the umbilicus, towards the lower side directly above the spine.
If, on the other hand, there is a generation of hydrops due to liver disease: then your section should be three fingers' width from the umbilicus to the left.
And if that generation is due to the spleen, then your section should be on the right side: and it should not also be located at a place where the sick one will lie, so that there are no fluids going to that weak spot.
Then pierce the skin with a sharp instrument completely.
Then introduce it into the section, and with your hand, with the spike-shaped spatula between the skin, as if you were scraping it off: and the amount that is scraped should be the size of a nail, or around that.
Then pierce the skin with the spike-shaped spatula until it reaches a vacuum spot: and there is a place of water.
Then pull out the flesh, and introduce into the opening an instrument which has this form.
And it is similar to a tube: it is made of silver, or brass, or gold, smooth, round: and at the lower part of it there is a small opening, and on its sides are three openings, two from one side, and one from the other side: and its end should be incised, following the pattern of the incision of a calamus, as you see: in the upper end there is an annulus.
For when the instrument reaches the water, it immediately comes up on top of the instrument, thus making a small amount of air bubble come up from the water at a medium rate.
For if you drain from it more than is necessary, perhaps at the hour of death the sick person dies through a resolution of his animal spirit; or something happens to him which approaches death.
But drain from it according to the power of its virtue, and according to what I tell you about the dispositions of the infirm from the power of its pulse, and from its goodness.
Then remove the instrument and retain the water.
That is, because it retains immediately by means of the skin which retains the hole which is above the sifon: of which I told you, that you should do as to that mode.
Then remove the instrument on the other day, if you see the sick person bear that thing: and also remove from the water a quantity of the pulse. Do that on some days without fear, and guard yourself from error: until there remains in the water not much of a quantity.
But if you are about to treat a sick person, and let go of a great deal of water: then take care of him with the dirt in the hot sand, and with a great sweat in the bath and in the sun, and let him wait on hunger: and take care of him with the medicines dried up, until he is healed: and cauterize over his stomach, and his spleen, and his liver, after the removal of the water: according to what I told you before.
Of the care of infants who are born in places of their urinary organs not pierced.
Chapter 50. When any infant comes out of the womb of his mother, and the head of his swaddling clothes is not pierced, or a hole is narrow, or is not in its place.
Then it is necessary to help with the piercing of him as soon as he is born with a soft sponge gently: according to this form.
Then put into the hole a small slip from lead, and tie him up: and hold him three days, or four.
When he wants to urinate, let it move, and let it go.
Then reduce the child.
And if you do not put lead [plumb], it is possible that the urine which has flowed over the place, should not prevent him from closing [claudi].
But he who has a narrow hole, he is treated with lead, as we have said, for many days, until it increases.
But those in whom the hole is not in its proper place, are wounded.
That is, because from those who are born, the hole is at the end of the penis; so that he cannot urinate forward, until he raises his penis with his hand to the top. And there is no generation in him, therefore the semen cannot reach the womb according to its straightness; and it is a foul disease.
And the mode of action in that is, that he lies down on his back.
Then extend his penis with your left hand by a powerful extension, and cut the head of the penis from its proper place with an acorn, or sharp stylus; like as you would cut a stalk, or like you cut some hair, so that it may come to resemble the head of the penis, and let the hole fall in the middle, according to what is needed.
And cause yourself to be near during your operation from the flow of blood.
For this often happens.
So he takes off with him who cuts off the blood, and cares for a wound, until it heals.
Regarding the wounds that occur in the prepuce and penis, and corruption, blackening, and adhesion.
Chapter LVI
These wounds often occur on the penis, and there is a profusion of foul flesh.
And from it another evil arises, and another not evil.
So it is not evil that you should hang him with a subtle hook, and cut it off, until you have completely cleansed it.
Then put on it a cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then care for him with the ointment of difinicon until he is well.
If the albather is male and of a bad color, then you should administer cauterization after incising it and shaving it.
If the albather is caught in the foreskin and is part of it between the foreskin and is outside part: then you should remove the albather that is inside first until it is secure, then care for him outside: because when you care for him at the same time, the foreskin does not heal securely unless it is pierced.
And also happen to the testicles, and the foreskin blackened and corruption.
Therefore, you should bring together everything that has been damaged, and what seeks to corrupt, or what is already corrupted.
Then put a line of honey over the wound that has been crushed with flour of ground corn, and herbs of three times.
Then care for that with the remaining cure until he is well.
If, however, a flow of blood occurs, then administer cauterization with lunar cautery, in this form.
For the cauterization is suitable for two dispositions at the same time, namely for a flow of blood, and when corruption occurs.
If it corrodes the head of the penis and destroys all in an hour: then you should insert a plumbum cannula into the meatus of Praepaus, so that the weak can mix with it.
However, the foreskin adheres to the head of the penis, and this type of adhesion does not occur unless the foreskin is healthy, and circumcision is not required: and when an adhesion occurs due to a wound or aphasia: you should cut it with an obtuse Spatumili until the ligaments are broken, and free the head of the penis from all parts.
If it is difficult to distinguish it finely, then you should cut off some of the head of the penis, and from the foreskin.
What is, because the foreskin when it is thin, perhaps pierces quickly due to its thinness.
Then separate between the foreskin and, with a thin linen cloth that has already been soaked in cold water so that it doesn't stick again.
Then treat with astringent wine until hardened. The purification of infants and the treatment of errors on them by accident.
Chapter LVII.
Circumcision is not a remedy for continence, like the other wounds; but since it is of our invention and use, we should mark it as an improvement on our procedure, and make it lighter, leading to health.
I say, that the ancient ones did not speak of circumcision in any of their books: for they do not use it in their laws, and is only because we have acquired it through experience.
That is, because I found most of the techniques and the use of bloodletting in purification, circumcising with a knife, and using forceps: and they use leeching, binding with thread, and cutting with nails.
And I too have already tried all these methods, and did not find a better purification than circumcising with forceps and binding with thread.
For, in purification with leeching, the skin often escapes.
For the skin of the foreskin has two tunics; so perhaps one cuts the upper skin and fears that the lower tunic will tear: so it is necessary to make an incision to cut the latter, and a pain will be expected.
And since the purification done by leeching, that is, digital, which the surgeons use, does not secure an incision at the extreme end of the male member: because perhaps it enters a hole.
In purification with nails, perhaps the iron blunts, and ruins your procedure: and the skin of the boy is naturally short, and often grows up so that it does not need purification: and I have already seen this.
The Mundification with lances and thread, I have found a good experiment: For the lances are proportional to the incision: since the sharpness that is above is like the sharpness that is below.
But when you press your hand with the lances, two sharpnesses are proportionate, and incise one at a time in one operation in one time: and it is made by a similar figure compression, containing the skin of the thigh from all parts, so that there is no error at all.
And the mode of operation is appropriate, so that you can estimate, especially if he is from those who understand a little, that you do not make, unless you tie the thread on his thigh alone: and let him go until another day.
Then let him enjoy and rejoice in all ways as much as possible for you, since he receives intelligence from it.
Then put your hand on his thigh, and blow into the skin, and pull it up until the head of the thigh comes out.
Then cleanse it from him since it is gathered in her sour:
Then tie the spot marked with double thread.
Then tie the lower one with a thread as much as possible as the second one. Then hold with your index, and keep the place of the lower ligament with good hold, and incise between the two ligaments.
Then wipe the skin quickly upwards, and pull out the head of the thigh.
Then let the blood run slowly (for it is better) and put the powder from above: and over the powder, a cloth in which the wool is spread out, boiled in water with rose oil, shaken with oil. Recent good: and let him stay on himself until another day: and take care of the rest of him with the cure, until it is healed.
The shape of the scissors for cleaning is this.
Now, regarding the design of the surgical scissors, the following is specified: they should have two ends and be curved; their blades should be equal in length to the handle-pieces.
However, a slip during the cleaning is possible: for perhaps all the inner skin will be shed, or a part of it near the incision. Therefore, you should extend it from your own hand before the examination of the site: and you should strike it according to equality.
If you cannot hold it with your hand, then remove it with a hook and strike it.
If, however, they have passed three days and remain under inflated flesh, an ulcer: then dismiss it until the ulcer has healed by itself, and prepare it easily: and be careful from the head of the tree.
For that will not harm it.
Care for it then with the one that has healed from the poultice, which we discussed in the book on poultices: and if it is incised from the skin above the measure, and extends upward, it will not harm it either.
Care for it then with that which we have said, until it heals.
Regarding the extraction of a retained warts from the urethra.
Chapter L VIII.
Retentie of the urine in the urethra, happens from an operation carried out by a stone, or congealed blood, or pus, or meat born, and similar things which we have said about the modes of curing in division.
And if the warts do not disappear, and you see that the retention is because of a stone which is now in the neck of the urethra: then it is necessary that he be cured lying on his knees.
Then put his feet together on his back, and extend his belly from the upper part of his back, and strangle the patient with his breath as much as is possible for him.
It was therefore thought with the neck of the urogenital system for the expulsion of the stone to the rear: why is the urethra emptied?
That if it is not solved with it as we have said, and the trouble is a matter of weakness: then it is necessary that you administer the extraction with an instrument, which is called a syringe, whose this is its form Sit ex argento, et sit subtile, lene, concauum sicut cannula pennae auis in subtilitate radii, longum in similitudine palmi unius et medii: cui sit cannula subtilis in capite eius.
And the mode of exit of the urine through it itself is, that you take a doubled thread, and tie the ends with good knot: and introduce the end of the thread into the lower part of the syringe: and strike with the forceps if there is anything leaking from the wool, truly introduce into the cannula with vehemence, like to raise.
Then dip the syringe in oil, or in butter, and in alume: and make the patient sit on a chair, and insert the urogenital system, and his penis with wet oils, and olive oil, and warm water.
Then introduce the syringe into the penis with ease, until it reaches the root of the penis.
Then double itself over on the upper side from the umbilicus. Then push the syringe into itself until it reaches the bladder, and feel that it has already reached the empty thing: and this is not done according to this order, unless because the opening, in which you insert, is twisted.
Then extend the thread with wool gradually.
For the urine follows the wool.
Then extract it, and make the urine run through the urethra: and repeat the syringe, and do not cease to do this, until the bladder is emptied, and the patient feels relief. Regarding the quality of clisterea of the urogenital system with the clepsydra.
Chapter LIX.
For it is closed, that is, shut.
And in it are three holes, two on one side, and one on the other side, like eyes.
And the place where the impeller is located, which moves it without addition, until when it is drawn with it something is attracted from moisture: and when it is moved, it expels it far away: secondly, because it makes the clepsydra, which throws naphtha, that is, Greek fire in fights.
So when you pour water into the bladder, introduce the end of the clepsydra into the water, and draw it out with what moves it upward; for water is drawn into the closed place of the clepsydra. Then introduce its end into the penis, as we have described in the syringe.
Then push the water with it because it moves that which we have described as fire: for water reaches the bladder immediately, so that one feels it there. The form of a thin clepsydra in which the bladder is closed up.
Then insert a strong thread into these holes, as they rotate. Then gather the circle together, as is gathered alsofrith; after you have put into it that which you take out of moisture, and oils, and waters.
Then tie it to the instrument: and make with it as you did with the water vessel by expression with your hand, until the moisture reaches the water vessel.
Regarding the extraction of a stone.
Chapter LX. I have already spoken in the division of the species of stone, and the treatment of it with medicines; and I have distinguished between the stone generated in the kidneys, and the urinary bladder, and their signs; and I have described the stone which is operated on by hand and section: and this is a stone properly generated in the urinary bladder: and that which is formed in the branch is also my subject; and I am narrating it with a clear exposition and abbreviation.
I therefore say, that stone generated in the urinary bladder often happens to boys.
And from its signs it is known that the urine which issues from the bladder is like water in its subtlety; and white sand appears in it: and it irritates the man's testicles, and hurts them when they touch it, and often hangs down. Then it stands up, and exits with it the anus in many of its phenomena.
And the cure of boys is easy from that time to about fourteen years.
But it is difficult with older people.
But with boys the cure is intermediate, because it is between that time and the time when the stone is larger; and its cure is easier if it is a small one, and if it is large, the cure is reversed.
When we have come to the cure, it is necessary first that we change the sick man with the clister, which removes all the dirt that is in his intestines; for he sometimes prevents the detection of a stone by inquisition. Then let the sick person be carried with his feet and be shaken and moved to the lower parts so that the stone goes down into the bladder or sometimes jumps out of its place from the top.
Then let him sit with his hands prepared between your hands, and his hands under his hips so that the whole bladder may descend towards the lower parts.
Then examine him and touch him externally.
If you then feel the stone in space, then immediately approach it with the cut side up.
If it does not fall under your hand at all, then you should clean the index finger with oil from the left hand if the sick person is a boy: or the middle finger if he is a full grown man: and put him in some part of his body, and examine for the stone until it stands under your finger: and turn it slowly towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press on it with your finger and push it towards the external parts opposite to the place you want to section: and have one minister to press the bladder with his hand, and another minister to stretch out the testicles with his right hand towards the top: and let him with his other hand move the skin, which is under the testicles in that part where the section is to be made.
Then introduce the probe, which has this shape.
And find in him where it is between the scrotum and the testicles, and not in the middle, to the left side of birth: and let the section be made on it so that the stone comes out easily from it, being not very large; and let the section be made diagonally so that it be wide outside, and tight inside.
For perhaps your finger, which is in the anus next to the section, will compress the stone; and it will come out without difficulty.
And know that from the stone there are angles and edges, so that it is difficult to get out because of that.
And from it is soft, like a gland, and round: and it is easy for it to come out.
Therefore, where there are angles and edges, add a groove.
If it is not so, then one should have an assistant stand on top of the patient, or bend over the patient with a awkward posture, whose end is as the moon which strangles on a stone and does not slip away from it: or as you would insert a thin instrument under it, with curved ends.
If you cannot stand above him, then make the opening slightly larger.
Since if something is making you bleed, cut it off while it is still alive.
But if the stone is larger than one, then push the largest part towards the opening of the bladder.
Then cut on top of it.
Then push a little bit after it, and do the same if there are more than two of them.
Since if it is very large, then it is not known how to separate it from above with a large incision.
Since this has happened to a sick person from one of two things, or that he should die, or because the urine is distilling often: soon, because it does not consolidate at all.
But give him a way to expel it until he leaves: or with forceps on the break, until you cut it out quickly.
When you have finished your operation, then fill the wound with thure, and aloe, and dragon's blood: and tie it up, and put a soaked cloth on top of it, with oil and rosewater, or with oil and cold water: so that it may be soothed by the warm poultice.
Then wrap the patient up, including their neck, and do not separate the ligaments until the third day.
When you release him, then soak the place with much water and oil.
Then take care of the wound with dye-fin-icon ointment, and basilicon ointment until it is healed.
But if the warm poultice is added to a broken bone, and it is corroded, and there are similar things: such as if blood congeals in the bladder, and urine is prevented from leaving it: and it is known that this happens when the urine leaves with the blood.
Introduce therefore your finger into the cavity and draw out the blood.
For if any remains, it invites corruption of the flesh and decay thereof.
Then wash the cavity with vinegar, water, and salt; and oppose to it all that is proper from the cure, until it be healed.
And it is necessary, during the time of cure of all the body, that the two hips should be bound together, and that the joints should be kept close together, for those medicines which are put upon the place.
If the stone is small and lies in the meatus of the urethra, and fixes itself there, and prevents the passage of urine; then take care of it with that which is proper before you proceed to the section.
For often you will find relief from the operation, since I have already tried it. And take the Perforator out of iron, which has this form, a triangular extremity, acute, fixed in wood.
Then take a thread, and bind it with the limb under the stone that it may not return to corruption.
Then introduce the piercing iron into the limb with ease until it has reached the stone: and remove the piercing with your hand little by little from the stone; and feel the piercing of it, until you have made it pierce from one side to the other.
For urine is at once removed.
Then press your hand upon that which remains of the stone from the external side of the limb.
For it will break, and go out with urine, and the sick one will be healed.
If this cure is not proper for you, on account of something which prevents it from working; then bind the thread under the stone, and a second thread above the stone. Then dry up the stone in the middle of the limb between the two bindings.
Then draw out the stone.
Then solve the bindings, and clean away the congealed blood, which has formed in the arm.
And it is not necessary to tie the tendon of the son under the stone, unless he returns to the skin for exercise: and another ligament from above, unless when the tendon comes after the departure of the stone, returns to the skin to its place, and covers the wound; and because of this, you must do this when you tie the upper tendon, that you raise the skin above, that it return with your supplement, and cover the wound, as we said.
On the extraction of a stone in women.
Chapter LXI. On the extraction of a stone from the urinary bladder in women.
A stone is seldom formed in women.
If, however, a stone should occur in any of them, then the treatment is difficult, and it is forbidden on account of many reasons.
One of these is: that a woman may be a virgin. And the second is: that you should not examine a chaste woman, or one who has a husband already, under the pretense of medicine.
And the third is: that you should not examine a woman who is well versed in this art, especially the operation with the hand.
And the fourth is: that the distance from the place of the stone is great: for there is a fear of danger in the deep section, and it is in that.
That if necessity compels to do this, then you should take a woman who is well versed in the art as a doctor; and it is rarely found.
But if, on the contrary, you wish to keep it secret, then seek out a chaste, subtle doctor, and have present a skilled woman doctor in the matter of women, or a woman who is familiar with this part of the art; so do it with her present, especially ask her to do all that you order to her in the inquiry about the stone. In the first place, that she should examine if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary that she should insert her finger into some part of her, and inquire about the stone.
And if she finds it, let her hold it with her finger, and then order the obstetrician to insert his own finger into the weakened place, and inquire about the stone, after he has placed his left hand on the skin, and compresses it with a good compression. If then a stone is found, then it should be gradually moved from the urethral orifice downward with its utmost power, until it reaches with it to the root of the pelvis.
Then he should cut over it at the place of the middle urethral orifice near the root of the pelvis, from whichever side it is prepared and feels the stone in that part: and his finger should not be removed from the stone, compressing beneath it: and there should be a small incision in the first.
Then he should insert the ray over that section.
If then he feels the stone, then he should add to the second section a quantity proportional to the amount of stone discharged from it.
And you shall know that there are many types of stones. For from these there is a small one, and a large one, and an coarse one, and a sharp one, and a long one, and a round one having branches.
You shall therefore know the kind of it, as it will be shown to you on this which you wish to understand.
If then blood is drawn against you, then add in the place of the cut a powder of three times, and hold it for an hour, until the blood is separated.
If then blood is drawn against you, and you know that the discharge of blood is from an artery which has been cut: then put powder on the place, and tighten it with the powder as it declines: and do not change it: and let the stone go, and do not take out itself.
For perhaps the woman will die who is weak.
Then take care of the wound.
When then the sharpness of blood is seated after days, and the place is decayed, turn again to your operation, until a stone is discharged from it.
Regarding the section above the hernial region with water.
Chapter LII.
Ramel water does not exist, unless there is a collection of moisture in the sifac or skin, which is inside the scrotum: and it is called sifac. And sometimes it is in the proper pouch of itself, which nature has made in a part of it, until it is put on: that is another thing, and it is the skin of the testicles between the sifac white, which we have said: and it does not do this unless rarely.
And the generation of this branch, is from the weakness which happens to the testicles: why this substance is spilled upon them.
And sometimes it happens from a blow on the testicles.
And this moisture is having many colors. Or on the other hand, it is a color that is declining into citrinities, or is bloody red, or feculent black, or white watery, and this is what it is that is more.
For if it is in the sifac skin, which we have said, then the aperture is round to about the length of a figure-eight: and the testicle does not appear, because moisture contains it from all sides.
And if there is moisture in the proper pouch of itself, then the aperture is round with a part like it, and for this reason man guesses that it is another thing.
And if there is moisture between the skin of the testicles and the white of the sifac, then it falls down.
When therefore you wish to know the color of the moisture, then experience the color of the moisture in the aperture with a square insertion, whose shape preceded.
According to this, therefore, when it moves into the insertio's space, judge of it that it is between itself.
When therefore we come to the cure with the iron, then it is necessary that you send the sick person to bleed if it is possible for him to do so, and you will see his body full of blood.
Then he should lay him on his back upon a hard thing a little, and place under him many sheets.
Then sit to his left, and order the servant to sit on his right, who shall spread out his thigh from one side to the other of the skin of the testicles, and to the part of the scrotum.
Then take a wide spatula, and dry the skin of the testicles from the middle along its length, up to the chest: and make the incision according to the equidistant line that divides the skin of the testicles, until you reach the white layer surrounding it: and examine the flesh, or rather keep it open, so as to separate it: and sit with the flesh you are examining hanging down on one side more than on the other, and carefully examine it by its quantity that you can see.
Then pierce the white layer with a wide hole, and draw out all the water. Then separate the two labia of the incision with a hook, and extend the white layer towards the top, without touching the skin that is enclosed: and make the incision in whatever way you can cut it, whole or partially, especially its side that is thin.
For if you do not examine carefully, the incision will not be secure, except by returning to the water.
But if during your work an egg comes out of his skin: when you have finished the incision of the white layer, reduce him.
Then join together the two sides of the skin of the testicles with a stitch.
Then take care of him as you do with other wounds, until he is healed.
That if there is a corruption of the egg from another color, then you should bind the clothes, which are suspensions, fearing the flow of blood.
Then cut off the testicle with the suspender, and draw out the egg: then take care of it as we have said.
But if the water is gathered on both sides, then you should know that there are two branches: so dry one side according to what you have done on the other side equally.
And if you make it so that the operation is one, then do it; afterwards wash away the blood.
And introduce the cloth wetted with oil, or oiled cloth: and put another cloth than that which you have dipped in wine and oil over the testicles, and stretch it over the two balls of the eye: and place above it double cloths, and they will be fine: and bind them above with a ligature, which is having six according to this form.
Then take two cloths and make them fine and red, according to this likeness: and let the ends which are pressed by the tourniquet be under the loin, or wet wool: and let them be joined with the constriction in the back of the arms: and let one end rest on some part until it reaches the back, and the other end rest on the side of the rib cage: and let the two ends rest on the lower hips, and the other end on the two groin areas, and let the whole constriction be joined with the constriction in the back of the arms.
And, when it is being surgically treated this thread with a knife in the place of the section with iron: and it is, so that you may get the knife sharp, and separate the skin of the testicles with it: and it is lit up, according to what we have told: until it is recognized by the white sutura containing water: then get the knife, according to this form.
It is similar to Greek letters.
Then pierce it with that thread, and it is lit up, until all the moisture goes out.
Then extend the thread with a hook, and scrape it with a sharp knife lit up, and cut off all of it for you, until you cut off everything.
And do not let the fire touch him.
And you should know that this operation is more salutary, and less distant from the flow of blood, and better than the operation with the section.
But if the opposite for you makes in the hour of the section, or in the hour of the cauterization: a hot aposteme, or a flow of blood, or something else: then it is necessary that you should be concerned with what the opposite makes for you from that cure which suits him, according to what has been promised.
But if the patient is shy and does not expect this operation because of his own ugliness: then administer the piercing according to what I have just said: and so it is.
When you are certified by yourself that the wound is aquous: then it is necessary that you make the sick person sit on an elevated chair.
Then pierce the abscess in the lower part of his side with a chisel: and place the piercing according to the length of his body, and make the aperture wide enough so that all the water runs out.
Then put a cloth over the place, and tie it up, and let him go so that he may empty out the remaining water: then take care of the person, until the wound is healed.
But if there is an obstacle to the exit of water at the time when you pierce it: and this should not be done except for that reason, because the white cloth creates a resistance in the wound orifice and prevents the exit of water: then it is necessary that you insert a feather into the wound, or an instrument with which water is removed, whose shape has preceded: or add a little to the operation of the wound.
And know that the water returns and accumulates after six months, or around them.
When it is accumulated then it returns in the same way, and the sick person spends his days.
On the care of the ramulus carnosus.
Chapter LIII. The head.
You should know that there is a fear-induced head on the ramulus which leads to harm in many dispositions.
Therefore I remove it so that it may be healed from it.
And I am remembering the operation in it, and the species of the abscess.
I say, that many types of abscesses happen in the bodies, which are composed of testes: and it happens from many causes, indeed. Or from acute overflow or bitterness that is discharged to the testes.
Or from a blow.
And it is called apथमata according to the color of the body, and no pain is found; and it is called an apथमata gray.
And perhaps it is called a stone apथमata, whose color is dark, and there is no feeling of it.
And sometimes it happens from the enlargement of arteries, and the swelling of their vessels: as it has previously been remembered: or from the swelling of veins.
That which is then from them by the enlargement of arteries, is known by the position of the apθημα, when you compress it with your fingers.
And it is not necessary that you touch it completely.
But this, on the other hand, does not separate anything from it when you compress it with your fingers. And it is also possible that, after this form of apथमata has occurred, a section should be made and the remaining flesh: and it is, so that the skin of the testicles is separated.
Then extend your hand to the top, and pull it out with a hook or: and free the suspenders from the water, and tie the bandage: and cut the suspenders after you have freed the bandage from all parts of them that you can.
If then the consolidated hand is with those flesh-bearing bones, then it is necessary that you attract the hand, and cut it off. And if the adhesion is between some of the siphacheta, or in that which is between the suspenders: then it is necessary that you free all this adhesion, and cut it off with a round cut.
If then the birth of flesh is in the place of adhesion which is behind: then it is necessary that you cut off all this, and pull out the hand, as we have said. When your operation is completed, then fill the hand with wool soaked in rose oil and wine: and then take care of the hand with the remaining cure, until it heals.
Of the treatment of the vine ramification.
Chapter LXIII.
It is an apथमata somewhat hidious by the softening of the testicles, and it is difficult to move on a weak motion and exercise, and walking.
And in the cure of this disease there is fear, because of which there was a memory before it.
But it should be said, let us speak of the operation as those who came before did. I say then, it is necessary that you should make the sick person sit on an elevated chair.
Then cut through with a sharp chisel, cutting transversely in the direction of the scrotum, until the skin is separated.
Then scrub off all parts, as we have told you in extracting the arteries that are in the wrists.
Then dry them in a straight middle section according to the length of the body, and pull out what is gathered from the corrupt wet feces.
Then heal the wound with the cure of the other wounds, so that the skin that nourishes one testicle falls:
For it is not bad through that.
But if all the skin falls away from any wound, then it is necessary that they should be taken out through this, because it is not covered by the skin's nutrition, because of the incision, and does not heal or scar, and does not become part of them.
As for the cure of intestinal worm: Head LXV.
Why do the intestines come out from that rupture to one testicle?
And this rupture is either from a split, or from the length of it.
And these two types of injuries occur from many causes. Or from a blow. Or from a fall. Or from a cry. Or from a heavy object, and similar things.
And a sign, when it is from an extended scar.
This is what happens gradually over a long period of time, and does not happen suddenly: and it is a swelling equal to or deeper than the surrounding area: this is because the scar compresses the intestines.
And the sign of this is when it is from a section of scar, because it causes sudden and severe pain from its beginning: and it is a swelling that is different and appears under the skin close by: and this is because of the exit of the intestines, and their course towards the external scar.
And when it comes out with a wrinkled intestine: and this is called Ramus intestinalis, and wrinkles: and sometimes it happens with wind.
And when it runs into feces in the intestine and stays there: and this causes sickness and pain, especially when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of the diseases that are associated with this, there is a danger: for which reason it should be avoided.
And the method of treatment is, as you order the sick person to reduce his intestine by his hand into his cavity, if he obeys, he will return.
Then let him lie on his back between your hands: and raise his legs.
Then extend the skin that follows the skin upwards, and dry the skin of the testicles completely over its length.
Then fasten with two fingers of the section, according to how far apart it is to open the section with them: and let the section be proportionate, so that it can come out from it without effort.
Then scrape the scar and the flesh that is under the testicles, until when you touch it, a piece of hard flesh comes off: then put your index finger into what follows the testicle, into what is between the hard flesh that is under the skin, and between the second scar, and firmly join it with what is behind the scar.
Then with the right hand pull out the skin of the testicles inside: and while doing this, extend the silk thread [of the ligature] high up, with the left hand: and tie off the end of it, with the silk thread, at the site of the incision: and instruct the assistant to hold it taut, so that it does not slacken when you are cutting through.
And feel with your fingers, lest there be anything there still alive, from the intestines, inside the silk thread or hard knot.
If there is something there that is still alive: then push it downwards into the gut.
Then take hold of the thick filament, made of ten thin strands, that runs through the silken thread: and push it in between the last part of the incision, that is, the Tunica, which lies just under the skin covering the testicles after the cut: then cut off the ends that stick out from the filament, until you have four strands.
Then join some of them together with a cross-shaped figure: and tie them with the silk thread, which we have mentioned, because it is a firm knot under the skin of the testicles, until there can be no possibility that any of the veins, which supply them, can send anything to them: so that there does not come about a burst from the heat.
And place another knot, far away from the first one by two fingers' length.
And after these two knots, let go of the silk thread that hangs under the skin of the testicles, to the length of a finger's width: and cut off the rest all around, leaving a circle, and take it off.
Then dry up the lower part of the incision where the blood and pus run: as we have described earlier.
Then add the wool soaked in oil to the nail: and place on it the knot that we have described.
And when the silk thread that we have mentioned, the white one, is cauterized after the incision, being afraid of the flow of blood.
This often happens.
And loosen the ligament, until it falls by itself.
But if its fall is delayed, then soak it with warm water: and place over it that which I have said, until it falls.
Then care for the wound with the remaining cure for the wound, until it is cured.
[This is a section about ramie wool.]
Chapter LVI.
IN this Ramie none dared to attempt the cure with iron.
And first they said, that it was done as we have related in the Ramie which is with the Vine.
That is, so that the wounds after cutting on them with ease go down: and then dry in the middle, and cure the wound afterwards with what opens it, until the wounds fall out: and cure the wound, according to what we have said, until it heals.
[This is about the incision made in the groin.]
Chapter LVII.
When there is a rupture in the groin, as we have said, and the place comes out, and nothing of the intestines goes down to the testicles: but if it goes down, it is little, and returns at all times: but if it be prolonged with that time, there is added a fissure in the sheath, until the intestines go down into the sheath.
And this thing came about from the enlargement of the sheath, which is in the groin, as we have said.
That is, because it extends the sheath: then it softens, and the place comes out, and comes out.
And its cure is with a poultice, as has preceded its narration.
And when it is cured with iron, according to this manner: and it is so, that the sick one lies on his back between your hands.
Then dry up the place of the rupture which has come out and is prominent, with an incision across its width, according to the quantity of three fingers.
Then tighten up with a thong and, which are under the skin, until it is discovered when the sheath of flesh, which follows it, comes out.
Then take the ray [of light], and put it on an eminence from the [sifach], and press it deeply into the eye.
Then, cut two eminences from the ends of the  [ray] from the  [sifach], and connect them with a suture; then remove the end of the ray.
And do not cut the   [sifach] at all, and do not touch one to another, nor anything else, as I told you in the cure of intestinal wounds. Then, consider that cure of the wound.
When you cut the   [rays], then clean it, and restore the   [wound], until it is healed.
For the    [sifach] is hit against, and no eminence of the rupture is added.
And the cautery is better in this place; for it is nearer to health.
Regarding the softening of the skin of the testicles.
Chapter LVIII.
The skin of the testicles is sometimes softened in certain men, because the flesh that is between them is softened, and its appearance is changed.
Therefore it is necessary for the one who is asked to cure him, that he lie down on his back, and hit all of the softened skin over the natural skin. Then aggregate two lips with a suture; and if necessary, in the first place, three sutures, or four, and a firm suture.
Then consider that cure of the remaining wounds, until they are healed, and let the    [rays] fall.
Regarding Castration.
Chapter LIX.
You should know that Castration is excommunicated by our law; and for that reason I shall remind you of it in this book: and its reminder is necessary only for two reasons.
The first is that it should be in the knowledge of the physician when he is questioned about it: and that he may know how to treat it when it happens to him.
The other method is that which we often use in the castration of certain animals for our benefit, such as rams, horses, and cats and similar animals.
I say then that Castration is done according to two methods. Or by friction.
Or by a cut and slice.
In that which is done by friction the course of operation is this: that we make the animal sit in warm water until his testicles become soft and lax and hang down: then with your hand you turn them over until they have resolved and do not appear under the touch.
But in the castration by a cut and slice, it is necessary that you hold the animal, and with your left hand press the skin of his testicles.
And this method of castration is better than that which is done by a cut and slice: for friction perhaps leaves behind some of the testicles, so the animal desires to have sex.
Then care for the wound, until it heals.
Of the care of hermaphrodites in two methods.
Head 70.
Hermaphrodite is from testicles in two ways.
The male is of it because it appears to be in it that follows the space, or in the skin of the testicles, in that it lies between the two testes, figure like a hen's, in which there are hairs: and when it runs urine from it which comes out from the skin of the testicles.
But in women is one kind, and is hen-like above the skin like a penis completely, sticking out to the outside: of which one is like a phallus of a male, and two like two testes.
And the treatment of three kinds, two from men and one from women, is this: because it is necessary that you strike the added flesh until the impression disappears.
Then take care of the remaining wounds.
But in the species of men from which urine is secreted, which is in the skin of the testes, there is no operation or cure at all.
The incision of the hernia and the prominent flesh in women.
Chapter L XXI
The hernia might be added to the natural place until it is well and its appearance is not disfigured: and sometimes it becomes so great in some women that it reaches as far as coition.
It is necessary that you hold the hernia with your hand, or with a pin, and strike it: and not finally in the incision, especially in the deep root: so that the flow of blood does not occur.
Then take care of the wound itself in the cure of the wound until it heals.
But the middle flesh, which is born in the womb of the mother, until it fills itself: and perhaps it exits to the outside according to the similarity of tails: and for that reason some call the first illness with a tail.
It is necessary that you strike it as you struck the hernia, and take care of it until it heals.
The cure of the Alatic hernia, which is a hernia in an unpierced woman.
Chapter L XXII
The Alatic is such that it is a hernia in an unpierced woman, or that there is a small hole.
And it is either natural, or accidental.
The accidental is from an illness that preceded it: and itself is formed either from meat added, or from thin skin, or from scales: and it is formed either in the deep of the mother's womb, or in her sides, or on top of her, or underneath: and it prohibits coition and conception, and birth, and perhaps also menstruation.
And his knowledge is acquired through the examination of obstetrical cases, if there is visible obesity nearby.
But if it is not apparent, then ask her with your fingers, or with a ray of light.
But if the obesity is from a thin layer and is nearby, then bring it close and unravel it.
And it is, so that you put it on top of two lips of wool.
Then place your fingers of both hands at the same time, and the woman sits with her legs extended on her back.
Then stretch out the two lips with strength until the thin layer is unravelled, and the obesity opens.
Then take a piece of wool, immerse it in oil, and place it on the spot: and let the woman sit there all day so that the spot does not harden through the pressure of anything else.
But if the layer is thick and dense, then it should be separated with a flat leaf of myrtle.
But if the obesity is from flesh that has grown, then suspend it with a hook and cut it: and have with you medicines that stop the flow of blood without causing pain, such as acacia and dragon's blood, and the gum Arabic with its albumen.
Then introduce a wide silver catheter so that the wound does not quickly harden, keep it for several days: and administer lytta from dry linseed, then treat the rest with the remaining treatment until it heals.
And when the birth of a child takes place in the womb, the birth of flesh should take place: therefore it is necessary for this method to be followed: that, while there is no scrofulous disease, there should be no opposition with iron at all, since it would cause opposition from the scrofula in the womb.
Regarding the care of hemorrhoids, Athézel and BOTHOR (a red rash) in the vagina of a woman.
CHAPTER LXIII.
Hemorrhoids are an opening of the anal openings, from which runs much blood frequently.
But when the ancient hemorrhoids have become thorny, then they are thorny; and I have said already in dividing their kinds and signs: and let me say here what receives cure from them, and what does not.
I say then that the hemorrhoids which are in the womb-opening, and do not appear sensible to touch: then is no cure for them with iron.
But which are of these hemorrhoids are in the womb-opening above the place where the sense [of touch] drops, they are those which cure.
It is then necessary that you should bring the woman to a cold house.
Then extend the thorny threads upon it, or a sharp cloth, and cut it from its roots.
Then dust them over with a powder near the flow of blood from one cut without touching them: like acacia, and dragon's blood, and saffron, and such things to them.
Then push her feet against the wall an hour long.
Then let her lie in cold water.
If the flow of blood persists: then let her sit in a decoction of sumach, and of saltpetre, and of galangal, and such things.
Then take barley-flour, and make it into a paste with honey and vinegar, and make a poultice therewith upon her back.
But if blood should go along with it, then is good; and if not, let the back be adherent to wind and to bumps, without touching.
Then take wool, and dip it into the taractous juice, or into the tongue-root juice, or into the branch-root juice, that is, it shall be glad, and into Pontic wine, and let it adhere to her loins.
But when the apothesis has become quiet, then take care of the place with ointment, until it be whole.
Albarth verily is like to heads of garlic, and is sharp in appearance.
Then cut off what appears there, according to what I said in the thorny things equally: and take care of it, until it be whole.
On perforation that occurs in the womb.
Caput LXXIIII.
Accidunt in matrice species multae apostematum, sicut cancer, et apostema lapideum, et ulcera, et adubelati, et alekilati, id est, herpes, aestiomemus, et fistulae, et hemorroides, et ragadiae, et thelil, et apostema calidum.
Et ego quidem iam dixi omnes has aegritudines et species earum, et signa ipsarum, et earum curationes in diuisione: necesse est ut dicam in hoc tractatu apostema calidum quod accidit in matrice, quando est ex apostematibus quae colligunt saniem, et uis scire qualiter fit eius apertio cum ferro.
Oportet ergo ut consideres.
Tunc si dolor apostematis in incaeptione sua est acutus cum percussione sua, et flamma, et febre: et uides ipsum rubere: si cadit super ipsum sensus, tunc non properes cum perforatione eius: et cura ipsum cum eo eo quod iuuat super maturationem, donec quando quiescat acuitas accidentium.
Tunc oportet ut facias sedere mulierem super sedem quae labeat duo sedilia, et reclinetur, uel appodietur super dorsum suum, et aggreget pedes suos ad partem inferiorem uentris: et sint coxae eius expansae, et ponat brachia sua sub genibus suis, et liget utraque ligamento conueniente ad illud.
Deinde sedeat obstetrix a latero dextro, et administrat instrumentum quo aperitur orificium matricis.
Cuius forma uenit in eis quae sunt post.
Et oportet quando uis administrare hoc instrumentum, ut figas cum Radio profundum matricis mulieris: ut non sit illud quod ingreditur ex instrumento plus, quam profundum matricis, et laedat infirmam.
If, however, the instrument is deeper than the wound, then you should place a small pad on top of the deep matrix: to prevent the instrument from entering the entire depth of the matrix; and you should place a small spring at the upper side of the instrument that runs along the length of it; and hold the instrument, and turn the assistant's spring so that it does not open until the deep matrix is exposed.
When, however, the exit appears and is touched by hand, and it is soft and smooth: then you should separate it at its head with a small chisel on the side.
When, however, the wound is drained, then you should place a lime wood rod immersed in olive oil: or olive oil, in which there is some stiffness; and place the lime wood, and remove a piece from the deep matrix.
And place outside on the matrix, and over the wool felt washed with water, in which there are some red spots:
Then care for it after two days with a ointment that suits it, until it heals.
And when the matrix is washed and the wound so that it swells with water and honey: then with water in which there are some red spots of lily root, or long aristo: then return to the ointment.
That if the wound is hidden deep within the matrix, then you should refrain from treating it with iron, but rather care for it along with it as we have said in the division.
Doctrines of obstetrics, how embryos are treated according to a abnormal exit shape.
Chapter LVII.
It is necessary for the obstetrician to know in advance the normal shape of birth.
So then are the signs of this: when you see a woman compressing towards her lower abdomen, and desiring to smell the air, and letting go on her when she is above her, and hastening out in an exit, then know that this birth is according to the normal shape, and is going out before it, and second with it: or suspended, or hanging from the navel. So when you see these signs, then it is necessary that the abdomen be compressed so that the embryo falls faster.
But whoever is beyond this birth, is unnatural, deplorable.
For when the fetus ever comes out of his feet, and the body of him goes before the head thereof, and his feet and hands one or two together, or his head and hands: or if he come forth with his belly and back: and perhaps he turneth over upon his neck, and other like figures deplorable.
Therefore it is necessary that the Midwife, be prudent, subtle in these things, and guard herself from error and deception: and I am showing all form of them, and what is understanding in it, and signifies by it, and points at it.
When the fetus ever comes out of his head with its natural exit, and becomes hard to him part, and you see his virtue already weakened: then let her sit on a chair, or let women hold her: and sprinkle her with the juice of fennel, and with wet oils.
Then the Midwife shall put her little spatula between her fingers, and find with him a second time, and dry up her nail with it, until she runs out what is in her from moisture: and press the belly of the woman, until the fetus falls.
But if it does not fall, then it is necessary that the woman be cleaned out with the juice of fennel, with sesame oil.
Then command her after the cleaning, to compress: and make her sneeze with a handkerchief, and hold her nose and mouth at the same time.
For the fetus will come out immediately.
That if two hands of the fetus come out first, it is necessary that you reduce them with ease gradually.
But if he does not obey in the introduction, then put the woman on a seat, and raise her feet up: then set the seat on the ground: and the woman should hold so that she does not fall by the concussion.
But if they do not come out the hands, and the fetus dies: then cut them, and take away the residue of the fetus: and tie his hand with a cloth, and take it out with equality: for he will come out himself.
The exit of the embryo on her own feet.
When the fetus comes out on his own feet, then it should be pushed up: then turn the fetus slowly: then make it equal.
Then take one of her feet, and extend it slowly.
But when they come out up to the hips, then order her to compress, and make her sneeze with a condiment: for she will come out if God wills it.
And if he does not come out with me when I tell you, then reduce the fetus slowly, until you put it back in the natural shape.
For himself will come out when you make an easy exit.
That if it is prohibited with me all that I have told you: then take from the mucus of the aloe, and oil of sesame, and gumme that has been dissolved: and hit everything in the mortar with a good beating: and then put down on the woman's lower parts, and close them.
Then make her sit in warm water until she has a hyperacidity.
But when you see that her lower parts are now warmed, then make her sniff myrrh: and support him.
But when she holds the sniff for an hour, then make her sit on a seat.
Then make her sneeze: and squeeze her mouth and nose: and press gently the lower part of her leg with a light compression.
For the fire will come out immediately.
The exit of the fetus on her knees and hands.
When you exit this form, then apply your hands gradually.
Then, the woman should lie down on her back and have her feet hanging down to the ground; and she herself should lie on a bed and spread her hands out wide.
Then, he should gently press against her belly.
Then, he should pull out what is underneath her feet from the groin area until she is prepared at the bottom part.
If it does not exit as a fetus, then take her feet and move them with a rapid motion.
Then, he should gently press what is above the groin area gradually until the fetus ascends to the top.
Then, he should insert his hands and stretch out the fetus gradually: and instruct the woman to compress, until it exits.
The exit of the fetus hanging downward from the hands.
Then, he should take his hands away.
If he cannot reduce her, then he should ease the woman and have her walk.
However, if walking is not possible, then have her lie down on a bed: and shake her legs with a rapid motion.
Then, administer the lubricant you prepared from mucus.
If she catches it during delivery, then have her sit on a seat.
Then, study the hands for reduction: and keep the fetus in the shape of a ring: and instruct the woman to sneeze, and tell her to compress herself, until it exits.
The exit of the fetus over its own head, with spread hands, and its face towards the back of its mother's body.
It is necessary that the Obstetrician hold the fetus by the hands: and then rotate it gradually, and stretch it with ease.
When it is equalized, then place it on a cushion we prepared from oil and mucus.
Then, instruct her to move her arms gradually.
So when you have done that, then make her sit on the seat, and order her to lean towards the right side.
Then order her to compress [the wound] and make her sneeze while she is compressed.
Exit the fetus prepared on the side.
When it descended to the opening of the womb in this way with the second [child], then tear the second [child] with your fingernail until it is discharged from the moisture.
But if he is suspended on the surface of the fetus, and his neck, then cut him from the umbilicus  [navel]: so that he does not hold back, and dies.
Then push the fetus towards the inside until you have placed it  [ đúng vị trí]: and order the woman to compress herself at times: for he will come out from the opening easily.
Exit of twins, or of a multiple fetus.
You should know that twins are often born: and sometimes three, and four.
However, that is rare, and seldom happens.
But five is a thing outside nature, and they do not live happily together: and it holds them back, although they multiply, the second one only: and separates them with a chasm, distinguishing between them by a tied string at the navel of each.
And when they come out it is like the coming out of a natural fetus, easily: and they come out with a loud noise, as we have told you. If any one of them is difficult to bring forth at birth, and seeks to go back into what we have said in regard to unnatural shapes, then take care of them as we have told you: and let her lie on a soft bed, and make her do what she does easily and slowly, and follow all the form with which it is prepared by nature leading to salvation.
When one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten are formed in the womb: and I have proved with myself that a woman has emitted seven, and another fifteen, all formed.
What was done by the measuring of the glorious sage.
This therefore must be so that it is in the science of Obstetrics. For perhaps this will lead to a comparison with its like; therefore oppose it with him what is necessary
On the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you care for a dead fetus with what I said in the division on medication, and it does not come out, and you are forced to use the operation by hand, then you must consider.
If therefore the woman is of sound virtue, and is not with any of the accidents from which she fears a loss: then it is necessary that the woman lie down on her bed, on her back, and have her head inclined downward, and her legs raised: and the midwife should hold her by the two sides, or tie her to the bed, so that her body is not extracted with the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the womb of the mother with oil moistened with mucilage of algues and fenugreek, and seedlinseed: Then the midwife should bathe her hands with these oils and mucilages; then she should enter the woman's womb with ease.
Then she should ask where she should place her feet from the fetus, and the right places for that.
Consider then, if the fetus is prepared to come down on top of its head: then place the umbilical cord on her eyes, or on her neck, or in her mouth, or in her palate, or under her beard, or in her armpits, or at places near her ribs, and under her breasts.
If however the descent is on her feet: then in her rib cage, and in her ribs.
And it is necessary that she hold the umbilical cord with her right hand: and let her rub it in what is between the fingers of her left hand: and she should enter with ease with her hand, and place the umbilical cord in one of those places that we have said, until it is free.
Then extend it with an equal extension, and do not have only one extension, but move it on all sides, to relieve its exit: as is done with a tooth when it is being extracted.
And you should put it between those so that the extension becomes softer.
That if a part is held back from it, then the midwife should place some fingers with oil on it and insert them from that side so that they turn around with it as she holds it back.
If then a part of the baby comes out, then the hooks should be changed to another place that is higher: do this until the whole baby has come out.
If then the hand comes out before the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to its constriction: then, a cloth should be put on top of it.
Then pull it out until it comes out all at once, cut it or place it in the cradle, or lay it down: and you should do the same on the other hand, and on both feet.
But if the baby's head is large, or if it has a constriction during its exit, or if water has gathered in its head: then, with a spittle that has thorns, find out with it the head and remove the water; or break it off with an instrument called Almisdak, whose shape comes from the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter after this.
Similarly, do this if the baby is of a large nature of head: then, an algengematum should be separated: or pull it out with Misdak, as we have said.
Then pull out the bones with forceps.
If then a head comes out and is constricted by the fork: then wait until the water that is in its chest is discharged.
But if it is not complicated, and does not yield to death: then incise the head in haste, according to what is possible for you.
That if the lower part of the leg is swollen, or there is hydrops in it: then you should drain it, until the fluid comes out.
But if the fetus is above the feet, then its attraction is easy, and its direction towards the mouth of the mother is light.
But if it is constricted at the navel, or at the chest: then you should lift it up with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand: and cut open the navel, or the chest, until what is inside comes out.
But if they take away the remaining member, and bring back the head: then the midwife should insert her left hand. But if the mouth of the mother is open: then you should insert your hand into the depth of the womb, and seek out the head, and draw it with your fingers towards the mouth of the womb: then you should insert one hook, or two hooks, and draw it towards you with them.
That if the mouth of the mother is constricted, because of the hot sweat that comes to it: then it should not work on the fetus, but then you should administer an infusion of liquids, and thick substances: and apply poultices: and sit in water that softens and moistens.
That if the fetus is above its side, then it is possible to make it even: then administer what we have said for a single fetus.
That if that is not possible, then cut it in haste, and remove it.
And you should not leave anything inside at all.
When you have finished your operation, then administer what we have said about the hot sweats that come to the wombs.
That if blood comes out: then go down into the Strictive waters, and administer the remaining cure.
And indeed I have already seen a woman, in whose womb the fetus was dead: and then impregnated on top of it another wicker, afterwards the fetus died another also.
Then he happened to her after a long time a scar in the navel, and it swelled up until it was opened and began to discharge pus.
So he called me to cure her, and I treated her for a long time: but the wound did not heal.
Then I put over it some kind of strong plaster: and he came out of place by the mouth.
Then a few days passed, and he came out with another mouth.
So I marveled then, when there is no mouth in the belly.
So I thought, because there were bones of a dead fetus.
I asked about the wound, and I took out many bones, to the woman who was in better condition: and now it did not last long at all, and discharged a little pus from place.
And I do not hold this strange, unless that in it is the science, and help to it, which the artisan-doctor administers with his hand in the cure.
On the forms Of the Instruments necessary In extracting the fetus.
Chapter LVII.
Here below is the form of the Strappado, which are equal to two scrolls in two extremities of two pieces of wood.
However, this Vertiginous should be made so as to be subtler in the Strappado: and for it to be made either from ebony or from wood of bush.
And let the width of each wood be as two fingers: and the edge of either of them be as one finger, and the length of each of them be a palm and a half less: and there shall be in the middle of the two woods two pieces of the same kind of wood, which are both firm, their length being a palm and a half more and a little less: and the width of either of them be as two fingers or a little less.
And these two additions are inserted into the jaw, so that it opens up with them when you turn your head to the left and right.
Form of vertigo which opens the jaw.
Other form, similar to it but finer and lighter.
Let it be made from wood of ebony, or from resin, according to the similarity of the hooks.
However, at the end there are two additions, as you see here above: and the length of each addition from them is almost a nut: and the width of either is, two fingers.
So when you are going to open the jaw with it, then make the woman sit on a bed, hanging her feet from the side: and open what is between her shoulders.
Then introduce these two additions joined together into the jaw: and you hold the end of the instrument between her thighs.
Then open your hand with the instrument, as you do with the hooks, equally according to the quantity which you wish to make by opening the jaw of the mother: until the obstetrician does what she wants.
Form of vertigo other than that which the ancients said, Form driving the fetus.
Form of almisdax, which grinds the small head. Form of vincum having one spike.
Form of vincum having two spikes.
Form of the hook which has saw teeth, with which the head of the fetus is ground.
Form of spatumilis having two ends to cut the head off.
Form of the two spatulamilia also broad.
These instruments are all used, and the more they multiply in kind, and are prepared by the artisan, the faster they carry out their work, and the higher among men because of their quantity.
Do not then despise these instruments, for they are prepared for you.
It is not excusable that necessity of them.
[On the extraction of the second part].
Head CXLIV.
When the second child is held back at the time of delivery, then you should prevent the weak one from being taken away, so that he may retain his desire.
Then put it in place with a press; and firmly hold your hand upon its nose, and the nostrils of it.
If then he goes out through this, it is good.
If not: then take a wand, and pierce in the lid an aperture: and put into it herbs opening the mouth of the mother, such as calamus, rue, anise, camomile, chamomile, cassia-wood, and centaury; take all these herbs, or some of them, and boil them in water, and put them on the fire.
Then put a twig of oak into the aperture of the jar, and another at the other end in the mother's mouth; and let it remain until the vapor comes to the congealing of the mother's milk.
Then put it in place for sneezing, as we have said.
The second child will then come out with ease.
If it remains after this cure, and does not come out: then order the midwife to dip her hand in oil of sesame, or mullein. Then she should put it into the whelk, and ask where the second child is.
When then finds it, then let her take it, and extend it slowly.
If it is attached to the milk deep down, then put your hand in, according to what we have said, until you find the second child, and gradually take it out, so that the mother' s milk does not come off with a sudden pull: but it should be turned by degrees to the right and left: then add attraction.
For then it obeys, and is withdrawn, and is separated from the adhesions.
If the umbilical cord is tied, as we have already related: care for it with sterilizations and from the medicated ooze with herbs.
But if it does not go out with all that we have related, then be careful not to tire yourself out in the extraction process.
It is true that when it comes out of the womb, there should be a few drops of blood on the woman's legs.
Then cleanse her with the four-fold ointment.
For it will corrode her after a few days, and dissolve away, and come out.
But when it putsrefies, let an evil smell go out from her to the stomach and head, and hurts that one with illness.
Therefore, let appropriate suffumigations be administered to that one.
Some, however, have long since experienced the suffumigations of nasturti and dried fennel.
Form a tool for suffumigation to the woman during the second and menstrual days.
Let it be made from a kind of wormwood or fennel, and let it be placed at the end of a fire; and let the suffumigation be put on plums: hold it in place until that suffumigation is consumed: and then take another one.
¶ Of the cure for the wound do not pierce.
Chapter LXXXIX.
Many boys are born, and their umbilical cords are not pierced, which have now been softened by the subtle siffar.
Therefore, let the midwife pierce it with her finger: and if she does not, then pierce it with a sharp awl: and be careful of the rope, so that it does not touch it.
Then put on top of it the wool soaked in wine and oil.
Then care for the wound with ointment until it is healed.
But if you are aware that he has been drugged, then put a plumb-line in the hole for several days, and remove it when the boy wants to urinate.
And also it happened that An was affected by a wound due to either consolidation or abscess.
It is necessary therefore that this consolidation be removed, and then it be cured with the one that we have said about cure and plucking. § On the Cure of Fistulas That Occur in the Lower Part.
Head 80.
Fistulas that occur in the lower part are a nodulation and grossness that occurs close to the anus or in the space of one of the parts; and there is one fistula or several.
And when this nodulation has been broken open, it will open and run out from it a watery white discharge, or pus.
And when these fistulas are penetrating.
And there are fistulas when they penetrate into the space up to the skin, and up to the edge of the testicles.
And there are fistulas that penetrate up to the joint of the hip, and up to a nodule at the tail.
From this one, when it is recognized that a penetrating fistula goes up to an organ, and not from a non-penetrating one, is, as you put your finger on the anus: and try to put in it a little thin wire of metal: when there is no bending.
That if there is a bend in it, then put in it a little wire of lead or a needle from the hair of a horse, until you feel the attempt, or a needle in your finger.
That if you do not feel it itself, and does not come out from any opening of defecation, and no windiness, and no skin as I said: then you will know that it is not penetrating: so go on to the cure.
And when a fistula is penetrating up to the testicles, or up to the edge of the urinary meatus: then its meaning is the exit of urine from it, and its prohibition from this so that the place consolidates with medicine.
If it really does penetrate as far as the joint of the hip, or as far as the hip itself: then its sign is that it should reach this far, if there is no tortuosity as far as the mouth: and there is a sensation of pain in the surrounding part, and that it always comes out pus from it: and that it does not heal with ointment, nor hardens with the application of unguent.
And in these fistulas, if they all penetrate, there is no cure at all: and the cure of them is toil and old age, from foolish doctors, for whom a form is created. But in that which is not penetrating, and not old, there is hoped for a cure with a severance: for I tell you, and I have already proved it: and it is, let the sick man lie between your hands on his back: and rub down his legs all the way up to his hips, and his hips should be bent towards his abdomen.
Then, after introducing a plunger, or air, if there is a tortuosity in the fistula, until you know where the tentacle reaches.
But if the sick person feels it around a certain part, then it is necessary to introduce your index finger into that part.
But if you feel the tentacle already penetrated into himself detected, besides that you feel it between your finger and the skin, or meat: then therefore you know certainly, that it is penetrating: do not work in it, because there is no cure for it, as we have said.
But they said that he is cured in some people with meat, and from the medication by which he hopes to relieve, is, that one should light a fire of fine caustic substances according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before, and introduce that fire into the fistula, until it reaches around a part.
Then repeat that again twice, or three times, until you know that all those added meat, filtered through, which are similar to a feather of an owl, have been burned away.
Then that wound with a cold-water wash in butter, until the flesh comes out, which is dry: then that wound with an ointment that generates flesh and solidifies it.
If therefore it heals, it is good.
And if not, then it does not heal with any other cure.
And if it comes out with a straw and does not reach the tip of your finger, which is in the anus, and is between it and the straw a thick flesh-like substance, or snot: and you will see a fistula on its surface; then dry off the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and let the straw run dry wherever it reaches the end of the extremities, and let the straw come out and fall.
Then cleanse those filthy meats, which resemble the feather of a bird in the ear, so that nothing remains of them.
If however blood annoys you, and dissolves between you and between your operation as it separates those meats: then it is better that it happens so, and faster to heal with a burn, to cauterize it with fire, or with sharp medicine.
For the burn with fire جمع the good habits, to the burning of that flesh, and to the stopping of blood, and drying up of moisture.
Then that wound with a cold-water wash in butter, or crushed clays, until the place lets out puss, and the dry flesh comes out in puss.
Then that wound with an ointment that solidifies and generates hard flesh: and there are medicines in which are sterilizations and drying up.
For when they are washed, then it is healed at once: and do not put off the cure. If however the fistula has reached deep into the anus, and it is elongated by the overflow of the body's fluid: then put your finger into it, and feel with it.
And if you feel the straw between you and it, and there is a thick substance of snot or flesh near the penetration: then there is no cure in that, except after another visit of trust and hope.
That is, because it is administered in him of the two ways: either as cauterizes herself, as we said: or separates her, until the consequences of her converge, so that it is possible for you to intrude liciniae, and cure from next.
And do not proceed much with the section, so that you do not hit a serpentine containing member, and happens on an exit of infirmity without will. Then care for that with him that we have said. Perhaps is he will be healed: or you lengthen the same limb, and clean it up until close to a member, as we have said, or with a probe, or with another acute extremity.
Then clean those filthy meats which are in the section, until where you can with scrutiny.
Then endeavor to restoration of the wound of all the section, and hole if it consolidates: and remains a open fistula in the inner part of the anus, and will be lighter on infirmity.
And sometimes follows this way: and it is when you introduce a probe in the fistula: and it is in the side of the anus near to the surface of the body with skin and margin of the anus: then take the probe of the acute extremity which is as a needle of awl, that is, preparational core, following this form.
And introduce into her the thread of five threads, and around her.
Then introduce a probe with a thread in the fistula, until the consequences of its converge.
If then it penetrates into the margin of the anus near, then extract the thread from that hole: so that you introduce your finger in a member, and extract the extremity of the thread, and unite both extremities together: and tighten each of them, and leave it for one day or two days: and however much the thread incises into the meat, tighten it well, until those meats which are between the two extremities of the thread strike down: then care for the wound, until it consolidates, and is healed.
For you are not to make the surgery because of the snake, so that you may not hurt yourself.
Then do it as we have said, until he is well.
The form of the spike that the fistula is found, whose depth is sharp and very sharp, and one side is not acute, so that it does not hurt the one who is not necessary, as you see.
Regarding the suture of hemorrhoids, from which blood flows from their incision: and the treatment of fissures.
Chapter LXVIII.
There are hemorrhoids in two ways.
Or they are within the anus, like carbon lumps, or prunes: or almost like grain.
And some of them are small and great: and blood flows from them always, and one is joined to the other.
And they are outside the anus, and at its extremities.
But the external hemorrhoids are, for the most part, very few in number, and of moisture, from which flows yellow water, or a little blood with constant flow: and they are, according to the color of the body.
And the cure that is within the anus, as you would have it done to the sick, so that he may soften: and be expressed, until the anus comes out, and appears to you as a little hole.
Therefore hang them with a hook: or hold them with your fingernail.
Then cut them near their roots.
If they do not hold themselves with hooks, because of their moisture and their own softness: then take them with a rough cloth, or a twig of oak, and draw them out with your fingers.
Then cut them, and sprinkle on them some hot powders after the incision, so that they stand in place of a causticum.
He cauterizes them according to what has been said in the chapter on cauterization.
Then take care of them with the remaining cure until they are cured.
That if he does not obey the exit of the stool, then let him use the stool for small enemas so that it comes out with it what is in the ano, and obeys the exit quickly when it comes out with it that which is in the ano,
If, however, they are external from the ano, then their affair is lighter, easier: and it is as if you take them with your finger, or you take them with a hook and throw them down.
Then take care of them with that which we have said, until they are cured.
And who hates incisions with iron, then it is necessary that you administer their sutures in this way.
Take a wet thread, and insert it into the cavity.
Then remove the foreign bodies from above, and let him penetrate with the point of the needle into the root on one side: and wrap the two ends of the thread around the lower part of the needle, and let them run horizontally: and tighten the foreign body with a strong knot.
Then tie a knot in the thread, and extract the cavity.
Then do the same with all the foreign bodies, and let go of one: and do not put your own finger on it, so that it runs out of the excess blood.
Then place over a cloth soaked with rose oil, or with aloes, and place the body on top of it: and order the sick person to lie down.
Then remove the body, until it falls.
So when they fall out, take care of them with ointment, and with the remaining cure, until they are cured.
On the treatment of fissures.
For often a person comes from the drying out of feces, and from the nature's contraction.
When they are slightly dried up, and do not respond to medicine: then you should scrape them with the points of the scraper, or with your own finger, until they become moist, and remove from them the upper crust that prevents them from being consolidated.
Then take care of them until they are healed as is necessary.
But if they do not heal: then treat them again with a more intense effort than before, until they bleed a lot, and then take care of them, until they are healed.
The cure for the sick with fever, and not the sick without fever: and for poison, and for a stings of insects.
Then take care of that one: and if you want to cauterize it according to what preceded in his chapter.
But from poison there is one eminent little thing, rough, filtered, rotundous on top of the surface of the body.
And it often happens in the hands of boys.
And its cure is, so that you spread out the poison, and hit it itself: or you tie it with silk thread: or with hair, until it falls off.
And if you want to, cauterize it according to what has been said above with fire, or with acute medicine: and the poison with an inverse spin is eradicated by a tool that I call. But the ant is also an eminent little thing, filtrated, coarse, on top of the surface of the body, crawling into the depth strongly: and when it finds it cold, one feels in it a similar stinging like an ant's bite, and it occurs throughout the whole body: and most of it is made in the hands.
And its cure is, so that you take a tube from the feather of a goose, or from a peacock's feather strongly: and put that tube over the ant, until it contains the circle of the tube from all parts of her.
Then with the cane turn your hand, until you separate what is around the formica; and place it in a deep flesh, and pluck out the formica from its root. And if you wish, make it with an air cane or iron, according to this shape.
Sit above the cane to the limit by pulling back the slough of the wound, so that the pressure on the finger and its turning may be eased.
And if you wish, cauterize the formica according to what has been said in the cauterization of Athelil in the chapter on cauterization.
Deformities Of Instruments That Are Used To Cleisters In Illnesses Of The Anus And Washing Out Of The Wound And Colic.
Chapter LIII.
When the clister is made of silver, or of gold-plate, or of common bronze, or of hammered bronze.
And when they are made of these instruments, small and large, according to those in which they are used.
So that what is administered in the cure of small boys shall be small, and those of their age shall have weak or sore anus, so shall also be their clisters.
The clister
The clister
The cane of its head, that is to say, the ligature of the uter, shall be wide according to this form: and let it have a distinction so as to be tied like you see, and its lower extremities which enter into the anus, are closed, that is to say, not open, soft, very delicate, drawing toward slowness: and on one side of its head there shall be two holes, and on the other side one hole.
And the size of the holes shall be according to the thickness of the rays, and the thickness of the string, and let there be in which to put the medicine from a goat's milk: or from a paper roll, which is according to the form of a small egg: whose root is one palm.
When however such a bag is placed therein, a clister in the head between the two distinctions should be strongly pulled together with a constriction.
Then the clister should be joined with it.
And this is the form of the uterus as depicted here, and the fossae. The quality of the threading with it is this: fill the uterus or apply a medicine that has been heated according to the tolerance of the nurse: and be careful not to be too hot, or too cold.
Then the patient should lie on his back and raise his legs towards the ceiling: then place the thread underneath, that is, skin over which the person will lie, or a cloth.
Then the end of the clister should be immersed in oil, or chalk, or mucus of fenugreek, or similar.
Then introduce it into a certain place with ease.
Then take the instrument with both hands at once and squeeze it vigorously until all that is in the clister has been expelled into the uterus. Then remove the clister and have the patient raise his legs towards the wall. If the medicine is to induce discharge, then hold it as long as you can.
And if he sleeps with it all night, it is more effective.
But if you thread it into the uterus during a female menstrual period, and the discharge is sudden: then repeat the threading, until the woman is healed.
That if there are hemorrhoids or itching in the anus, then a mild hot seat should be used, gently and without constriction, as it is threaded.
And this is the form of a thin clister on which there is a tight skin.
Of the treatment of wounds to the head without fracture of the bones.
caput liii.
I said ten times in the division of the cure of the wound that suited the book, and I say here the cure of them with the hand, and with medicines according to the second supplement.
I say then, that wounds differ according to that which is made a wound, and according to the place on which the wound falls.
The wounds which are often made are as many as the blows of a stone: or the cut of a sword, or of an axe, or the strike of a spear, or of a stick, or of an arrow; and like these there are many other things.
But the wounds which are made according to the places of the body are, as a wound that falls on the head, or on the neck, or on the breast, or on the belly, or on the side; and such like members.
And I am telling the cure of some wounds, that I may set forth the reasoning and rule for the rest of the wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds: because the memory of the composer will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
I say then.
I say then. When there comes to be a simple wound in the head, and there is no fracture of the bones: consider then, if it is from a blow of a stone, or similar, and already has broken the skin only: and it is a great wound, and fear for the consequences of fever: then approach and perform phlebotomy on the head immediately: and do not tarry with it: and draw out his blood according to its strength: if there is no obstacle to phlebotomy, especially if that blood which issues from the wound be little.
And let phlebotomy take place from the opposite side of the wounded part.
And let the sick person abstain from wine, and from coarse food.
But if restraint from something prevents him, then he should abstain from little food, and not approach meat, nor wine.
And put on the ulna if it happens that he has an apostema warm, a cotum infusion in oil rose water only, or with wine in which is styptics.
But if you are free from the hot apostema, then put on the ulna, if it is new with its own blood, and has not changed the air, the powder that I will describe after a little: and if it has already changed the air, then put on the skin a certain ointment, until healing.
But if the ulna is large, or is from an incision of a sword, and similar: and the lips do not collect with powder, then collect them with a stitch, according to what I will describe in the wounds of the legs about their stitches.
But if the ulna has already been removed from the bone, and hangs down, and does not hang by anything, except for a small suspension: then cut it.
Then care for the ulna with medicines, and restore in it hard flesh at the place of the skin, and order to the sick person that he eat food in which there is thickness, such as are heads, and cooked wheat, until it is as a pulse: and to him similar things.
That if the ulna is in the skin putrefaction, and does not adhere to the bone: then cut off the whole putrefied part, and throw it away: then care for that.
But if there is an artery in these wounds, or new blood flows from it: and does not cut off by medicines, then inquire about the artery.
But if you do not cut the ulna, then dry it with Spatemili, or bind it.
That if necessity compels you when you do not give what I have said, then burn it, until blood comes out.
The Mode of the Powder for the Incision.
Recipe olibani partem unam, et sanguinis draconis partes duas, et calcis non extinctae partes tres: teratur totum multum, et cribelletur: et impleatur ex eo uulnus, et constringatur constrictione bona, donec adhaereat super ipsum bene, et coaguletur cum sanguine.
Take one part of the oil of olive, two parts of the blood of a dragon, and three parts of the ashes of a non-extinct calcis: knead them all together thoroughly, and pass them through a sifter; then fill them with a bone, and tighten it with a good constriction, until it adheres well to itself and is congealed with blood.
For this medicine will not be eradicated from it until it is cured.
Then take care to this other cure, until they are cured.
For the wounds of the neck.
Chapter LXXXVI. On the wound of the neck.
If a bone has broken in the neck, there is no difference in treatment between it and a simple wound of the head.
But if a cut has already occurred in the nerve of the neck, or in an artery: then if it is a nerve, there is no skill in it unless it is treated with that which causes a sharp stinging, like Ziniar, and the numbing, and similar things:
For the nerves are hurtful and they harm them.
And do not put anything cold on the wound at all: for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is above the limbs: and let this be treated by doctors with lene, like lead mixed with sweet water sometimes infused with oil, or with rose oil, and turpentine, also when it is washed with sweet water: and other mineral stones, according to this mode, and moist unguents.
If the wound is large, then apply a stitch: or cover it with powder.
Then care for himself, until he is healed.
If on the other hand the wound is deep, or has occurred a pocket of pus in the lower part of it, then pierce it in a depressed place in that.
If the artery has already been cut and its flow of blood is followed: then separate it, or dry it up, and tie it: or causticate it, if necessity compels to do so.
If on the other hand the bone has already been hit by a gout, or all of it, and it is well as it were: then join the skin with a stitch over the cannum (gout), and do not touch the gout, but bring it back to its own shape, and reduce it.
Then tighten it with a loose stitch, and let go of it for several days.
Then care for himself with unguents, until he is healed.
If the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then inquire about it: if there are any fragments of bone in it, remove them all, or as many as you can: and as for that which is not prepared, leave it, until the wound putrefies, and its exit separates and becomes free.
If the wound is fresh, then powderize the top of it with the powder that you have spread over.
If the wound is in the nerve and has become a fistula: then care for it with that which belongs to it, as it is described in its own chapter.
The ulnar nerve in spatulas.
If, therefore, from the ulna comes a bleeding, and when he breathes he becomes weak, then know that the ulna is deadly.
That if it is not deep, and it is only a little with blood: then do not put powder on it at first hour, nor bind it so that the blood does not go into its depth, and go back to the heart, and makes it weak: but put on it an attractive ointment, and loosen it twice a day.
If, however, the ointment is not present with you, then put in the wound a clean cotton cloth, that it may suck out what goes out of it from the humors: and let the sick man sleep on the ulna, that what is gathered in it may run out.
If, however, three or more days have passed since the wound, and there has happened no spasm to the sick man, nor a bad tremor of the heart, nor a contraction in the breath, and you see its other dispositions good: then know that the ulna is saved.
Take care of it, and with gentleness, and with the whole cure, until it is healed.
If, however, its healing is completed, and it has now opened always, then know that it has now become a fistula.
Take care of it from its own chapter.
And if the ulna is from an incision of a sword or a knife, and it is simple on the surface of the back, or of the back: then take care of that with what went before from the stitch, if it is large: or with powder, if it is small.
But if it has already made an impression on the bone, and has come out of it with a crack: then ask about the ulna, and hurry to remove those cracks, if they are separated.
If they are not separated, then let them go until the marrow rotten, for extraction of them allays the pain.
But of the remnants of the wound and accidents in the remaining member in the cure, is the judgment which we have spoken of.
De wounds of the belly, and the exit of the intestine, and the emergence thereof.
Chapter LXXVII.
The rupture which happens to the belly, is great, and medium, and small.
Therefore when and how the intestine emerges, or the number of intestines.
Why does this intrusion happen, and their suture is more painful and difficult.
And the small disruption also happens to be difficult from a different mode.
Follows that, as for the reduction of them is more difficult, if you should not be careful about the intrusion into its place immediately: because it swells up, opens, and thickens: why does the entry become difficult?
Therefore this type of disruption is better than the small one: because when the reduction of the intestine does not become difficult, like it does in these two species.
Know that the suture of the belly is according to four ways.
Two common sutures meet in the suture of the belly, and the suture of the remaining wounds of the body: and two other sutures properly communicate with the remaining wounds.
However, they are more proper when it is a suture of the belly: and I will tell you at each time with an exposition and explanation. I therefore say, that when the wound is small, and something of the intestine emerges from it, and it is difficult to reduce it: then it is because of one or both of these two species.
Or because of the smallness of the disruption, as we have said: Or because there is swelling in the intestine from cold air.
When therefore that is so, then you must heat the wound, so that it is submerged in a sponge, or a wet cloth in warm water by itself.
I will decocciate [decocculate] it in water, and fennel, and spice, and imbibe [imbibe] it with the intra-intestinal embrocation until the swelling subsides.
When the wine in which there is stenosis: and it is better than water alone in resolving the swelling.
When therefore you see that the swelling has already resolved, then dampen the intestines with water in which the decoccultation is made, or worse.
For by it the entrance of it is alleviated when it is small.
If however the departure of it is excused after this treatment, then find in disruption a little, with an instrument wherewith they are held together.
And the first cure is better when it is prepared, than to operate: and there is no coercion in operating after necessity and want of instrument.
Let one part of it be which is twisted, acute, and the other part not acute, and the extreme soft not with the softness of Spatulimis, but rather harder a little: and this is that which resembles caiada, as you see it.
When therefore the tendon is enlarged and the intestine enters, then it should be, that it is reduced according to its own natural form in its own place, if possible above it: for it is better.
When however the disruption is wide in the lower part of the womb: then you should, that you make lay sick on his back, and put his legs higher than his head.
And if it is in the upper part of the womb, then you should, that you raise its head and its breast higher than its lower part.
And likewise if the disruption is in one of two parts of the womb, then you should, that portion which has the tendon be higher by the other part.
And so it should be, that you admit it into large wounds, and into middle-sized wounds.
In wounds however small, place it according to what is prepared for you.
Then make it so that a faithful servant sits between your hands, who holds the whole laceration in his hand: and add to them lips.
Then find out from him who follows the seam something after something: and this is a way of common sewing one seam.
And it is so, that you take up now, or number now according to the quantity of the width of the wound.
Then let go from the end of laceration quantity of finger ring, that is, measure: and fix now one more than you put into it thread in two ends of skin, with two ends of syphac which is under skin from within, until you make it penetrate from other part, and thou already have added two ends of skin, and two ends of syphac: and there are four orders.
Then tighten with thread double in circumference accus some from both sides at the same time, until there are added two lips of wound to the aggregation decenting.
Then let go also the thickness of finger and fix in them now another: then make it straight with thread, as you did with the first.
So do not cease to do that thing with him when he holds him from the acubukus, until you finish the constriction of wound of all.
And let there be accus medio between the thickness and subtility: for acus subtile very quickly incide flesh: and grossae are difficult entry into skin: therefore let there be accus medio in subtility, and in thickness.
And it is not necessary, that acus be fixed in two ends of skin proxime बहुत: lest flesh very quickly incide, and open wound before its consolidation, and do not also elongate with the sew, lest wound be prevented from its consolidation.
Then cut off end of accus so that they do not hurt the sick near its sleep: and put them feathers from cloth from all part, which hold the ends of accus: and let go them, until you know that wound is already consolidated.
And this kind of stitch with acutely pointed needles is indeed more convenient for small wounds.
Since one, or two, or about them will suffice.
The second kind of stitch is common, as you gather the four ends: the two ends of the skin and the two ends of the suture in one thread, with an aiguille whose point is refined in subtility and thick in bulk.
Then when you pierce with the needle these four ends, bring them together from the part where you began, so that the thread is relaxed from the upper part of the wound: so that the stitch is made, as it were, like a stitch in a piece of cloth which is gathered up, and place between each stitch the quantity of thickness of a small finger.
This kind of stitch is known to men.
And with this stitch I sewed up a wound on a man's abdomen, which had been cut with a knife, and the cut was about an inch deep: and two inches from the mid-gut emerged two inches of small intestine, and in the middle of the groin there was a break.
So I reduced that after he had been standing for twenty hours.
The wound then was consolidated in the space which had been about fifteen days: and I cared for him, and he recovered: and after that he lived for many years, enjoying his usual health.
And the doctors judged that he would not recover.
And it was a miracle, for I healed him with ointment.
Since I was in a place where the ointment could not be obtained, and there were no doctors.
So I placed on the wound a fresh cloth twice a day, and kept up the washing with honey water until it was healed.
Two kinds of stitch are described by the author according to the context of his narrative.
And it is, as you begin with the sharp stitch: and insert the needle from the outside into the inside part.
When the needle has penetrated into the skin, and runs along in accordance with the length and breadth of the whole body: let go of the end of the thread which you inserted from outside into the inside, and let it run through the other end from the interior part to the exterior at the opposite end.
And when you have made it penetrate thus, then make it penetrate in this way, in that same end, the mirach from the exterior part to the interior: and dismiss the end sifac, which is in this side, and make it penetrate now in the other end from the interior part to the exterior: and make it penetrate with your penetration, as you do when you make it penetrate in the sifac end of the mirach, which is in his part, until it penetrates all of it.
Then also begin from this same side, and also yourself with the end, which is from sifac in the other side, and now remove it from the skin where it has penetrated.
Then reduce it into that skin, and also the end sifac, which is in the other side, with this end mirach: and remove it out of that skin which is from his part, and make that one thing, and another: and make that other thing after that one, until they are both outside altogether according to that example.
And the summit of this suture is as their suture which sews the skin together: so that their end sifac one from part of the skin: and that you dismiss it the other one from the other part, until you finish.
Second species of suture, which was said by Galen.
This speech has been told, as if their are some who make them come together in the same way that they are by nature: and apply the end sifac to the other end of it, and the end mirach to the other end.
And this one is made as I tell you.
It is necessary that you make it now in the end of the mirach which is near to you from the exterior part, and make it penetrate into the interior in this one alone: and dismiss the two ends of sifac.
Then reverse now, and make it penetrate from the exterior part to the interior in the two ends of sifac, that is, on both sides.
Then reverse the other two also, and make them penetrate from the interior to the exterior in the two ends of the mirach, which are on the opposite side: and make it so that both penetrations can be seen outside.
And this method of suture is better than the common facile suture, and it is a suture whose predecessor was remembrance.
This is therefore the speech of Galen also.
And said someone.
The suture of the hand with two thorns.
That is, so that you put one thread through both: and start with the insertion of the thorn, from the fact that it is with you, and let it penetrate until the side of the other, according to the sutures of their coriums which are equal.
And know that when the rupture is in the middle of the hand: then the suture of it is more difficult than the remaining places of the hand.
The judgment of the cure of the wound, is the judgment of the other wound.
That is, because when you achieve a wound with its blood, before it changes itself: and reduce the intestines, and their own things, and fit themselves: then put it on the powder of the carnation.
That is, if the air has already changed the wound: then put on the wound a certain ointment, which are present with you, until they make a pus: and let the threads fall, and harden the sifac, and heal.
Then the cure of that is like the cure of the other wound, until it heals.
If they are not present with you the medications, then put on the wound immediately, from the fact that it begins to emit pus, and changes the old one: and change the wound twice a day, as I have taught you, until it heals.
If you are the case, that a wound communicates with the main members in injury, then it is necessary that you immerse the wool in oil of temperate warmth, or in rose oil: and put it on the wound in the circumference of the places which are between the hips, and under the armpits.
That is, if it feels pain, or punctures, or corruption in its intestines (for this often happens): then stir up the wound with wine of strychnum, black, warm: especially if the putrefaction has already reached the intestines, and a penetrating matter has appeared until its completion.
And you shall know that what is from the large intestine is easier to heal; and that what is from within it is more difficult to heal.
And the intestine which is called the jejunum does not accept healing from a wound that has occurred therein at all; and this is because of its multitude, which is from within it, and its size, and its subtlety in the body, and its nearness in the nature of nerves.
But if that which proceeds from the wound is small, and you manage it carefully: reduce it according to your reduction, so that you reduce the intestines equally.
But if there is space left, and it has already been infected with pus or blackened: then you should tighten it with a thread above the place that has become corrupted from it, so that blood does not flow.
For in the intestine are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament, and put two ends of a thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside the intestine: so that it will alleviate its attraction towards you, and its extraction at the site of the wound on the side of the ring, and the emission of pus from the wound.
This is a reminder of a wound that has occurred in the intestine.
When the rupture has occurred in the intestine, and it is small: then it is possible for some people to be restored; because I saw one who was wounded in his belly with a lance thrust, and there was a wound on the right side of his stomach, and it was an old wound; and a fistula developed from it, and effluents came out of it, and there were windstorms.
So I applied the treatment, until I was not confident in its healing; and I did not pay close attention to it, until it had healed, and the place had become consolidated.
After I saw the place now consolidated, I feared for the illness that might occur in his belly: and it did not happen to him from that accident any bad occurrence.
He remained in better health, eating and drinking, and enjoying himself, and entering a bath, and exercising his exercises.
And some experimenters said that because when there is a stab in the intestine and it is slight: then it should be tied according to this manner.
And is, so that you take flies of big heads.
Then collect two lips of the wound, and place one fly out of these which have an open mouth over two lips of the wound.
And so, when it has a head on it, and ties its mouth, cut off its head, because it clings, and does not loosen itself.
Then place another fly next to the first one, and do not stop doing this with the fly after a second quantity of the wound's size.
Then reduce the wound, and tie it up.
That head remaining attached to the intestine, until it is fed with the intestine, and heals up, and does not cause any harm to the inside completely. And it is possible that the intestine be tied with a thin thread also: which is removed from the animal's intestine, joined to it after it has entered into the bag.
And is, so that you take the end of this thread out of the intestine, and cut off a lot of it.
Then tie the end of this thread with a thin cloth wrapped around it.
Then insert this thread into the bag, and tie the intestine with it.
Then reduce the wound in a rupture. And this method of sewing with flies and intestine is no better than a second trust or hope.
You know, a wound that is large and broad, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines: then is no device but cutting away, nor is its healing at all.
Of the care of Zuchem, and of Fistulas.
Head LXXVIII.
You know, that every wound, or ulcer when it grows old and dries up, and turns into a sore, and does not heal over, and always discharges pus, and does not close: then it is called generally a fistula wherever it may be in any member: and we call this same Zuchem.
And the fistula is indeed a node of inflammation that has become hard and white: when there is no pain, but the sound is shrill; and because of this, some call it what is called in Arabic 'risâ', that is, a feather.
And it is in certain hours moist, which emits pus.
And perhaps it splits into moisture in certain hours.
And when this moisture is much, and it is little; and it is thick, and it is fine.
And I have already pre-empted in the division; then when I said wounds, that every wound which does not heal, and does not arise in it flesh, is not that except for one of causes.
Of which one is that, or because of the scarcity of blood in the body; or because of its wickedness; or because it is between itself, and on its lips there is hard flesh, preventing the birth of meat; or because it has much dirt and filth; or because the wound is putrid, and the matter that is cast out from it is of bad quality; or because the remedy is inappropriate in its cure; or because the corruption falling into the region is a kind of pestilence, or through its property in the region, as happened in Caesar Augustus: in which it is difficult to digest diseases, and its recovery from pustules by nature is delayed; or because there is only one opening, or a number of bones.
And I have already shown all the stations and causes of these wounds, and their cures with doctors in a division; and it is necessary here that I should tell you about the cure of the fistula and the zakken, which is done by means of a surgical operation with the hand.
You therefore know, that the fistula happens in all the members of the body.
For from them are the fistulas which reach into large veins and arteries, or nerves, or intestines, or urinary bladder, or some of the ribs on the back, or some of the joints of the skeletal structure: such as the hands and feet: and from them are those which go up to the proximity of the main member, and others.
What then from these Fistulas is, according to this mode, of difficult cure, and does not receive benefit, and the occupation with it is labour and ignorance.
If then from the Fistulas there is any whose depth does not reach to these places which I have said: and thou shalt hope, and trust in the cure thereof, and enquire about it with it, then take it holding on of brass or iron, if the Fistula tendeth in rectitude, and inquire after it with it.
But if in the Fistula there is any tortuosity, then investigate it with a fine lead.
For lead with its gentleness softens the body, and deals with tortuosity.
That if the Fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to indicate over it with a lead.
So that you may know about the Fistula from its one opening out of its own openings.
For humidity which clisterizes itself, directs towards other openings, and runs from them.
Then inquire, according to which manner it is possible for you to know: that you may know whether there is an opening there, or a nerve, and the Fistula is concaved far off, or near: or is a Fistula one whose openings are many, and stands over all of it with great strength of your own: by your questioning which you question the sick, and by finding of pain at compression with your hand on the place, and similar indications and causes of accidents apart.
When then you are standing on all of that station with true stability, then advance to cure according to confidence: and is, as you consider then, if there is a Fistula near appearing, or in a healthy place far off from a joint, or from a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or one of the places which I have said to you: then dry up the Fistula according to what has been stated before from my narration, and remove whatever is in it from filtration, and corrupt flesh which comes forth from its opening out of the flesh, or thistle, and similar things: and cure that, until it is healed.
But if the fistula is distant and deep, and straight: then you should close it as much as you can.
Then clean it out completely of all its corrupted flesh.
Then apply the poultice of fresh meat in acute medicines: and insert it as far as you can into the fistula that you apprehended with the iron: do this often, until the acute medicine has completely eaten away all that is left in the fistula's closure from the corruption.
Then restore it with a unguent that generates healthy flesh, until it heals.
But if it does not heal with that, then cauterize it according to what we have described.
But if the cause of the fistula is an opening, and this can be confirmed by you: then examine it, and cut it out according to what I have told you: if it does not forbid you to take some flesh, or a nerve, or a main member, as we have said.
But if it is detected by you that there is some corruption and blackening in it: then shave it off, until all the corruption has been removed.
Then take care of the flesh with what heals the flesh, until it heals.
That if it does not heal, and it is discharging pus as it did before: then you should know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption.
Therefore examine it a second time, and carefully feel it, and clean it with your last strength.
Then restore it.
But if it heals, that is good: and if not, then you should know that that corruption is in a distant part of the body, which you have not reached.
So you do not have the skill to treat it, so you must let nature deal with it.
That if the corruption is in a small opening, and it is possible for you, attract it with subtle hooks that suit it.
But if there are many bones, then carefully feel for all of them, and do not let go of any of them with your strength.
If, however, you feel a contradiction from the moisture, and there is no fear or mistake in the incision, then cut those moistures and flesh, if they are there, and free the bones.
If, however, you are not prepared to remove the bones at your own time, then place over the humerus what should decay itself: and let it alone until it decays what is in the surroundings of their bones from flesh and moisture.
And guard the humerus so that it does not consolidate.
And constrict the incision which you followed in your operation.
Below place over the bone, if you wish, a soaked three times with oil: or a soaked in Egyptian ointment, or some kind of ointments.
For when those moistures putrefy, and the bones separate from them, the removal of them is relieved, and their attraction.
If, however, there is one large bone, such as the femur, or the pelvis, and similar to them, and that which has腐敗した from it is a large part: then shave that bone with the last razor, until that腐敗した and corruption are removed.
Then restore the humerus.
If, however, what is in that bone腐敗した is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to cut that bone, and cut the flesh all the way to the place where the corruption reaches: then take care of that bone, until it consolidates. And I tell you the story of the man who happened to his femur: that you may place it as an example and aid for your operation.
He was a young man of about thirty years of age, to whom there came pain in his femur, from a cause which moved within the body, that is, from within, until it reached the leg, and there was formed an ulcer great enough: and there was not for him an extrinsic cause.
So he stayed with that error of the doctors, until it opened up, and a lot of matter came out with it.
And after that his cure is delayed until his hand is healed, and many openings are made in it; which all emit pus and the moisture of the body.
So he was treated by a number of physicians for about two years, and there was no wise man in the art of his hand, until I was called; and then I saw his hand, and the matter that came out of those openings ran in great stream: also all the flesh of his body was already rotten, and his color was citrine.
So I entered one of the openings with a probe, and the probe came to the mouth.
Then I examined all the openings, and I found that they led into each other from all parts of the hand. Then I pushed, and followed one of those openings until I came to the bone: and I found it corroded, decayed, rotten, and pierced, all the way down to the marrow.
So I cut off what had been detected by me, and prepared it from corrupt bone.
And I left, for there was nothing in the bone but that corruption, which I cut away and I closed it up.
And so I had made an end of it.
Then I placed a patch of healing flesh on the wound with long-consolidated medicine.
And there was no consolidation.
Then I tried to heal it.
And it was not healed.
Then I healed it with medicine, and it consolidated quickly, and was made sound; and this repetition of the operation, and sectioning of the bone, was not necessary unless for the weakness of the nurse, and her lack of endurance, and my fear for him from death: for he suffered in all hours from a bad flow of fluid.
Sanatus est ergo sanatione integra: et nata est in loco ossis caro dura, et bona facta est dispositio in corpore suo, et rediit uirtus eius: et conuersatus est in dispositionibus suis: et non fecit ei contrarietatem in ambulatione nocumentum omnino.
If, however, the jaw is broken in a part of the body where it has already emerged: then it is necessary to tighten it according to this manner: and thus: so that you take the ligament, and tighten it in the extreme end of the prominent bone: and order someone who will stretch it upwards: and put another ligament made of coarse woolen thread on the first ligament. Then tie the ligament over the meat which is on the bone: and stretch the extreme end of it so that you pull the meat downward: and you cover the meat over the place that you wish to tighten, so that it does not hurt when you cut the meat.
Place the ligament, or a board under the bone downwardly askew: for when you do this, it does not hurt to tear the meat apart.
And it should be so that there is a tightening on the corrupted place to some extent, so that there is not the appearance of the bone's corruption: and does not appear in its appearance to the sense, and drives at the tightening of his own power. If the bone is corrupted and not prominent, then a part of it continues with another part: and corruption is in its middle or in one of its parts: then cover all meat with its part.
Then place the ligament downwardly.
Then tighten that which is on the first part where there is corruption until there is tightening from the second part: and let it be tightened according to the length from the corruption to some extent, as we have said.
If the corruption is in the joint, then cut that which is corrupted at the joint, and tighten the bone where it continues from the other part.
If, however, the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no strength in that except for a scraping.
If corruption is in the palm of the hand, or in the palm of the foot, then the matter is difficult to treat.
But you should also ask how the corruption appears to you.
And then scrape it off, and clean it up as best you can, and with whatever skill you have: when it does not give you a contrary vein or nerve.
And know that there are many knives and saws to cut these bones, according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of them, and their grossness and subtlety, and their size and smoothness and roughness of them, and their rarity.
Therefore you should prepare for each type of operation an instrument suitable for that operation.
And know, these operations demand from you to pay attention to the instrument you are holding when you are studying a long time.
And the knowledge of these ways of this art is a witness to your own health: for then you will find out through yourself what suits each illness.
The form of the saw.
The form of another saw.
The form of a third saw.
The form of a fourth saw.
This form of the saw drawn, but not well made. Let its bow be made higher, and its keenness from iron: and its handle from boxwood, and its base be made askew.
The form of a razors joined together.
Let the head of this razor be shaped according to the form of a star-shaped clau, and its points be shaped according to the form of dots of elischefigi.
And it is not suitable unless it rubs with the heads joined together when they are infected, or a wide and broad mouth, and large it is.
Major form of the razor.
Medium form of the razor.
Wide form of the razor.
Form with which it is closed.
Other thin form of the razor.
End of other thin form of the razor.
Small, thin form of the razor.
Form with which bones are cut.
Also great form of the razor.
This is similar to a radio, and the end is like a saw: it is exhibited in many places from the bone-cutting edge.
Form which is joined to its edge that is pierced through from the bones.
End of it is triangular, acute are its ends.
Fits from India.
And likewise it is necessary that all which we have said of the razors, and incisers, and saws should be.
Regarding the cutting of ends, and the locking of bones.
Head LIII.
The ends putrifie, or for an extrinsic, or intrinsic cause.
But when you have been healed with medicine, and there is no cure: and you see corruption inci
then that which is accidit to it is a sign, that the member is degraded, until it is cured: for fire has burned it, or has putrefied after decay: until it incides corruption on it, and it creeps into all the body.
Therefore with the cutting of it, and likewise if the cause of corruption is from an impact of some venenous: as the sea-scorpion, and the nightingale-fly, and the nettle-tree, and the like.
If therefore corruption, or impact is at the end of the finger, then cut the finger, and not leave space for corruption, that it may incide to the remaining hand.
And likewise if it has happened in the hand, then cut it from the root of a sharp instrument, and not leave space for corruption, until it takes hold in the sharp arm.
And if you have made an incision in it, then cut the arm at the elbow joint. But if corruption has spread and you see it around the elbow: then death is certain for that one.
And besides that cure, there is a quantity of strength.
And likewise do for the foot, when corruption has entered into the toe, then cut it at the knuckle joint: and if it enters into the sole of the foot, then cut the whole foot.
But if it ascends up to the knee, then cut the leg at the knee joint.
That if corruption has already reached above the knee, then there is no hope of recovery, except for amputation and to let go of the sick to death.
And the mode of cutting the limb, or of bending it, is so that you hold the lower ligament, which you want to cut: and stretch another ligament above the place.
And let one assistant stretch the lower ligament: and let another assistant stretch the upper ligament upwards.
And you separate the flesh that is between the two ligaments, with a chisel blade, until the whole bone is exposed.
Then cut it, or bend it.
And it should be so that you put on all parts a linen cloth, and let not the saw touch the sound place: and make an incision into the sick with added blistering and heating.
But if blood flows inward while you work, then quickly burn the place: or put on the body some powdery things that stop the blood.
Then turn back to your own medication, until it is finished.
Then bind the wounded limb with a suitable ligament, and take care of it, until it heals.
And I tell you what happened to the man in his foot: this is the same thing that I tell you.
That is, because what happened to his foot was that it got burned with fire: and that corruption first occurred in his toe, until it spread throughout the whole foot.
Then he cut the vein from itself, having observed that a corruption was spreading to the limb with its trembling, which was due to pain and chills; and he cut it near the joint, and it healed.
And after he had passed a long time, that corruption again came to his finger of his left hand. So he came to me, and I tried to restore that excess with him when I placed on his hand from the medicines after purifying his body: and the excess did not respond, and it began to tremble in another finger: until the corruption began in the hand.
So he called on me to cut his hand: and I did not want to do so, hoping from myself for a response to that excess: and I was afraid also of death upon his hand at the cutting.
Because the strength of the man was over his fall.
Afterwards he despaired of me, turned to his own land: and came to me about it, because he wished, and cut all his hand: and he was healed.
And I did not bring this narrative, except to be an aid in that which falls regarding this kind of disease: and to be a sign what means, and according as it is applied.
On the treatment of gangrenous wounds, and on the quality of cauterization with medicines.
Chapter X.
When a gangrene occurs on some fleshly part of the body, and the apothecary's space is prolonged, until it makes the collection of pus: then it bursts, or pierces, and lets out what is in it, leaving behind an empty place like a pit: and the skin which is over it is as fine cloth which has been worn away: and does not spread to the last degree of corruption, nor impresses into the mouth, the nerves, or the ligaments: it deserves to be called a Sinus: and is not called a Fistula: however if it is prolonged, until it impresses corruption onto some of these limbs, then it is called a Fistula, or a tub.
And its cure is to strike off that whole skin as it was turned over; and especially when it has been thinned out and made like a cloth; and trust that it will not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
But if you hope that the skin will adhere and there follows from it no corruption: but if in the skin is a thickness of flesh, then its cure with Clister; and is, as you should consider to the Sinus.
Then if it is great, and the pus which is discharged from it has a foul odor: then clisterize it with the Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, oil, and myrrh, parts receiving alike, mixed together in an ashpan; and let them boil on fire, until it turns red with the medicine: and let it come to a thickness of honey.
Then take from it what you need: and dissolve it with water and honey, and clisterize it with it the Sinus: and tighten its orifice, and let the medicine flow into it for a time of two hours.
Then extract it with an expression: let it be for days, until the Sinus is cleansed and the smell is removed.
And when it is clisterized with water of ash when this medicine is not present with you: and is, as you should take ash from wood of oak, or ash from holly-tree: and throw it on the water.
Then strain it, and clisterize it with it, until you trust that the Sinus is now washed away.
That if the sick person does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine and water of ash, then clisterize it with water and honey, to which has already been added some crushed myrrh.
Or clisterize it with honey and wine, since of the property of honey is to cleanse and wash away: and the wine makes the Sinus adhere, especially when there is an excess of astringency and dryness.
When you have done this a few times, and are confident that the sin has been cleansed away, then sterilize him with the poultice which he uses for birth.
And so take from the poultice a little piece of the size of an apple; and dissolve it with rose oil, and with wine-tar [i.e., wine mixed with tar]; or sterilize him with some medicines, and with other ointments whose properties I have written in my tract on ointments.
That if the opening of the sinus is tight, in which the tube of the poultice does not enter: then make it larger with iron a little; or put into it licorice which has been soaked in Egyptian ointment, or in basilicon ointment, until it increases.
And likewise if the opening is also wide, then join the lips with a stitch; and let go from it the quantity with which the poultice is made without adding anything to it.
And likewise if the opening from which the pus runs is raised up towards the top: then dry him up in a lower place which is in himself, so that the pus may run down to below: for when the pus is constricted in the depth of the sinus, it prevents flesh from being generated in it.
That if you are not able to dry the sinus completely round below it according to your wish: then try to prepare the member in such a way that the pus runs out of it with ease, in accordance with how you prepare it for yourself.
Try to ensure that nothing of the pus remains in it at all; and take medicines which are used for the sign  [i.e., the poultice], suitable to what you wish.
And spread them over the linen cloth.
And have a piece of linen of such a size that it may communicate with all the sinus.
Then cut with forceps in the direct opening of the sinus a hole which is somewhat larger than the orifice of the sinus.
Then spread over the other linen cloth, with a little quantity of ointment, in accordance with the size of the hole; and place it on the member at some distance from the opening of the sinus, so that the exit of pus from it may be allayed: and do not remove the linen cloth, except after a few days.
And yet who is above the sinus opening, he who is moved at all hours, so that it emerges from what is aggregated there from pus: and know that the virus which runs out of it is great or little; or digested or undigested.
And consider again the place of the sinus itself, does the Lord feel pain there, or is there no pain in it, and is there a swelling there, or is there no swelling?
Now when your treatment extends so long, and you see the matter that comes out over the sinus opening, then know that the sinus is already attached, or approaching attachment: then therefore حل it in the morning, or on the third day: and when you solve the wound, then change to another cloth, and renew the ointment. But if the virus comes out of the sinus after a long interval, do not despair of its attachment, for its healing approaches, for there are people who delay the generation of flesh in their wounds, and among them are those who work in an opposite way.
But if it comes out after many days with undigested pus, then know that the sinus is not attached.
But if the attachment of the sinus is delayed and its condition prolonged, then add to the exudation of medicines, indeed let the doctors make their medicine so that it be in its substance moist, and in its virtue dry: just as the ointment of daphnes, when added thereto, adds a surplus with exudation.
And from the greatest one that is cured, it is, so that you take the ointment of daphnes, and dissolve it with rose oil, and rub it on the old wound equally in its substance.
Then bind the unguent thereon, and use it.
And this same action is done by you when the ointment of daphnes is not present with you, when you boil it, until it thickens, and you use it.
Or take myrrh, and aloe, and olive oil: grind them all together, and powder it, and apply it to honey while it is on fire.
Then cut a strip of cloth long enough to go across the top of the wound, and tie it tightly across the Sinus: and with the mastic poultice which you have made, until it has thickened: and dust the wound with powder, and place it on the cloth, and tie it up.
And sometimes when it is given to him long herb aristequia, and the roots of sky-lily, and it is a lily; and barley flour, and centaurea.
Use them simple, or ground up, wash out, and sieve themselves: and dust over the honey which you have made, and use it.
If the Sinus is prolonged, and not healed with this cure: then know that there is corruption in it: or now makes an impression on the bones, or on the other hard members, or ligaments: then heal the Sinus with the cure of Fistula, as has been said. Về việc điều trị viêm niệu đạo và ngứa ran, và cắt ngón tay được thêm vào, và cắt
Đầu 71.
Panarites là một vết viêm nhỏ xuất hiện dưới móng tay cái hoặc ngón tay, và có thể xuất hiện ở các ngón tay khác.
Khi đó nếu tình trạng kéo dài và bị bỏ qua, và vết viêm trở nên nóng: hoặc nó bị hư hỏng, và tiết dịch nhầy, cho đến khi nó ăn mòn gốc của móng tay: và có thể nó hư hỏng toàn bộ, và có thể nó ảnh hưởng đến miệng, cho đến khi có mùi hôi thối: và làm tay bị cong, và màu của nó chuyển sang đen.
Vì vậy khi bạn điều trị vết viêm đó, giống như đã nói ở trên về sự phân chia, và không có tác dụng chữa bệnh nào từ bạn: sau đó bạn cần phải cạo bỏ toàn bộ phần còn lại của móng tay.
Sau đó đun nóng kỹ mông sau khi điều trị.
Vì nhiệt độ cao là điều cần thiết cho việc chữa bệnh.
Nếu xương là lành và móng tay cũng lành, và các bổ sung lỏng mỏng đang ép vào mô bên trong, và nó bắt đầu đau: sau đó bạn cần phải đặt một thứ nguyên liệu nhỏ dưới góc của móng tay bị tổn thương, và đẩy nó lên: và cắt mô với sự dễ dàng, và đặt trên phần còn lại từ các loại thuốc đốt cháy, ăn mòn, cho đến khi toàn bộ bị hư hỏng.
Then this ointment care, until he heals.
If however the decay has already impregnated the jaw, then one should break that jaw and remove it: for indeed it is not cured while it remains in it a corrupted jaw.
If you see the decay and the decay to run into the finger, then cut it at one of the joints, according to what was said above in the introduction.
Then take care of the wound, until it heals.
If however the nail is torn or struck; and there is great pain, then it is necessary that you let blood at first.
Then dry the nail with a sharp spatulium, cutting across from above to the wound.
And guard it, so that the cutting does not reach the flesh which is under the nail; for you would make happen through that a very painful injury, and it would be a cause of birth of flesh added in place.
Then take care of the place with him who sits with that pain.
The finger, however, that is born in some hands of men, perhaps is flesh all over; and perhaps there are bones in it, and perhaps there is a nail: and in some of its joints perhaps the birth is in the joint root, or perhaps it is born in certain nodules of the finger.
So then this which is born in some nodules of the finger does not move; and that which is born at the joint of the finger, perhaps moves.
That one, however, of these which is flesh, its section is easy to be made.
That is, so that you break it at its root with a spatulium blade.
But the cure for this one of whose birth is at the joint root, is difficult.
So then abstain from cutting it.
In that one, however, who is born in the finger at the very last joint, then it is necessary that you cut its first flesh round up to the mouth.
Then cut the bone with one of those saws convenient for that purpose.
Then care for the wound, until it heals.
However the injury which has occurred to the fingers, often happens or from the birth of man, that is, he is born with it, or from the healing of a wound, or from a burn by fire and similar causes.
Therefore it is necessary to remove this callus, until the fingers recover their natural shape.
Then place between them a strip of linen, or cloth dipped in rose oil: so that they may not quickly join together and separate them: or place between them a thin piece of lead, until the place has healed as much as necessary.
And likewise if the callus which has occurred to some of the fingers with the palm, then dry this callus, according to how it is prepared and suitable for the shape of the limb.
§ On the Incision:The Defects.
On the right side of the neck, between the Adams's apple and the angle of the jaw, there is a small opening, through which, if necessary, a straw or a needle may be inserted, to drain away any fluid that may accumulate in the throat; and in order that the skin may not be stretched tight, it should be marked from the corner of the mouth to the corner of the jaw, so as to form a kind of V. When this incision has been made, it is advisable to insert into it a large needle, so that, if necessary, any fluid which may collect in the throat may be drained away; but before doing this, care should be taken to see that the tongue does not get in the way, and then the needle should be withdrawn. When the incision has been made, care must be taken not to pierce through to the windpipe.
Veins that are deep-lying, large, and full of melancholy superfluity which occur in many parts of the body; and most of these veins are found in the legs, especially in those who walk much or work hard, and carry loads upon them.
Therefore it is necessary that you should administer a strong treatment for the body from black cholera sometimes with a strong vomiting.
Then, take a bowl of wine mixed with water, and keep it at hand.
The treatment for these veins with iron is done in two ways.
One of these methods is, so that they should sit and black blood should be drawn out.
And the other method is, so that a vein should be cut and all of it should be drawn out.
The section is truly performed in this way.
Now wrap the leg with warm water a lot until the thick, foul-smelling blood resolves.
Then tighten the bandage around the leg from the upper side of the hip all the way down to the knee with the wound exposed.
Then dry one, or two, or three wide sections in a single place.
Then dry the leg all the way down: until you see an amount of blood that is sufficient, and which the strength of the wound-keeper allows.
Then bind it up: and command him to refrain from foods that cause black cholesterol: and again instruct the patient to drain and draw blood when the veins are filled, and if it hurts the sick person.
The elevation is performed in this way.
Scrape the wound, if there are many hairs in it.
Then dip the wound into a bath: or wrap it in the leg of the patient with warm water until it turns red, and the veins burst: or exercise it vigorously if there is no bath available, until it warms up.
Then dry the skin in the direction of the wound along its length: or at the end of it near the knee, or at the lower part of it near the heel.
Then open the skin with a knife, and scrape the wound from all sides until it feels smooth: and you will see that it turns from red to black as it heals.
When you have thus washed the skin, you will see that it is white as a string.
Then dip it under [the liquid], until it comes out and dries on the skin: hang it with a smooth, soft hook.
Then dry another wide section next to that one with three fingers.
Then he removed the scabs from the upper part of the wound until it appeared.
Then he washed her with water and soap, as you have done, and hung her up by the feet with another hook, as you did at first.
Then he dried a different section, or multiple sections, if you are able to do so.
Then wash it again, and cut the last section near the heel.
Then remove it by pulling on the section that is above it.
And do this, until you have completely removed it from the upper section; then cut it, or with longer sections, until you have cut through all of it when it has come loose: then cut it.
If it does not obey you when you try to remove and wash it: then insert a strong double thread under it, and tie it, and pull it out; or insert the Radium underneath: and turn your hand around all sides of it, until it has come loose.
And be careful that you do not cut yourself.
For if it cuts, it is difficult for you to wash it well, and it enters into the body and causes damage.
When you have completely removed it: then place it on a wound-bed that has been soaked with wine and oil and sprinkled with rose water, or just oil; and take care of it, until it heals.
Now if the vine is contracted, and has a twist to it that lies in the way of the parts, and it is not like what we have said above in regard to the straightness: then you must find under it all the part of its twist, and the locations of its winding.
Then hang it up with a hook until you have washed it all over; and be careful not to hit the section on your leg while washing it, or to cut yourself, for it will be difficult to wash well or remove from you.
So then you are cautious.
The form of injury that heals the vine.
The form of wound that is not healing well.
Non est ei curuitas sicut reliquis Vncinis, neque est acutae extremitatis, ut non uulneret uenam: et est grossae flectuositatis, lenis: quoniam si esset subtilis, incideret uenam subtilitate sua: imo sit ei superflua grossitudo, sicut diximus.
Non est ei curuitas sicut reliquis Vncinis, neque est acutae extremitatis, ut non uullerent venam: et est grossae flexuositatis, lenis: quoniam si esset subtilis, incideret venam subtilitate sua: imo sit ei superflua grossitudo, sicut diximus. De extractione Venae cruris internae ut in femore, ut in thora ut in braschi ut in brachi ut in cubiti.
Caput XCI.
De extractione Venae femoris internae, & ad sinus uti.
Caput XCII.
De extractione Venae cruris externae, ad sinus uti.
Et hoc facit ut superesset, si ubi fuit et si longus est, sicut in femore: qui enim est longior a brachi, et non tantum a cubito, sed et ad pedem.
Et hoc facit ut superesset, si ubi fuit et si longus est, sicut in femore: qui enim est longior a brachi, et non tantum a cubito, sed et ad pedem.
Et si Vena non possit ueni sua per se, et concidit in locos circumcrines, in quibus sunt moxae venarum, ut in thora, ut in braschi, ut in cubiti: tunc concidebit in locos illas moxis.
Et si Vena non possit ueni sua per se, et concidit in locos circumcrines, cum moxae venarum sunt: tunc concidebit in locos illas moxis.
Et si Vena non possit ueni sua per se, et concidit in locos circumcrines, cum moxae venarum sunt: tunc concidebit in locos illas moxis.
And do not hit it with the root before it has gone out completely.
For if you hit it, it will be bruised, and it will go into the flesh: and it will cause an ulcer to form, and decay in place, and a bad wound.
Therefore it should be handled gently, and removed slowly, until it has gone out completely from its last part, and nothing of it remains in the body: and from this comes a vein that runs in some men for five palms and ten fingers.
And now it has come to me, because it has gone out through twenty palms.
But if you hit it during your treatment time: then introduce the root into its hole, and pierce it with a long one through the flesh, until all that is in it is removed out of it: and administer decay to the place with medicines for several days. Then take care for yourself in curing those ulcers.
And this Vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot, or in the foot itself: and it has many openings, and goes out from every opening a branch.
So take care for her, as we have said in the division, and with what is preceded.
Regarding the section about worms that are born under the skin, and it is called Bad Disease.
Chapter CCIV.
This Disease is called in our language Bad Disease: because it often happens to worms, and there is one little worm that is born between the skin and the flesh.
And it moves in the whole body, going up and down: and it is felt by the sense when it walks on its limbs, until it breaks off at every break in the skin, and goes out.
And its generation is from decay of certain kinds of earth.
As worms and snakes, that is, earthworms, and roundworms in the belly, do.
And he fears her wickedness.
For when he himself examined the body, and raised it up to the head, and came to a place: then perhaps it opened within him, and he departed, and destroyed his eye: and this has happened often.
But when you are treating him, and taking him out, then that thing does not happen except with his walking, and the sensation of it itself.
Therefore, you should hold what is above him, and what is under him with a strong constriction by the ligament.
Then dry up on top of him, and take him out.
That if it sinks into the flesh, and not into his whole body: then put a place on top of the spot with fire, until he dies.
And greater is what he fears, is her corruption, which corrupts his eye, as we have said. But if you see him having already come to the head near the eye, then hold below him with a good constriction by the brow.
Then dry up on top of him, and take him out.
And it is necessary that he should use his own self-cleansing with the medicines which are dissolving the bad humors of his body.
And let him beware of food that generates putrefaction.
On the section about disease of Naquir.
Head 105.
This disease is called in our country Naquir, and it is a pain that happens to some member, and then it changes from one member to another.
And indeed I have already seen him, according to what I tell you.
I was called to a sick woman in some parts of the body.
And she held out her arm, and I saw swelling in the armpit of the arm.
And after an hour had passed, I saw one swelling go up with fire, like the swelling of a wound, going faster than it is possible to go: so that it was like running silver, when it runs from place to place.
The pain then came from that place and was fixed in the shoulder.
Then after one hour, it slid into the rest of the body until it reached the other arm.
Then he told me that he was shaking all over his body, as I saw.
So I was amazed at the speed of its movement from one limb to another.
And indeed before that I had not seen this sickness with my eyes in such a way.
But I saw many who were suffering from pain that was moving from one limb to another: and I did not see him with my eyes, as I saw him in the woman.
And I do not think that it was, unless it is because that woman was from those who are born with scaly skin on their faces: hence this appears to be the reason for that movement of pain.
And it is necessary so that it does not appear in this way in those who are healthy and have moist bodies, hidden scaliness of the skin.
When then you are healing him, and the patient feels pain: if it appears to your eye, as we have said, then squeeze him on top, and under him quickly: and dry him on top until that movement is stopped: and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see him with your eyes: then take care of his body with scalding, and with it what expels movements, and with pilules that turn them red, and with those made from nettle, and the like.
Regarding the extraction of arrows.
Chapter LVI: Arrows differ according to their kind, and according to the places from which they come out of the body.
But there is a different kind: for some have large points, and some are sharp: and some are conic, and some are flat.
And of these there are those that have three angles.
And of these are the tongues.
And from these are made stars.
These indeed which are according to the members in which they fall, are according to two modes.
Or indeed the members are from the main members conjoined, such as the brain, and the heart, and the liver, and the lungs, and the kidneys, and the intestines, and the bladder, and these similar to them.
When therefore it falls into one of these members, and you see the signs of death which I shall tell you about, then you should extract that star from them, because death follows it in many dispositions.
And when those bad signs do not appear to you, and the star is not hidden in the depth of the member, then extract it, and take care of the wound.
For from the signs when the star falls into the brain, and penetrates the bone, and exits asiphe which is above the brain, it is: for these occur from that caustic soda, and scotoma, and vertigo, and reddening of the eyes, and inflammation, and reddening of the tongue, and spasm, and confusion of thought, and forgetfulness of cholera.
And perhaps it exits blood from the nostrils, or ears.
And perhaps speech is severed, and the word is destroyed.
And exits from the wound's place a white, pulpy moisture.
And exits from that similar to the moisture of meat.
If therefore you see these signs, then refrain from treatment, and extract the star if it has not exited.
The signs of the star when it falls into the heart are: that it is near the left nipple: and feels as if it were fixed in a hard place, not in a soft one.
And perhaps the star has a movement similar to pulsation: and black blood runs from the wound.
And follows that coldness of extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting fits.
Know then, that death has certainly come.
And the sign of an arrow when it pierces the lung, is a frothy issue from the armpit; and the veins that follow the neck, are distended and their color changes with the nurse.
And he breathes out great wind, deep; and seeks the attraction of cold air.
That if the arrow falls into a wound, which is within the chest: then it is near the ribs little; and it makes a great sighing with pain, and a deep sighing: and all the limbs of the shoulders do move.
And if an arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps it will expel something undigested from food.
And if an arrow falls into the belly, and is fixed there: it expels something from the armpit, or the rectum, or the intestine which is already broken.
Therefore there is no hope in curing him, nor in drawing out the arrow.
That if an arrow falls into the bladder, and expels urine: and proceeds from it something towards the outside, and its pain is stronger on the sick: then you shall know that it is deadly.
The rest of the limbs, as the face, and the neck, and the throat, and the spoons, and the support, and the spine, and the knees, and the feet, and things similar to the limbs are healed according to many dispositions: for if an arrow does not hit a blood vessel, or a nerve: and that arrow is not deadly.
And I tell you what I saw of these arrows, that it may be a sign for your cure.
That if an arrow falls into the tear duct of a man's eye, at the root of his nose.
And I drew it out for him by the other side, under the fat of his ear: and he was healed, and there came no harm to his eye.
And I drew out another arrow from the Jew, which had fallen into his fat under his lower eyelid: and that arrow was hidden, and I could not get it out unless I cut off part of his cheekbone; and it was a great arrow among arrows of the Turks, with a soft iron; in which there were no ears.
The Jew is therefore healthy, and no bad accident has befallen his eye. And I took another arrow out of the quiver of the Christian.
And that was an Arabic arrow, and it is the one which has ears.
So I followed behind her between two spears, and she was already submerged in his throat.
I was subtle with her, until I pulled her out: and the Christian was healthy.
And I took another arrow from the man who had fallen into his belly; for we thought that he would die of it.
Afterward, however, I waited thirty days for any change in his condition, then followed behind him with the arrow; and when I had passed it over him, I looked upon it, and took it out; and he was healthy, and no bad accident happened to him.
And I saw a man to whom the arrow had fallen on his back, and it was healed over; there was a wound on him.
Afterward, however, he came out of prison after seven years, and the arrow had come out of the root of his thigh.
And I saw a woman to whom the arrow had fallen into her belly, and it was healed over; and the arrow remained within her: nor did she change by any means from her natural disposition, nor did the woman perceive any hurt in any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man, to whom the arrow had fallen on his face; and it was healed over, and remained there, not causing him much pain; and similar things happened to many others.
And I took out the arrow of the king's princes, which had fallen on his nose and was falling toward the right side a little; and the arrow was hidden all away.
So I was called to cure him after the loss of the arrow for three days.
And I found the arrow's string very tight.
So he himself felt a prick and pain on his right side.
I hoped that that was a spot from the tip of the bow.
I therefore hoped that that was a spot from the tip of the arrow. So I laid a plaster on the place with the plaster in which there was attracting and healing power, confiding to myself that the place would heal, and it appeared to me as a sign of the bow so that I should cut over it: and no accident happened in that place indicating that the arrow had followed the place.
So I endured with the plaster on it for many days: and no accident happened, and the bone was healed in between: and it remained ill from the space of taking it out for a day or two, until he felt the arrow one day in his nose.
And he told me that.
So I put on that broken bone an acute medicine, enduring for many days until it was healed open: and when I tried to move it, I felt a little spot of the arrow which held on to the wood.
Then I added in the opening of the wound with that acute medicine, until we could see clearly the end of the arrow: and passed from me with that time space of about four months.
Then when the bone had healed well, and it was possible for me to insert my fingers into it, and move them, and it did not comply with going out: then I did not cease to probe gently, and devise over it by means of devices, until one day I got it out with bent pins, according to the form of their shape at the end of the shaft, until I took it out.
Then I restored the bone.
And those who medicate judge, that the cartilage of the nose is not restored.
So I restored it, and the bone was healed, and the injury was healed with a complete health: and he did not hurt him in anything at all.
And I will tell you the quality of the extraction of some arrows: to put that rule and sign over it, which I did not mention.
For the parts of this art and their distinctions are not contained in the narration; nor does this book contain them, and the prudent craftsman compares little to much: and as much as is present, he has compared it to what is absent: and found a new operation and a new instrument from descensus rerum extranearum huius artis quando accidunt.
I say then that arrows do not come out of the body parts in which they are fixed, except according to two methods. Or by attraction from the place from which it entered.
Or by the opposite part of another.
And that which has come out from where it entered, either is an arrow going in a fleshy place: and is attracted and comes out.
That if it does not comply with the exit at the time at which it falls: then you must let it alone for a few days, until it rotten the flesh that is around it: and the attraction of it will be eased, and its exit.
And likewise if it is stuck in a bone and does not comply with you to come out, then let it go as well for a few days: and again bring it out with attraction and movement every day, until it comes out.
That if it does not comply with you to come out after a few days, then you must cut off the sagitta from the bone completely with a sharp tool, until the arrow is enlarged.
Then attract it and pull it out.
If however the arrow is fixed in a skull bone and has already gone into one of the vents of the cerebral bone, and appears as one of those disorders that I have mentioned: then you should refrain from attracting the arrow and let it go, until it gets used to being there after a few days.
For if the arrow reaches the brain, then death does not delay for long.
And if the arrow is not fixed except in the body of a bone and has not entered as far as the brain: and remains sick for a few days, and does not happen to him any of those disorders: then use your craft in attracting the arrow and extracting it.
If it is fixed tightly, and does not obey you when you try to pull it: then apply terebinth resin around the area of the wound, as you have told me: then take care of the place until it heals.
If the arrow is already deeply embedded in the body, and hidden and concealed from sight: then try to find it with your touch.
If you feel it, then pull it gently with some tools that are suitable for pulling.
If you cannot get above it due to the constriction of the skin, and because of the length of the arrow deep within: and there is no bone, or nerve, or blood vessel there: then find a way above it, until the bone becomes enlarged, and it becomes possible to pull out the arrow.
That if they are ears that are being held on, then free the flesh tightly held in them from all sides, with any device you can: and devices, if it is not possible to release the flesh in a fracture of the ears, and their contortion, until it heals.
And you when you perform the extraction of the arrow, wherever it is located, then use your twisted hands to twist it in all parts until it heals: and with the utmost care, so that the arrow does not break, and becomes difficult for you to attract it, and its extraction.
That if you cannot get above it in one hour, then leave it for a few days, until what is around it putsrefies.
Then repeat it: for it will be relieved with poultices. But if the opposite happens to you, and the flow of blood is increased: then administer what we said in our book on treatment: and protect your skill from cutting into bone, or a nerve, or a tendon.
And administer devices in any way that you can to ease the removal of the arrow: and let it be with ease, and peace, or slowness, and strength, as I have told you.
And it is fitting that, when you pull out the arrow, it should be with a twist, so that it is injured according to its position, as it was located on the body with the arrow.
For he is more skilled.
But if you are not able to do that, then administer what is possible for you from the figures.
But the arrow that goes out from the opposite side, or has already gone out a little toward the outside: or makes a bump at the extreme end of the dart by feeling from the upper part of the skin near it, and you see it standing out: so cut it up, and make a section according to the quantity that it holds in it the darts.
Then attract it: for it becomes easy to come out.
But if it holds itself in the bone, then turn your hand according to its roundness, until it presses the dart into the bone, and makes it strong for itself: then draw it out.
And if not: let it go for a few days: then examine it again, until it goes out.
That if the wood of the dart is in it, then push it out with it.
But if it has fallen on the wood, and you are to administer a push: then introduce into it an instrument that is sharp, so that the sharpness of it enters into the tail of the dart: then push it out with it.
But if the dart is pushed together, then push it out with an instrument that goes into it.
For the dart is relieved through that.
That if the dart is poisoned, then it is necessary, so that you do not become poisoned yourself: for this you can do if it is possible for you.
Then take care of it with that which comes into contact with that.
That if the dart is falling into the chest, or the belly, or the groin, and it is close to that which you feel by trying, and it is possible for you to cut over it: then cut off, and be careful not to make an incision in the vein, or in the nerve, and pull it out.
Then take care of the wound, if you see it, and take care of that, until it heals up.
And this is the form of the forceps, with which are extracted arrows.
May their ends be similar to the face of a wedge, made like an iron; when they grasp onto the arrow, they do not release it.
And there are made from them many species, great and small, and middle ones, according to the quantity of the size of the arrow, and its thinness or thickness, and the constriction thereof.
This is the form of the impeller.
And this is the form of the impeller of lead.
This is the end of the lead-shaped impeller as an aid to entry into the hole made in the cone-shaped arrow, and it is driven with it.
This end of the lead-shaped impeller cone-shaped is concave as a feather's tip: that it may aid the entry of the arrow into itself and its impulsion.
On phlebotomy of veins.
Chapter LVII. Veins that are phlebotomized, those which run through the body, are thirty.
Of these there are sixteen in the head: two pulsating veins which run behind the ears, called the two herbs; and two arteries, which appear in two places; and two veins which run in the two lacrimal bones of the eyes, called the gazing ones; and a vein prepared in the middle of the forehead; and a vein running in the tip of the nose.
And two guide-veins which are in the neck.
And two veins which are in the upper lip of the mouth.
And two veins which are in the lower lip.
These are the veins which are called Algecirach.
And two veins which are under the tongue.
But the veins which are phlebotomized in the arms, there are five veins in each arm.
One of them is the cephalic, and it comes from the lateral side of the tree: and it is called by the common name of the head vein.
Et Fusca.
And the wound is on the left side, and it is in a place where the bone of the skull meets the spine, and it is named because it is in a common area of the body.
And the wound is on the right side, and it is in a place where the bone of the skull meets the spine, and it is named because it is in a place that is not common to the body.
And the wound is in the front, and it is in a place where the bone of the wrist meets the bone of the forearm, and it is named because it is in a common area of the body.
And the wound is on the front of the arm, and it is on a vein that is near the elbow, and it is one where blood is withdrawn, and it is one where the flexor tendon of the thumb appears to be thin.
And the wound is on the back of the hand, and it is between the ring finger and the little finger, and there are two branches.
In the leg and in the foot there are three wounds.
One of them is that which is under the thumb, from a forest side.
The second is the saphenous vein, and its location is near the heel, on the inside leg.
And the third is the nerve, and its location is near the heel, on the outside leg.
And there are three similar wounds in the other leg.
This text describes the location of wounds on the body, with particular attention to the veins and nerves that might be involved in the injury. It appears to be an anatomical description related to medical treatment or dissection.
The phlebotomy of the two veins that are behind the ears is important for treating several conditions: scurvy, hemorrhoids, swelling, and bad ulcers on the head.
And the quality of the phlebotomy should be according to what is said in this text.
And it is, so that the head heals well: and it rubs the back of the neck between two veins with a rough cloth for good friction.
Then tie the injured neck tightly with a scarf, until the two veins appear.
And their locations are behind the ears in two depressed areas of the head.
So then feel with your finger, and where you feel the pulse of the veins under your finger, there are the marks with cauterization.
Then take up the scalpel, and he is called the 'Incise'.
Then introduce it into the wound, until the phlebotomist reaches the mouth.
Then wash your hand with water and the skin at the top, and incise the wound with the incision knife.
And make the length of the incision as much as two fingers spread out, or about that: and allow to flow out as much blood as you wish.
Then tie it up with thread, and let it be, until it is healed.
And already preceded in the beginning of this book with the incision of ears, and their cauterization.
Of the phlebotomy of the two arteries in the temples.
But the two arteries which are in the two temples that are phlebotomized, are for the ancient hemianopsia: and the socket of the ball's eye, and the constant obturating. And the course of the flowing acuter all around the eyes. And the quality of phlebotomy is according to what I tell you.
The sick man shall strain his neck very much, until two veins appear with a visible pulsation under your finger.
Then the signs are with the caustics.
Then wash the skin above the vein from above with your index finger, and introduce the phlebotomist underneath, and wash the veins from above.
And incise it, as you did in the two other veins: and allow to flow out of blood according to the quantity of your need. Then remove the tourniquet and place your finger on one vein for an hour.
Then put over it a cotton and the thread, and squeeze it strongly with your hand: and let it be, until it is healed.
And already preceded with the memory of ears, and their incision, and their extraction at the beginning of this book.
Of the phlebotomy of the frontal vein after the phlebotomy of the head.
The true treatment of bleeding from the nose is after phlebotomy of the head, to treat old ailments of the face: and for hemicrania, and redness: and foul ulcers.
And the quality of phlebotomy, I will tell you.
The injured man raises his neck with a cough until the blood appears.
Then take the instrument called a fossorum.
This is its shape:
Place the prominent point that is in the head of the fossorum on top of the blood, and strike it with a comb or some other way: and let the blood flow according to the amount you want.
Then solve the perforation with a poultice, and tighten it, until it heals.
And when it opens again with the phlebotomist on the side.
However, it is not necessary that there be a phlebotomist at the acute end, as with the other phlebotomies, so it is with the lateral ends.
And bleed her according to the turn: for the mouth is close by: and perhaps, when it is thin, the phlebotomizes may break when it is slender.
Regarding the phlebotomy of veins in two tearful eyes.
The treatment of two veins that are in the two tearful eyes of the two eyes, is for the eye from scabies and redness: and for a sore in the eye, and facial ailments.
And the quality of phlebotomy of them, so that the injured man raises his neck with a cough until the blood appears.
Then bleed her: and you stand over its head.
And let the phlebotomy be according to the turn a little bit in length, with a little phlebotomist, a little on the side, for there is no flesh in place.
If then the phlebotomizes is slender at the end, perhaps it will break.
Then let the blood flow according to the amount you need.
And place on them a poultice, and tighten them at night, and solve them.
Phlebotomy of the nasopharyngeal veins.
The phlebotomy of the nasopharyngeal veins is useful for acute fever, violent thirst, facial illnesses such as hemicrania and redness that occurs on the face; especially when it is old.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that it should squeeze the neck of the sick person.
Then take the nose of him with your left hand, and take a fine, long phlebotomy; and fasten it in the middle of his nose, between that which separates the nose according to its straightness.
Since the vein does not appear to the touch there, and because blood begins to flow immediately.
And you should hold the last phlebotomy a little longer: and let the blood flow according to your need.
Then bind it for the night.
For it will heal very quickly itself.
Phlebotomy of the jugular veins.
Indeed, the two jugular veins are useful for constriction of the throat, the beginning of leprosy, melancholy illnesses, impetigo and bad ulcers, and for corrosion, that is, scabs from scabies.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that the sick person should be tied with a ligature on each side of his neck: and let the artisan stand over his head, and let the sick person sit on a seat.
Then take a phlebotomy according to the length of the wide phlebotomy a little more.
Then draw out a temperate quantity of blood, or according to what you see from necessity, which is to that.
Then do the same for the other nose.
Then loosen the ligatures, and tighten two veins in the middle: so that the sick person does not become constricted.
And let it go until morning.
For the wound will heal itself.
Phlebotomy of the algerich veins.
And Al-Ghabri's phlebotomy tool is an aid: for it is placed at the lip of the mouth, and brings about corruption of the gums: and bad ulcers: and chaps of the lips, and also bad ulcers, even those that are in the nose, and around it.
And the quality of phlebotomy is such, that you should make the sick person sit before you: and tighten his neck with a scarf.
Then turn the lips of him and look at two veins: one is on the right side of the mouth, and the second is on the left side: and the indication of each is by the color of amber.
And this is true: for there are small veins around them, black.
So cut both incisions where you want to. But if there is doubt about them on you, and you do not know which are they: then you should go to the greater incision of them, and more evident.
And likewise do with the two veins that are in the upper lip: and indeed there is much use to go with it: and cut two veins that are in the lower lip.
Regarding phlebotomy Under the tongue, after phlebotomy of the head.
And the two veins that are under the tongue, is an aid, for it is phlebotomy of the head, to remove the phlegm that is in the throat, and disease of the throat, and disease of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing them is such, that the sick person sits between your hands to the sun: and make him drink water, and look at the veins on one side of his tongue, and on the other side of his tongue: and show the color of each to the color of amber.
So phlebotomize both: and guard, so that you do not put your hand into their veins after phlebotomy.
For under them are the arteries, and perhaps it happens that a flow of blood comes out from those arteries.
Regarding three veins on the chest.
But the veins which are phlebotomised in the thigh, are those in which phlebotomy was customary in all men.
And phlebotomy is done on them according to two methods.
Or by puncturing with the phlebotome on one side: or by oiling to the sensitivity of the decline: or by cutting with the phlebotome with an awl, and it is Anelesius.
And this is his form.
Thus Anelesius is, which is suitable for the section.
And from them are species broad, and according to the width of their veins and their form the phlebotomy with the awl is broad, like you see it.
And it is suitable for opening closed veins, full, returning, visible, thick, and those which contain thick blood, turbulent.
And this phlebotomist is smaller in width, and more delicate at the extremities.
And it is suitable for phlebotomy of thin veins, which contain citrinin blood.
¶ Of the Basilica phlebotomy.
But the Basilica, which is one of the three veins phlebotomised, is the iuuamentum. For it draws blood from the diseases which are under the throat and the neck, because it follows the chest and the abdomen: and it is suitable for the phlebotomist to cut it with the phlebotome, in order that he may beware, and be on his guard, for under it is an artery.
If then he should err, and he adds to the puncturing of the phlebotomy, he will strike the artery, and will spill the flow of blood.
Therefore it should not be phlebotomised with the phlebotome while puncturing: but rather cut with Anelesius while cutting.
That if the Basilica does not appear by manifest sign, then you should separate it, and turn to another, or seek some branch of it: or make a phlebotomy in place of its Funem brachii.
For this is manifest, and cut her with the phlebotome Anelesius, as we have said.
But if you want to use phlebotomy on him, then you should do so before tightening the bandage on his arm, so that you can feel for the pulse first.
Then mark the spot with encaustic, then the arm, and dry it with a Concave Scalp Razor, as we have said.
And make sure that the pulse does not drop through the space from the site of the artery.
And when you see it, when you tighten the ligature, the swelling at the spot you marked with the encaustic, then that swelling is the swelling of the artery: so remove it.
That if you see blood rise during phlebotomy, like urine in a boy, and it is thin blood, red: then you will know that it is from the blood of the artery.
Then therefore place your hand on the spot for a long time, and then remove your hand.
But if blood is cut away (for it is often cut away) then tighten the arm, and let him go: and beware of his movement, and sit with him on guard.
And let him not move for a few days, until he is healed.
But if the blood does not cut away and weakens you: and there is no present medicine for you at your hand, then cut the artery, if it appears to you.
For its ends do convulse, and blood is cut away.
Or take the cork of a bottle, and find it: take half, and tighten it over the spot of the wound with a bandage and powder until another day.
Then if blood is cut away, it is good.
Then if not: then care for the man with what follows from the spot of the powder that blood was cut away: and cutting away his blood is not difficult in many positions, because of the small wound, and possibility of a bandage off the arm.
On phlebotomy of the vein of the foot.
The vein of the head and neck is the vein that draws blood from the upper part of the head and lower part of the body; for this reason it is composed of the branch of the basilica and the branch of the cephalic, as we have said.
And it comes to the phlebotomist so that he be above the fear from his phlebotomy, for under it is a nerve.
But if he adds to the puncturing of the phlebotomy, and finds the nerve, it happens that he is stunned, and difficult is his recovery from it, and perhaps does not completely recover.
And this nerve appears many times to touch.
But if it is concealed in some people, and it is thin, and does not show itself: then you should put your phlebotomy there where you phlebotomize, with the section of the alne, and away from the nerves with your strength.
That if the vein is between two nerves, then find the vein in length.
Of the cerebral vein.
But the phlebotomy of the cerebral vein is a phlebotomy because it draws blood from the head, and contributes to the ailments of the eyes.
And it is necessary in this vein your own, if you want, that you phlebotomize it piercing with the phlebotomy olive oil, or with the phlebotomy myrrh: for this is a savior of all veins, because it is not a sub arterial vein, nor a nerve. But it is necessary to you at the phlebotomy, that you bring with the phlebotomist only the head of the lock, and you will ask for a more indulgent place: and it does not hurt him, if first it is not discovered by tapping, so that it returns on it with the phlebotomy from time to time. But perhaps is accustom'd in some people when it is not phlebotomized in the first tapping, but it does not hurt him that thing, if that accustom'd is made at some time.
Of the utility of Phlebotomy and the precautions with which you observe it.
The quality then of Phlebotomy, and the accidents thereof out of which it is necessary to consider rectifying.
First therefore of its concerning which it is necessary thou shouldest know, that Phlebotomy is not administered, except for the preservation of health, and perseverance thereof, and caution from the advent of sickness.
And that Phlebotomy be made in one of three which are in the bed, namely Cephalica, and Fusca, and Basilica.
And that Phlebotomy be made in the beginning of Spring on a fast, in a day, and in summer: and in autumn, and winter after a feast, when there appear signs of satiety.
And that Phlebotomy be made in the first day, or in the third, after three hours have passed since the last day.
But Phlebotomy which is administered in sickness has not a determined hour; but when it provokes convenience and necessity thereto, in the night, or day, and at all hours, and in all times.
And it is not necessary that Phlebotomy be made on boys until they have reached the age of fourteen years.
Nor let Phlebotomy be made on a pregnant woman until the seventh month.
Nor let Phlebotomy be made on old men who have already passed their sixty years.
When therefore anyone wishes to be Phlebotomized, it is necessary that he should wash his bowels before Phlebotomy with a soft clister, if in them there is much retained dung: so that the intestines do not attract phlebotomy from the putrid excrements hurting the main members.
Nor let Phlebotomy be made on a patient who is fainting with nausea: nor let him be drenched by wine from drunkenness until he has removed that from them.
Nor let Phlebotomy be made on a sick person with hydrops.
And let Phlebotomy be made again after a feverish passion, and vomiting, and a flow of blood, and an increase in the number of copulations, and labor, and exercise, and vigils, and fasting, and all that dissolves virtue out of the body or animal.
Then consider in the subtlety of humors before that, if blood is thick with food and drink, and medicines: if possible to him that.
Then introduce the bath, if he does not prohibit anything: or let him exercise himself in some exercise, that the blood may be refined.
And put the phlebotomy of his in his bosom, about the third day, as we have said: and be careful, that the chest of him that day shall be drained of all animal bad accidents: such as anger, fear, and pain: and of all bodily accidents, such as labor, punishment, and excesses, and those like them.
And let him make his own things to be present with those wherewith custom of men is used of aromatic, and of odor, and of mirth, and similar things by quantity of possibility.
Then let the phlebotomizer sit on a tray that is higher than the phlebotomy tray: then let him take his arm out, and rub it with the hand of the phlebotomizer twice, or three times.
Then let him tie a ligature with the thong, and let him wind it around twice.
And let the constriction be tempered, because the constriction is not equal, or by surplus in the constriction, then it prohibits the course of blood: or in softening, then also it prohibits the course of blood.
Then after the constriction, let the phlebotomizer rub his hands together at once, until they are blistered, and let them feel with touch.
Then let the phlebotomizer wipe off the phlebotomy with a little oil, his own ancient one.
Then let him put his index finger of his left hand on the vein at the spot where he intends to phlebotomy, a little: so that blood does not flee, and the veining is heard with a snap.
For from the veins is what is like a running string when phlebotomy: and those are full of blood: and when you put the phlebotomy on it, it is hit by the phlebotomy, and deceives the phlebotomist, and does not open the vein: and if it opens it, it is tight: therefore, for this reason, let the phlebotomizer firm it, and be alert in all these things.
Then place the phlebotomy device.
And if not, then repeat that cut under that place a little, or above it with eagerness: if the spot does not stop bleeding.
That if it stops bleeding, or the patient feels pain, then let him go for a day, or two days: and do not tie a ligature tightly.
For maybe the heat draws away the blood.
And do not put him in a bath.
Then repeat the phlebotomy if he loves it.
That if the cut is small, or blood runs slowly: and be careful that not a little amount of blood comes out: then repeat the phlebotomy in the same hole according to its length, and add a little to the procedure.
And do it quickly, before that spot stops bleeding: for that spot may stop bleeding in many people during a small operation.
If then you see that the spot has already stopped bleeding, then do not repeat the phlebotomy at all, for it does not excuse with you to make a mistake. And place on the spot some of the fat oil: for it soothes the course of blood.
And this oil is better in this place than the person's own oil, and better than another kind of oil.
And also administer fat oil in all your phlebotomies when the blood course is to be stopped: and make it with myrrh and saffron when placed from one of those oils on the spot.
For the blood is thinned and resolved when it is thick.
That if a great apotheosis happens at the place of phlebotomy, for many times it happens, especially if he is not phlebotomized except in that very hole, or there is a small cut open, then mend and place on the spot a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly warmed up: and tighten it for an hour: for it is resolved.
It is appropriate that you should do this after the blood has gone from the wound with its own supply, or from another new one.
And many times indeed have there occurred hemorrhoids and eminences at the phlebotomy of the Basilica.
So put your hand on it, and then if it is a soft swelling under your pressure upon it, then that eminence is bad.
Cause therefore that you put something on it from that which we have said.
For perhaps it will flow out of her blood from the artery.
But make a plaster for her with that where there is a stenosis, so that the place may be hardened.
Then take care of the wound with the rest of the cure, until it is healed.
And it is appropriate that you should draw out all blood from every person according to the quantity of his virtue.
And that which appears from the vibrant color on top of the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it not go out, until it reddens: and likewise if you see it thick: then let it go out, until it thins out: and also if it is sharp, then let its sharpness be taken away.
And it is appropriate that he who is full, strong, and resistant to the extraction of blood by one stroke, so that the phlebotomy of the new blood may be increased, and the phlebotomist on the side: but in him who is weak, opposite to that.
And it is appropriate that he should draw out the wound with strokes, and that there should be a tight opening: and better is what is administered in the phlebotomy of the new blood, that it should be a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this way of phlebotomy is salutary by the flow of blood, and from the incisions of the nerves: and it is more praiseworthy and healthier than phlebotomy by the width and length.
And he who is accustomed to syncope during phlebotomy, it is appropriate that he eat a little bread infused with water of pomegranates before phlebotomy; or if he is warm, he should drink cold water; and he should extract the blood from him in three or four vessels.
And if his complexion is cold, then he should take before phlebotomy bread infused with syrop of myrrh, or with syrop of honey flavored with spices, or with scented syrop.
That if syncope should happen during phlebotomy, and it is the cause of the outflow of blood in great quantity: then he should drink in a vessel water of meat, and syrop of fragrant things: and he should apply aroma with algarobie resin, and open his chest while doing so: and he should use whatever we have mentioned in the division [of the treatment] of syncope from the removal of blood.
Whoever wants to release his arm, and let his blood flow: it is appropriate for him who has phlebotomy because of great removal, and whose power is weak, that he should let his blood flow little by little through the quantity of power in continuous days.
Whoever wants to release his arm, and let his blood flow twice, and his body is strong: then he should do this after seven or nine hours from his first phlebotomy.
Whoever wants to draw blood from his body to the opposite side of which he declines: it is appropriate that he be released in the second or third day.
In whose body there is much blood that has been warmed and has increased in heat, and causes fever: it is appropriate that he go out from it in a single stream, and extract a great quantity: and increase the opening until syncope happens: after you have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy: and put your hand on his pulse at the site of the blood flow, so that death does not happen at the place of syncope.
For many times this has happened, when the phlebotomizer does not know, and falls by negligence.
And it is not appropriate that when you want to heal the arm, and you draw blood secondarily, when the opening of the intestine has already been closed, and the exit of blood becomes difficult, so that it precipitates quickly on it with a movement, and it is curved and extends rapidly.
For this is an evil thing, in advance let go of him, until he is bled secondarily.
Or move with the sharpness of phlebotomy that which has been coagulated from blood in the opening of the intestine, and place on it some dissolved salt in water.
And place on it some of the tar of Alfarach, or sage green, and place the body under a soft compression, until the blood exits.
But if the intestine has already broken open, then let go of it, and do not seal it, until it heals.
That if necessity compels to draw blood secondarily, and there is no excuse, then either bleed the body above that place, or in an arm on another intestine.
But the cord of the arm is bled at the place of the purple vein, and the basilic vein, when they are not found, and are hidden, because it is composed of them.
And the quality of phlebotomy is such that he puts his own hand into hot water, until it turns red, and the intestine appears clearly.
Then let it be tied over it with a little constriction of the middle thread.
Then bleed secondarily little by little, not lengthwise, and not along the length: and let the opening be wide, and let your bleeding be slight as you bleed it over the wristband a little bit.
And indeed a great deal of blood is put into hot water in the time of winter.
And phlebotomy of this vein is salutary for all veins, because there is no pulsating vein or nerve under it.
Phlebotomy of the right hand is salutary for those who suffer from liver diseases.
And the quality of phlebotomy is such that you should bind the wrist with a strap or your hand after you have inserted it into hot water, until the vein contracts, and it is very noticeable.
Then phlebotomize it by passing through it.
And if you cut it completely, it will not hurt him at all.
And keep your hand away from the phlebotomy.
Because under it are naked nerves of the fingers stripped of their flesh.
Then repeat the hand to hot water, and let the blood run in it.
For if you do not repeat the hand in hot water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and its course is prevented.
When you extract a quantity of blood as needed, then place it on the vein with oil and salt: so that it does not solidify quickly.
And likewise you should do, so that you make with every strict branch.
The phlebotomy of the left hand is salutary for those who suffer from splenic diseases: and likewise do with its phlebotomy, as you have done with the second, equally.
The phlebotomy of the saphenous vein is salutary for those diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as diseases of the kidneys and retention of the menses, diseases of the kidneys and bladder stones, old sores of the buttocks and legs, and other diseases from the lower parts of the body.
And the quality of phlebotomy is such that you should insert the injured foot into hot water: and make a friction on it until the veins contract: and bind above the ankle with a strap.
And the place of the vein is near the heel, apparent towards the thumb: and many branches emerge from it on the face of the foot.
Phlebotomy therefore cut it on a larger branch of it, or at the heel in its gathering: since it is better and more salutary.
That if phlebotomy cut it on the face of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are under it over the surface of the foot.
And place your phlebotomy there where you want to cut it from behind, so that you may not cut it: and let the phlebotomist be.
If the blood should come out, then turn her other foot to warm water: and let the blood not flow into it, until it has drained.
That if there is an error in the phlebotomist's first cut, then he should keep with the phlebotomy to the upper part somewhat, for the place is salutary, and do not leave it with malice when you cut the nerves as we said.
And also with the saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
But the place of the sciatic veins, as we have said, is at the heel from the side of the bush.
And the binding of her phlebotomy is, to the pain of the ankle, when it is because of hot blood.
And the quality of her phlebotomy is, that it should enter into a weak bath and cheer up: and tighten her leg from the side of the ankle to above the heel with four fingers, for it does not appear except because of that.
When it then appears, then phlebotomy her according to whatever skill you are able, or according to the transfer: and it is better, or as if you were to cut her with an incision, or separate her with a section.
For the place of her is salutary, and she herself is secret for many people greatly.
That if you do not feel it at all: then phlebotomy some branch of her, and that appears on the back of the foot, and towards the ear: and be careful of the nerves, and let the blood flow in a quantity as much as you want.
Then untie the tourniquet, and place the skin over the venipuncture site, and tighten the area.
For this reason the wound is healed.
[Concerning] Ventilation, and the quality of its use.
Chapter LVIII.
Ventilation is produced from horns, and from air, and from heat.
And ventilation is produced in two ways.
When there is scarring and removal of blood: and the other is ventilation without scarring. And this ventilation without scarring is produced in two ways.
Or indeed it is with fire.
Or without fire.
And those ventilations that are administered with scarring and removal of blood are four-and-twenty parts of the body.
Of these four are the places of the body where ventilation is administered with scarring and removal of blood: the first is ventilation of the crown of the head; and alkhel, which is in the center of the neck; and al-hadha-im, which are two laminae of the neck on both sides at the same time; and ventilation of the mind, which is under the mandible in the lower jaw; and ventilation of the two spatulas; and ventilation of the tail end of the two bones; and ventilation of the two brahs on either side; and ventilation of the two knees; and ventilation of the two shins.
And indeed [the ventilation] does not remove blood from your small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and because of this its power does not fall from them, as is the case with phlebotomy.
And it is not necessary that ventilation be administered with fire, or without fire in any illness that is caused by filling up, until the whole body is emptied.
If necessity calls for ventilation on account of illness, or out of custom, we shall administer it at the beginning, end, and middle of the month, and at any other time.
That is, for there is a man who, when the blood multiplies in him, until it is removed by ventilation, finds in his head a black spot, and becomes dizzy.
And from these it is that he finds repletion and redness in his face, head, and neck.
And from these it is that he finds itching in his face, forehead, darkness, and dullness in his eyes.
And from these it is that he scrapes the place of his wound. And from these it is that the laughter of the people multiplies.
And from these it is that he finds the taste of blood in his mouth, or spits it out with his tongue, and spits out the blood.
And from these it is that his dream increases.
And from these it is that he sees in his sleep blood and redness, and slain men, and plagues, and things like them. When then do we see anything from them, and especially if it is in the third month: let us then make the wound heal, after having passed two or three hours from daylight. But the sign of wound healing of the back is this: for it brings weight upon the head and drips down to the eyes.
