After I have completed to you, my son, this book, which is the last of medicine's science with its supplement, and having finished in it from its explanations and declarations, it has seemed good to me that I should complete it to you with this treatise, which is part of surgery, namely, with the hand.
Because surgery with the hand is laid out in our region and in our time entirely private: until perhaps science of it has died out, and its track has been lost: and there remain from it only a few descriptions in ancient books, which have been changed by hands: and it happened to them error and hesitation, until their intentions were closed, and its vision was extended: It has seemed good to me that I should bring it forth with the order of this treatise in second place according to the order of its position and declaration and abbreviation: and that I should bring it out with shapes of instruments cautery, and the rest of the work's tools: for the sake of adding a declaration, and of specifying what is necessary.
Because the cause by which a good artist does not find with his hand in our time: because the art of medicine is long, and it is necessary for its author to exercise himself before it in the science of anatomy, which Galen narrated, until he knows the joints of the limbs, and their forms, and their connection, and separation, and has knowledge of the bones, and nerves, and ligaments, and their numbers, and their emission, and their pulsing, and quietness, and their exit:
And because Hippocrates said, 'The name is much, but the work is little, especially in the art of the hand.'
We have already spoken about it at the beginning of this book.
Because who does not know that we have spoken about anatomy, he will not be satisfied until he falls into error, in which human beings are formed: as I saw many of them who form themselves from this science and throw themselves on it without knowledge or experiment.
That is, for I saw a dull-witted doctor cut an apoplexy scrofulous in the neck of a woman, and wound some blood vessels in her throat; why the woman's blood flowed until she died between her hands.
And I saw another doctor, who thought to extract a stone from the man's penis, which had been causing him pain for some time; but the stone was great. So he came to him and took it out with a tweezers. Why the man died on the third day.
And I too had been called to extract it; and I saw from the size of the stone and the care of the nurse that he would die.
And I saw another doctor take a fee from our Duke's land for medicine; and there was a black eunuch by him, who was hurt in his thigh near the heel: and the doctor treated it with ignorance, and bound the wound closely to the shin with strong plasters, and did not cease from the pain.
Then he discharged him according to his desires. Then after a few days he discharged him, and ordered him not to loosen the bandages; but he stood thus until his leg was withered away, and he himself came to ruin.
So I was called to him; and I made an end of loosing the bandages: and there followed peace, and he was free from his pains.
Nevertheless the corruption was now confirmed in the member; and I could not restrain it.
So the corruption ceased not to walk in the member, until it died.
And I saw another doctor who pierced an apoplexy cancerous; and it was sore after days, until the malice of it came out with the lord thereof.
That is, for when the cancer is pure from the melancholy humour, then it should not be touched with iron at all, unless it be in a member that will bear it, lest it be cut away entirely.
And because of this, you must know, my sons, that surgery is divided into two parts: namely, the operation which is associated with health and the operation with which there is danger in many dispositions.
And I have already excited (you) in all places of this book, where surgery comes into existence, in which there is fear and dread.
Why it is necessary for you to beware of this, and to decline it: so that they may not find a stupid ear to speak and dishonor.
Take then a measure with care and protection, and bring the sick of you with ease and firmness, and to use the better way, leading by the grace of God to salvation and a worthy succession: and take away from you those terrible illnesses which make you afraid, so that they may come upon you a hesitation in your faith and your comfort.
For it remains more remaining to our glory, and sublime in the world, and finally to the quantities of you.
Because Galenus has already said in some of his instructions. Do not treat disease with medicine: do not call yourself a doctor of ill-health.
But I have already divided this treatise into three chapters.
Chapter one: Of the nature and cause of surgery.
On the pre-caution with fire, and caution with sharp medicine, a dressing, and an order from the head to the feet, and forms of instruments, and tools for cauterizing: and everything that is necessary in the operation.
Chapter two: Of the order of operations, beginning from the head and going down
On sectioning and perforating, phlebotomy and venesection, and wounds: and extracting arrows, and similar things: and all the chapter, ordered by forms of instruments.
Chapter three: Of cauterization with fire, and sharp medicine, and dressing
On restoration, displacement, and cure of twists, and similar things: chapter ordered from the head to the feet, and forms of instruments.
But first, let me speak of the qualities of the instruments and implements of surgery, and when they should or should not be used, and what kind of skin to display them on.
I therefore say that the speech about the quality of cauterization is a long, subtle, scientific, and secret speech.
A multitude of wise men also spoke in it, and they disagreed with each other, and for my part I am satisfied with a little of their speech, fearing to go into detail.
I therefore say that cauterization is universal for all skin types, whether with substance or without it: excepting two skin types, which are a warm and dry skin without substance, and a dry and cold skin without substance.
In a warm and dry skin with substance, they disagreed. Some said that cauterization is useful for such a skin. But others said the opposite, that cauterization is not suitable for such a disease, which is caused by heat and dryness, because fire's nature is heat, and it is inappropriate to heal a disease caused by heat and dryness with heat and dryness.
And he who says the opposite said: "By cauterization, all warm and dry diseases that occur in human bodies are healed, because when you compare a human body to its moisture, it is like fire, and a cold body is not like fire.
And I myself say through his speech, because I have also discovered that through experience.
However, it is not necessary to go into detail about that, unless one has already been proven and exercised in the last chapter of the exercise of cauterization, and knows the difference between human skin types, and the nature of diseases within them, and their causes, and the accidents of those diseases, and the time they occur.
Do not fear the remains of cold and moist diseases. For all the physicians have come together on them; and they do not disagree with Celsus on their treatment.
And know ye, O sons, that the secret cure by fire and the goodness of fire on fire is a simple action which does not reach, unless it reaches the member which is cauterized; and it does not harm another member joined with it, except with a slight damage.
But the fire which is used for the cure reaches that which is drawn out from the members; and it may happen that it produces a difficult cure of sickness in a member, and perhaps it kills it.
But fire because of its fineness and goodness of its substance does not do that, unless it flows over.
But now this has become known to us by experimentation because of the length of habit and study with art and station on verity of things; and for the length of speech I excuse.
And if it is not, because it is not allowed for my book, I would give you the secret and hidden thing in fire, and the quality of its action on bodies with its expulsion, which expels sickness by philosophical demonstration, which is gained from the minds of your children; let me say.
And know ye, O sons, that they disagree at the time when fire is to be made, and they put forward a better time of year for the wound.
And I say that fire is to be made at any time; because the damage which happens through the time is hidden in the cure, which is attracted with fire. And especially if fire is made because of the pains from necessary pains, strong pains, feasts which do not bear tardiness; for they fear these things, that evil which is greater than a small damage which does not happen through time.
And do not throw this out of your minds, O sons, that they do not measure it, unless the common and stupid physicians; for that sickness which is cured by fire does not always return: and they put forward its consequence, and it is not like what they say; because fire is not, except in place of medicine, which changes complexion, and dries up humidities which are causes, why pains happen.
Indeed, the cautery is superfluous above the medicine because of its velocity, the strength of its action, and the power of its effect: and it is possible that the disease may be restored at some time later, following the recovery of the patient's health, and the removal of his illness, and the strength of his body; and that it was prepared in his body from an accumulation of superfluous material within him; and that it reached him in the acquisition of its power from food, and similar causes, unless disease occurred, in which case cautery would be administered.
Indeed, a slight disease in a small member is superfluous, and moisture, such as the pain of a tooth, because of the pain, and similar things; for it is possible that this pain should not remain in him. But that is true of a few things.
But the word of the doctor again, that the cautery is last of all medicine, is a straight word: it is not meant for that which they intend in him; for they believe that there is no cure that brings with it when medicine does, nor anything like that after the occasion of the cauterium.
But the opposite is true of the doctor; and his intention, that the cautery is last of all medicine, is not so intended: unless when we administer to some disease ways of cure, and those do not confer those medicines: then we shall administer at the end of things a cauterium, and it confers; then it falls that the cautery is last of all medicine, is not intended according to what the common people and many medical men understand.
But the ancient ones said, "When the cautery is with gold it is better than when it is with iron": and they did not say that unless for the equality of gold, and the limitation of its substance: and they said, "It does not make a place for the cauterium. But that is not absolutely true; for I have tried it, and found that it does not do so in some bodies without others.
And cautery with it is good, and better than with iron, as they have said. Indeed, when you use fire cautery on gold, it is not declared to you, when lit according to the quantity that you use, due to the redness of gold: and when it comes to the coldness, and if you add ignition on top of it, it melts in the fire and turns into leaves.
Why does the craftsman fall from that in practice: and because of this, cautery with iron is faster and closer to us, straight to the point of operation.
And I myself have already ordered this chapter on cautery, according to the chapters: and I ordered them from the head down to the feet: that you may find what you want from it.
Chapter II.
Here confirm cauterization to the domination of humidity and coldness on the brain: which are two causes of sweat, and a multitude of flux of humors from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and a multitude of sleep, and pain of teeth, and pain of throat: and universally all sickness that happens from coldness, such as paralysis, and swelling, epileptic fits, and strokes, and similar things from those illnesses.
The way of cauterization is, so that you instruct the sick: that they are discharged in the first place with a solutable medicine and purifying the head after three nights, or four, according to what the power of the disease, and his age, and his custom require.
Then order that he make his head radiance with a red-hot iron. Then make him sit between your hands square, so that he has already put his hands on his chest.
Then place the root of your hand on the root of his nose between his eyes. So whichever way your middle finger moves, mark that spot with fire.
Then the fire cautery: which this is its form.
Then put the piece of flesh on the marked spot with the caustice, descent, so that your hand constricts it little by little, and you rotate it. Then move your hand quickly, and inspect the spot.
That if you see already extracted from the bone quantity of salt, or quantity of thyme, then move your hand. And if not, repeat the hand with the iron, or with another from him if it is cold: until you see the bones, which I told you.
Then take some of the salt and dissolve it in water, and dip it in the poultice, and place it on the spot: and release it for three days.
Then put over the spot poulticed in butter, and release it on the spot, until the fire scar is destroyed. Then care for that with the ointment four-fold, until it heals.
They have said, that since the splinter remains open longer, it will emit pus: why is it better and more beneficial to the patient.
And said one of them, so that it may be cauterized on the skin until the bone: and hold the fire, until some of the bone's spiciness is burned up.
Then burn after that which is burnt out from the bone, then cauterize it.
And others say that it should be with the fire to reach the last place, until it impresses on the bone an impression of a letter, so that it falls: or instrument which women put into an infusion of alphabet: and they extract, because from this place vapor of head comes out, and the splinter remains open for a long time.
Then cauterize, until it hardens.
But I do not know these two kinds of fire at all unless they are in certain people due to fear.
And to dismiss him, it is better for me with his health.
For the head is weakened by the solution of its natural continuity: as we have testified in the other members; and especially when the head is weak from nature: and, moreover, when the species of the Cautery is first more healthy and better with me, and I use it: so let us work on him while he is healthy.
The Head, Chapter III.
When chronic pain occurs throughout the whole head, and it is prolonged in one who is sick, and he uses ointments, and poultices, and hot baths, and oils, and employment. And above all if the cauterization has already been done with one cautery, which we have described, and does not give him anything of those things: then consider. For if the head is strong of nature's creation, and is not weak, and there is a cold sensation: then cauterize under it with another cautery a little bit. Then cauterize him on all the horns of his head with his own cautery, and don't let the skin be broken, and a quantity of bone be disclosed, which we have described. And cauterize him with one cautery at the back of his head, in the place which is called the spot: and it is a place where there is a breeze; and wipe your hand well in this place, and do not disclose the bone. For the weak one has the painful pain due to this spot, and is far from the pain of the other parts of the head.
And I will call this cautery in its place; and it must be that which is used to cauterize the horns of the head, and the back of his head with a thinner cautery, so that it cauterizes the middle of the head.
Chapter IV.
When pain and swelling occurs in the skull, or the pain extends to the eye, and the head is washed with medicines that clear it, and the remaining treatment is administered as I have described in the division of illnesses, and does not provide all of it: then cauterization should be done in two ways: either cauterization with an acute medicine burning: or with iron.
But if cauterization is done with an acute medicine burning, it should be as follows: take one of the teeth of a donkey, and scrape off its flesh, and cut off its ends from both sides. Then cut out the area of pain at the time with a phlebotome's blade, until a place is made under the skin, where the tooth enters.
Then insert it into that place under the skin, until it is hidden: then tighten it over that with a constricting bandage and remove it after fifteen times, then wash it out again after two days or three: then put a soaked cloth on that place, until a pus forms: then treat the pus with an ointment until it heals.
And if you want to make it with certain medicines that burn, which I have written about in the 12th book, On Burning Medicines.
But cauterization with iron is according to this method: Fire Cauterization, whose form is as follows:
And it is called a 'clauis': because the shape of the head is like the shape of a clauis, in which there is a little prominence, and in the middle of it is a small eminence.
Then place that on the spot, and hold your hand: and slowly turn the iron with speed: and the amount that burns is determined by the thickness of the skin, such as half of it. And raise your hand so that it does not burn the artery that is lower down, and so that no blood flows.
Then soak the wound in salt water, and put it on the place, and leave it for three days: then put the wound with butter: afterwards treat it with ointment until it heals.
And if there is a headache, cauterize this headache with extreme care with a scalpel in the second cautery. And do not cause an incision of the artery in this headache, but it is old and its own.
The mode of cauterizing in an old headache.
When you treat a headache, in addition to what we have said before in the treatment preceding and because we have said that the division of diseases is not effective, and you see from the disease that it does not suffice to it that we have said from cauterization with medicine or cauterization with fire; then it is necessary to put the fire of cauterization until it turns white after the signs on the place of pain with a line whose length is half a finger, or almost like that: and then put your hand out one way, and squeeze it until you touch the artery, and reach all the way to the mouth.
However, it is necessary for you, so that you cauterize the continuation of the jaw, which moves during chewing, so that it does not burn on one side or the nerve which moves it, from which accident a spasm occurs.
And be on guard and take care of the flow of blood of the artery that has been cut off. For there is a danger in cutting off that part, and especially to him who does not know what he is doing, and is not studious or expert: and he dismisses the operation with it at first.
And I come with a reminder of the treatment of the flow of blood of an accident from an artery in its own place in this book.
That if you see from the disease that this cauterization does not suffice, and you see the body suffering from the cauterization in the middle of the head, as we have told, treat the wound until it heals.
And if you see, apply cauterium, which we said in the chapter on the extraction of the artery with a cautery having two scissors. For cauterization is better and more effective in this way.
§ On the method of cauterizing with fire in pain in the ear.
When pain happens in the ear from cold, and is cured with poultices, and the remaining cure as we said in the division, and the pain does not cease, then apply fire cauterization: and that is what is called a punctum, whose shape is this.
Then the punctum with it after its ignition around the whole ear, as it heals: or around either, if the pain is simultaneous in both. And lengthen it with the cautery from the root of the ear slightly, after you have marked the places with encaustic: and let the quantity of cautery be ten points all over the ear, and almost the same.
Then care for the place, until they are healed.
§ On the method of cauterizing with fire in torture.
Chapter VII.
Torture which is cured with cauterization, is not unless from the species which happen from phlegm, according to what we said in the divisions of ailments.
And removed cauterization of the species which happens from drying, and spasm of a nerve.
When you treat this species of torture with hips, and caputpuruns, and gargarisms, and your cure does not bring about improvement, then you should cauterize the sick with three cauters: one near the root of the ear, and the second a little lower than its place, and the third at the connection of the two lips.
And place your cautery from the opposite side of the weak part. For softening does not happen unless in the part which appears to be healthy.
And the form of cauterization is, so that it cauterizes itself with the cautery in the direct extremity of the upper ear near the apex of the head a little bit: and the other in the time: whose length is according to the length of the thumb. And deposit your hand with the cautery, until half-a-handspan of the skin's thickness has been burned away.
And this is the shape of the cautery, and it is made from a scalpel, whose form is mentioned above: verily, however, it is not less sharp by much, as you can see; and the scalpel should be a little less thick than that.
Then heal the wound with the cautery which preceded it: until it has healed.
The way of cauterizing in ancient apoplexia.
When apoplexia is antedated, and care for it has been given with that which we have said, and your treatment does not bring about a cure, and the patient is without fever, then cauterize him four times on every corner of his head, and once in the middle of his head, as we have said, and once at the back of his head, according to what has preceded: and the way of the cautery should be according to what has preceded.
Also cauterize with the cautery over the mouth of the stomach: and it is more final.
Then heal with that which has preceded.
Chapter IX.
It is necessary that he should drink a great deal of wine in the first illness, and pills which clean the brain.
Then shave the whole head, and place over its back an ointment described in the treatise on ointments: and sometimes put it on himself.
This is the way of the cautery: and do it according to the order which we have said there.
If then he is healed by it, it is good. If not: then do to him three cauteries on the back of his head, which descend from the upper part of the head down to the lower part of the eye: and place between each cautery a thickness of finger.
Then heal the cautery with that which preceded it.
If he does not want to wait, and is eager: then make him a cautery in the middle. That if you do not want to add anything: then cauterize him above two horns.
Then care for the wound, until it heals: and anoint the cautery according to the form, which has been said before.
The mode of cauterizing in paralysis, and of softening.
Head 10.
It is necessary that you should proceed in the purification of the head with hygeine, and with that which I have said.
Then shave the head with a razor: then cauterize it with cautery in the middle of the head, and with cautery over all the horns of the head, and with cautery over the posterior part of it, and with three cauteries over the joints of the neck.
But if you are not able in health to soften the body with many of these things, and the sick person can tolerate it, and the sickness is strong: then cauterize him with four cauteries over the joints of the back, and the last one with cautery, until it is burned through the skin very much, and wash your hand. Then care for the wound, until it heals: and so anoint the cautery.
The mode of cauterizing in epilepsy.
The epileptic person is not to be cauterized unless his epilepsy is from phlegm.
Then let the purifications of his brain be first with hygeine, and with the rest of the cure which I have said in a division: but if the sick person is very weak, or can tolerate medicinal things.
But if he is a boy who cannot tolerate medicines, then let him have gargling, and teeth-cleaning for purifying the brain, before those many days with good alimentation.
Then shave his head, then cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of his head, and according to that which has preceded in mode: and with another cautery on the back of his head, and over all the horns of his head. If he is infirm but strong and able to tolerate, then cauterize him with the cauterizations I mentioned in having a paralysis, and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck, and the vertebrae of the back: and let there be cauterization with olive oil according to the method that preceded.
But if the boy is infirm, then put the cautery that is fine, according to this mode.
On the Mode of Cauterizing in Melancholia.
When the cause of melancholy is corrupt humours and thick phlegm, then cauterize him with the cauterizations I mentioned in having a paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of secretions that lead to melancholy, and his body is wet and unhealthy, then give him in a drink what will purify his brain, according to what preceded in division: and then shave his head, and afterwards make a tortuous strip made of linen, like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the head: and the infirm one, sitting down, should hold himself upright on all sides.
Then present the liniment. And it is fitting that the ancient butter be used. And heat him over a fire with moderate heat, which he can tolerate, when he enters into him. Then let him evacuate himself in the middle of his head in a circle, and let him leave until he is chilled.
Do this to the infirm one once a week, with the rest of his treatment being good, until he is healed.
Or if you want to, cauterize him by making small dots on him a lot of the time, except that you hold the hand with the cautery: but let it be smelling.
This kind of cauterization moistens the brain with its quality.
Then place on him a cloth soaked in butter, or in chicken fat.
On the Mode of Cauterizing in Descending Water to the Eye.
Chapter XIII.
When you see the first signs of water in the eye, as I have described in the division, then begin to drink, and use an ointment, while he washes his head.
And keep him away from all moisture, and let him sit in a bath, on a few days' fast.
Then order him to shave his head, and cauterize it in the middle of his scalp. Then cauterize him over the two temples with two cauterizations, if the first signs of water appear in both eyes at the same time: or from one side, if the first sign appears in only one eye: and cut away all the veins and arteries that are under the skin: and let the cauterization be long in length through the temples: and let it stop the flow of blood.
If you see anything of it, then cut it off immediately with whatever medicine is possible: and I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and in their cutting off, and in the caution against the flow of blood.
And when he is cauterized in the scalp, under two bones, with two cauterizations, which are brought forth last.
The mode of cauterizing in ancient tears.
When the tears of the eyes are ancient, constant: and are over the veins, and the arteries that are on the outside of the head, it is proven that it is from the cold excesses, phlegmatic: then cauterize with the same cauterization in the beginning of the descent of water, with a cauterization in the middle of the head, and two cauterizations over the two temples, and two cauterizations in the scalp under two bones. And if it does not bear the addition, then cauterize him in all sides, with careful eye, at the end of the eyebrow, with a small cauterization.
The mode of cauterizing in the nose's foulness.
When you treat this, with the medicine we spoke of in our division, and there is no benefit from the treatment: then approach it and give it three nights of soup for sick-fleshes: then shave its head, and cauterize it with medium cautery, with oil cautery. Then cauterize it with two clumps of cautery, over the two eyebrows under the hairline a little.
And guard against the artery, lest you cut it.
And this is the form of cauterization with clumps.
The mode of cauterizing in softening the eyelids.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture: then cauterize the eyelid with one lunary cautery, with this cautery of the moon.
And if it is red, cauterize it above the two eyebrows with two cauteries all over: and let them be stretched by the two times: and let the length of each cautery be according to the length of the eyebrow: and do not put your hand on it with the cautery, but second by second according to how much it burns the third eyelid.
The mode of cauterizing the eyelid when the hairs are turning into the eye by stinging it.
The cautery is in two ways, with fire or with the medicine burning.
But in the cautery with fire, prescribe to the sick person beforehand so that he lets go of his hairs, if he is of those who clean them out, until they are lengthened and made even. If, however, it stings him near its origin: then squeeze the eyes with a wet cloth so that they do not move, until they are asleep.
When, however, they have become asleep and even: then place the head of the patient in your lap: then mark on the eyelids of his eyes with encaustrum, a mark that is according to the figure of the leaf of myrrh: and let the beginning of the mark be next to the hairs.
Then put on the bandage wet with albumen, or with slippery mucus over the eye.
Then the fire-cauterization whose form is this.
Then cauterize on the figure, which you have marked little by little in many places, until it is burnt to the surface of the skin, which is like the figure of a holly leaf, all apparently proper.
And the sign of health of your operation is this: that if you squeeze the eyelids of the eye and make the hair disappear at the point of the eye.
So then put your hand away: and dismiss these tribes after a few days.
Then put on the bandage with butter, until the eschar is eradicated. Then care for the wound with ointment, until it heals.
If any of the hair returns after an hour and softens the eyelid: then again apply the cauterization to that place, as you did before.
But if the hair is on the lower side: then cauterize that, until it returns to its own place: and equalize so that the hair of the eye does not sting.
It is as you command for the sick person to let go of the hair, until it is prolonged and equalized. Make in the shape of a holly leaf from paper or cloth.
Then take from the known soap, and from the unmixed clay of a pound of silver or nearly that amount: then dry it all at once with good friction, and make it with haste so as not to be chilled. Then from this take a piece from the cloth on which you made the shape of a holly leaf, and put it on the eyelids of one or both eyes. And put under the eye the bandage wet with albumen, and let the head be in your lap.
Then put your index finger on the medicine, and press the wound slightly. And thou shalt move him whenever he feels ill from the medicine of medicine: for his mordication is like fire.
While he was persevering in this that he found the mordication, then leave medicine, and move it himself with your finger. When the mordication has ceased, then remove medicine, and wash the eye with water.
And then consider, if you see the eyelid rise up, as it were, during contraction with fire or during incision, is well: and if not, then repeat over him from medicine on the place where the medicine does not print, and does not disfigure, until your operation has made it even, and closes.
Then put over him Cotton with butter, until the skin of the heat has been eradicated. Then care for him with diaphoric ointment, or other, until he is healed.
And it is necessary for you near the operation, that you keep the last watch, lest anything fall into the eye from medicine.
That if the eyelid softens after days, and fights with hair something into the eye, then repeat medicine on that place, which softens from the eyelid itself, as you did in the first. Then care for him, until he is healed.
And this is the form of the leaf of Myrrtus.
And you should know that human eyes differ from each other in size and shape. Therefore according to this let your consideration be: and do not conceal the straightness of his sight, which is the study of this art.
The mode of cauterizing in the涙管.
When you care for the fistula, with what regards we have said concerning divisions of illnesses, and your cure does not bring about: then it should be cauterized according to this mode.
Prescribe to the sick person that he puts his head in your lap, and holds it between his hands so that it does not move or shake with his head.
Then put on cotton wadding, or musk-sap, over his eye: then apply the cautery, whose shape is thus.
Then cut the wadding, like the shape of a feather from one end, so that it forms the cautery; and if you cut the thread, going through to the other end, and if you stretch it thus.
However, this wadded string is better for your purpose.
Then unscrew the tube, if it is open, and take out the pus from it, and dry it up: and if it is not open, then unscrew it, and take out the pus from it.
Then put on the cautery, which has been heated well.
And hold your hand slightly near the cautery from his eye, towards the nose, so that your hand does not move, or shake: and put on the cautery, with the fat of the eye, and soften it.
If then you cut the skin at the beginning of your cautery to the mouth, it will be good. And if not: then repeat the cautery once or twice, if you can bear it: and dismiss it after three days.
Then put on cotton wadding with butter, and treat the wound with an drying ointment, until it heals.
If, however, he is not healed after forty days, then put on the wound an acute corrosive medicine, until you see the mouth: and read it again according to what comes out in his book.
And there is another way of applying the cautery, which some said first. Hold at the tube opening, and find it: then put a thin string into the hole, that is, a small cannula, whose shape is thus. And pour into it a little quantity of liquid lead, and hold your hand firmly with the canula, so that the sick person does not move at all, so that he does not run, or let the molten lead come to his eye.
It is necessary that you put on the eye a poultice made with infusions in albumen, or water.
Lead, however, burns the place of the fistula, and heals it with a wonderful cure.
What if the fistula is healed, as we have said from the cautery and cure, is good. And if not, then it is necessary to administer the hole of the nose, and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose, according as it comes in its own place to itself.
The mode of cauterizing in fistulas of the lips.
Fistulas often occur on the lip, which are called hairs, and most especially on the lips of boys.
What if you have care of these wounds, as we have said concerning the division of illnesses, and the cure is not successful, then a small bit of fire, carefully cut from the cauldron, according to this form.
And set it in place according to the sharpness of the knife.
Then quickly place the burning bit on the middle of the fissures, until the fire reaches the depth of the wounds.
Then care for it with a plaster, until it is healed.
The mode of cauterizing in a fistula of the mouth.
When it has happened that a blister occurs on the root of the gingival tooth, or in the palate, or on the roots of the teeth: then pus is produced, and bursts: afterwards it dries up, and pus flows out, and a fistula forms: then care for it, and the cure is not successful, then you should set fire to the cauldron according to the quantity, which it takes in the fistula. Then introduce the burning bit into the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand so that it does not burn to the bottom of its depth, and last one: do this once or twice.
Then care for it after that, until it is healed, as we have said concerning the cure until it is cured.
If then the pus is cut away and heals, it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to detect the place, and remove the corrupted bone according to what comes into its head.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in gingivitis and softened teeth.
When the gingiva softens through moisture, and the teeth move, and does not benefit from remedies, then put the injured head in your bosom.
Then take a cane-like object, whose shape comes after these things, so that you put it over the tooth: and insert the burning caustic quickly into it; and hold your hand there slightly, until the sick one feels the heat of the fire having reached the root of the tooth.
And wash your hand: then repeat the caustic a few times, according to your will.
Then let the sick one fill his mouth with salt water, and hold it for an hour: and spits it out.
For the teeth move, and the swollen gum is drawn together, and the corrupted moisture dries up.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in toothache.
When the toothache is due to coldness, or has coldness within it, or is sore, and does not benefit from remedies: then the caustic is to be applied within it according to two methods: either with butter-caustic: or with fire-caustic.
But the caustic within it is to be made with butter, so that you take buttermilk and heat it, and boil it inside the ear-piercer or the needle. Then take a cotton swab, and wet it with the fat, and hold it on the tip of the tongue. Then submerge the affected area in the butter that has been heated: and place the area on the painful tooth quickly, and hold it until it becomes cold: then repeat the application a few times, until the power of the fire has reached the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, immerse the thread, or wrap it in cold butter, and place it on the hurting tooth; and place over it a hot iron, until the fire penetrates deeply into the tooth cavity.
But cauterization with fire is so that you go towards the air pipe or the iron pipe. And sit in his body some gruel so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the throat.
Then hold the cautery, whose shape you have made; and place it on that tooth; and hold your hand, until the cautery cools down.
Do this sometimes, for the pain is alleviated, or at the same time, or on another day.
And it should be impressed with the cautery so that the sick mouth is filled with good butter and holds it for an hour: then he should spit it out.
This is the form of the cautery.
Cauterize with any limb as well as you can: and this is the form of the cane.
The mode of cauterizing in Strepuli.
When the Strophulae are inflamed with phlegm, and from cold humidities, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, and wish to digest them quickly: then hold a small, hot cautery, whose shape is thus made.
Has two open ends so that the smoke from the cautery's other end is emitted: and place the hot one on the sore once, and again if you tolerate it, until it penetrates deeply into the abcess.
That if the abcess is small: then place the cautery according to the quantity of the abcess.
Then let it be left for three days, and place over it a hot cloth wrapped in butter, so that the fire which was lit is extinguished.
Then care for the tooth with dental ointment, until it is healed by the shape of the cane.
To cauterize a sore throat and reduce a constricted air passage.
When there is moisture on the lungs and especially when this is accompanied by a cold complexion, then it is important to remove the sick person's fluids at the outset with dissolved medicines.
Then cauterize the throat itself with fire at the root of the gum and, if it should happen that you go too deep with the cautery so as to hurt the gums or skin, do not move the cautery there again unless something is present.
Then cauterize the throat with another cautery at the joint of the neck at the base of the spine and, if it should happen that you go too deep with the cautery so as to hurt the gums or skin, do not move the cautery there again unless something is present.
Then take care of the person who was before treated, until he is well again.
The way to cauterize a lung disease and cough:
When a cough and lung disease are caused by cold humidities, and the sick person is not feverish or suffering from phthisis, and the illness is old: then cauterize the throat with two cauteries above the jaw in depressed places, lightly, and gently. And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts: and let the cautery be the same length as that which was before used.
And if you wish to mark your cauterization by puncturing with the cautery, which is called a 'point', and which corresponds to the form of that which was before used in puncturing pain in the ears: and let there be points from twenty to almost thirty.
Then take care of the person who was before treated, until he is well again.
And now let there be three branches of cautery: according to this form. Why the allaying of pain with this cauterization is greater when you make the three branches of cautery.
Chapter 27.
When the assistant's head is dislocated due to moisture, and it does not return to its original position at the time of its dislocation until it has become accustomed to returning, then it is dislocated by a slight movement, which has happened as we have already testified, then you should reduce the dislocation in the first instance. Then the sick person should be laid down on his back or on his side. Then, with your left hand's index finger, gently press the small bone at the top of the wrist, which is inside and towards the thumb: and if it is dislocated inwardly.
Then take two sharp surgical instruments. The shape is this.
Then cauterize the flesh until it penetrates to another side, and make the figure of the cauterization with four cauterizations.
And when the cauterization is made with a instrument having three sharp edges, then the figure of the cauterization becomes six smaller cauterizations: and the sharp edges are second only in their fineness to the needle.
This is the shape of the instrument having three sharp edges.
And when a single addition to this method is made, then there are eight cauterizations.
Then place over the cauterization crushed herbs with salt. Then do not allow the sick person to move any part of his body for a certain time, until he is comforted.
And if the dislocation is upward and it rarely happens, then cauterize him on his shoulder with a single sharp instrument, or cauterize him by puncturing with many sharp instruments.
For the joint will be firmated and the moisture will disappear: and the sick person will recover.
The method for cauterizing the stomach.
When cold and great moisture occur in the stomach, until they have taken the person out from his skin, and multiply to him catarrh until he is cured, and do not make any effort: then the sick person should be laid down on his back, and extend his legs, and stretch his hands. Then cauterize with three cauterizations, cauterization under the cochlea of the chest in the quantity of one digit with cauterization of the claw, and two cauterizations below the two sides of a cauterization, until the figure of the cauterings becomes tri-angular. And lengthen between each other so that they do not join together, when they make pus.
And let the depth of the cauterization be the quantity of two thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And let the figure of the cauterization be according to this form without addition: and if you want a large cauterization in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and let the cauterization with which this cauterization is made be one according to the form of a circle according to this form.
And let the stomach be cauterized by piercing it at the point where it trembles because of this cauterization: and it is, so that you mark a point on the stomach according to the quantity, which you have with the caustics: then cauterize the same with the cautery-pierce: then cure the same with the cure that preceded it until it heals.
The way of cauterizing with fire.
When it happens in the Abdomen that there is pain from cold and humidity, or from thick winds, until it emerges from his natural skin by means of excess discharge, and the sick person is treated with what we have said, and it does not benefit him: then let the sick person lie on his back on the chest of the dead, and let three cauterizations be made according to this form, and this quantity be the same over the spar below the hypocondria, where the bed of man reaches: and let there be a space that is between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger: and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight: and do not squeeze your hand with the cautery very much.
And let the quantity that is burned be from the thickness of the skin, the half of which is not added: and let the sick person stand on his feet.
If, however, he is not standing, then let him lie down, for he has already stretched out his legs, and lifted up his arms.
This is the form of the operation.
And you too can do this operation with a knife blade when there is skill and prudence in the art with you.
And guard yourself that you do not proceed too far in the cauterization, and let the skin be burnt all over, for it is burnt all over the body, and reaches the intestines: since the skin is there thin, so know that one thing.
§ On the method of cauterizing the liver.
When it happens that the apostema [blister] is in the liver, or in its lining: then if it is in the liver, you will see a pain that is gentle and without acute pain, and if it is in the lining of the liver, with a sharp pain: and you will see that the treatment of doctors fatigues it.
It is necessary therefore that the sick person should lie down on his back on his own bed. Then form the shape of the blister with encaustic [hot wax], and then light the fire of the cautery so that it is absorbed by the radiation. And this is its form. And cauterize with that one cautery until the whole skin is burnt, and reaches the siphac, until it comes out completely: then take care of the cure of the cured things, until it heals.
And it is not necessary that this cautery should be used, unless the study of medicine is prolonged in someone: and because sometimes some illnesses come with experience: then let him dare to carry out such an operation.
But, however, to dismiss it, with me it is better.
§ On the method of cauterizing in the pleurisy.
The ancients say that the cautery with roots of arista [aristolochia] is applied to pleurisy in this way. And it is, to take from the roots of dry aristolochia long, a root which is found in her, and let it be as the thickness of the finger. Then immerse it in oil: and light it on fire. Then cauterize with one cautery in him that is between the extension of the fork with the neck, and two small cauteries under the goatee slightly inclined on the side, which is under the beard.
And two cauteries also in him, which is between the fifth and sixth ribs slightly inclined towards the back: and one cautery in the middle of the breast, and another above the stomach. And three cauteries from behind: one in him that is between two spoons: and two cauteries from the sides of the breast, lower cautery which is between two spoons.
And it is not necessary that you should compress your hand with the cautery, but let it be in the open skin smelling.
And some ancient said that out of men who use a cautery of similar iron wire: and light it on fire, and insert it into him that is between the ribs until it reaches with it to its aposteme, and comes out serum: as we have said in the aposteme of the liver.
But in this piercing with the cautery there is fear, that either the sickly one dies immediately, or happens to the place of a fistula, which has no cure.
§ On the way of cauterizing the spleen - Head III.
When you cure the sickness of the spleen, when with him that we have said about the division of diseases, and your cure does not benefit him, then cauterize it in her according to three ways, which are all correct.
Of which one is, that you make three cauteries, or four lined up according to the length of the spleen according to the figure of the cauterize of the liver, whose predecessor was the figure.
And let there be between every cautery quantity of the thickness of the finger, or less.
And let there be a mode of the incision, which we said in the incision of the liver equal.
And do not compress your hand with the incision: and let the sick man lie on his back.
And another mode of incision is: that which has two sides of the fire of the incision, which we said in the chapter of shoulder dislocation: and raise the skin, which is in the straight spleen, where it reaches the bed of the sick on the left side: and let your raise go up according to the breadth of the body, so that the incisions fall according to the length of the body.
Then introduce two sides of fire strongly, until you penetrate through the skin with them from the other side: then pull out the incision: so there are four incisions.
And if you wish to cut with an incision that has three sides.
Then take care of the incision after you have let it emit pus for many days: because it is more healing as much as remains from the cure has προηγεσθαι.
The mode of incision in Hydropsis.
The incision does not fall in Hydropsis, unless it is properly raised.
When you cure Hydropsis with the methods of treatment which we have said in the division, and there is no cure, then it is necessary that the incision should be made four incisions around the navel, and one incision above the stomach, and one incision above the spleen, and two incisions behind the back between the vertebrae, and one incision in the middle of the chest, and one incision in the middle of the stomach: and let the depth of the incision approach the thickness of the skin.
Then let go of the incision open, so that it emits pus after a long time.
And do not wet the sick with cure after the incision, for it is necessary that there be two intentions: and will hasten to him the healing with the help of God.
The form of the incision which is cut with the cutting of the belly, let it be a fold: according to which it preceded in form: and its form which is cut with the cutting of the back, let it be a lip, according to which it preceded in form.
To cauterize the feet and legs.
When they have been put out [of the fire] and filled with yellow water: you should cauterize across the back of the foot in the web between the auricular and the annular: and wash your hand with the cautery, and do not twist it: then wash your hand: and do not touch it at all.
For the yellow water shall restore it, and the cautery shall remain in this form.
Then make two cauteriums on the two legs, and let the cautery be made with the tip of a scalpel: and make a cautery according to the length of the leg, one under the knee, and the other lower down by it, about in the middle of the leg: and make two cauteriums on all the hip: and do not close the cauterium for a long time: so that it shall be healed from it some water: then cure yourself with the rest as we have said.
The way to cauterize in solution of the belly.
Chapter 35.
When the solution of the belly has been relaxed from cold and moisture, until it weakens the retaining virtues and the digestive ones, which are in the stomach and intestines: and cure it with the methods of curing, and does not heal: and you shall see a weakened one bearing the keen virtue of the cautery, then cauterize him with a large cautery across his belly, following what has gone before in the cauterization of the stomach with a small circle-shaped cautery, and four small cauteriums around the navel, with a small scalpel: and a large cautery above the loins, or two cauteriums.
And if you see abundant moisture, and a weakened one of these things, then cauterize him with a cautery across the chest, and a cautery across all the hips: and perhaps you shall add two small cauteriums on the stomach near the large one.
This is indeed a successful cure, whose promise does not fail.
To cauterize hemorrhoids.
Chapter 36.
When there are many old hemorrhoids, or one, and they are of a gross humor, cold, or corrupted humors, and are treated with the same thing that we have said in the division, and does not benefit: then cauterize three cauterizations on the lower spine of the back under an egg-shaped triangle, and a cauterization under the navel almost like two fingers.
And if you consider that his stomach is cold, and his food is not digested, and you see that his face has palor, then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cautery, according to what came before: and a cautery on his spleen, and another on his liver, with a clove: and leave the cautery open for some time: and then take care of him, until he is healed.
Chapter 37.
When you cut off the thrush, then light a cautery that is radiated. Then introduce the lit one into the thrush that has been cut off: and with your last hand, until the cautery reaches the opening of the anus, from which blood runs: do it once, or twice.
If then there are many thrushes, then cauterize each one with a second cautery according to what we have said. Then take care of them, using the ointment on them until they are healed.
And if you cauterize him with a large cautery on his back, it is more painful in the curing.
The way to cauterize the fistula in the anus.
Chapter 38.De modo autem quod et in ure
When the sick one does not obey the section and the work that we have described in its place, and shudders at it, perhaps he will be healed with a cauterization.
For when a fistula has occurred in someone and it is old, pus runs out of it, and there are corrupted wetnesses. It is worthy that you should probe it with subtle attempts when it has occurred. Then recognize the quantity of its depth with tentative tests.
Then apply a cauterizing fire, which is like heat. Then insert yourself with the fire itself into the fistula and measure the quantity in which it enters by its closure.
And repeatedly apply the fire to it until all the corrupt bodies are burned out; once, or twice, or three times, according to the need.
And guard yourself from any burning of the skin, if there is any, or large blisters; or if the fistula opens into the stomach or intestine, then guard yourself from all these places.
And do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place; and be aware that it is not penetrating.
Then take care of the place until it heals.
But if the seal remains there and no material is lost from it, and it remains like this for a long time: then know that it has been completely healed.
And if no material is lost from it, then know that it has broken open, or its opening is in a deep place, or almost like those things: whose memory will remain in its own place.
As for the method of cauterizing the Renes.
When it has occurred in the kidneys a pain from cold, or from gross wind, and they are midnight because of that, then you should cauterize the same above the loin over the kidneys, cauterizing each kidney with a cautery, preceded by a memory.
And perhaps we have cauterized it again within the same loins. Why do three stripes come? Thus they will be more in the test.
As for the method of cauterizing the Vesica (bladder).
When there occurs in the bladder weakness, and softening from cold and moisture, until he does not retain urine, then cauterize him on the lower part of the scrotum over the bladder, where the hairs begin to grow together, and cautery from the right side supplied, and another from his left: and let the length of his cauterization be according to the length of the finger-knuckle: and cauterize him with two cauteries if you can bear it. And let it follow, according to what preceded cauterization nail.
As for the method of cauterizing the womb...
When there occurs in the womb cold and moisture, and it is prevented by that from conception, and her menstrual fluid corrupts, and there is a delay in the coming of her courses, and pain occurs with her when she approaches her time, then it is necessary that he be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder, and cautery on the lower back, or two cauteries: and let it follow, according to what preceded cauterization nail.
As for the method of cauterizing the hymen in a case of its being torn...
When the mucous membrane flows with moisture to the vagina, and there is a cause of her exit from its place: and its sign is that his leg remains long on one side when they stand face to face: and the site of the tear is found in it.
Then let it be that the weakened one be cauterized on his own hymen with a similar circle of cautery: after you have marked the signs with the caustic substance around the hymen, as it returns: and let it fall into the middle of the circle.
If this cautery is not present with you, then cauterize him with three cauteries, with a large olive oil cautery: and let the depth of cautery follow according to the thickness of the skin of all.
Then he cares for himself until he recovers.
The method of cauterizing in sciatic pain:
When pain occurs in the sciatic bone, and there is a cause for it, causing cold and humidity: the sick person should be cared for with the treatment mentioned in the division, and if it does not help, it should become old: then it should be necessary to separate the sick person from thick humors with foety pills, or with artificial pills, and others. Then cauterize him.
And the method of cauterization in it is according to two ways: either with cauterizing with burning medications, or with fire.
With fire, there are many ways.
Of which one is that he cauterizes over the sciatic bone himself with three triangular cautery wicks, according to this form: And make them a good depth or bad. And there should be space between each cautery of the amount of grease: and the cautery should be with oil.
When, however, the cauterization is in the middle on the top of the sciatic bone itself. Why are there four cautery wicks?
And if you want to cauterize with a circle, which has the form preceding the dislocation of the sciatic bone, one: so that the circle contains all the sciatic bone.
And burn the thickness of the skin of the whole body.
This is the method of cauterization in sciatic pain: when pain clings to the sciatic bone itself and does not extend all the way up to the pelvis and legs.
If, however, it extends up to the pelvis and legs, then he cauterizes himself with two wicks over the hip, over the spot where the pain is located, and with his own wick over the top of the leg slightly: and let the cautery be with a chisel.
And make the depth of the cauterization according to the depth of the thickness of the skin.
If the sick person complains that the pain extends to near the toes, then cauterize him at that place with a single, double, triple or multiple punctures, as needed.
If he complains of pain under the knee towards the thigh, then cauterize him at that place with a single knife cut.
And let your cauterization in everything be so that you do not burn the nerve ends or a large artery, and do not attract it towards an evil disease or contraction.
And I have indeed seen one and the other, from those who cauterized above the knee, and finished in cauterization, and the thigh was inflated until the tumor was attached to the foot, and it was pierced all over, and corrupted all over: then the solution of the wind happened, and death after that.
If the pain is in two parts at the same time, cauterize each one according to this method.
And some wise men said about the cauterization of ancæ, whose cautery is this method. Make a similar mark on the iron, whose diameter is half the palm: and place it at the opening according to the thickness of the nail, or less than more: and inside that mark is a third mark.
And there is a space that is between any mark by the quantity of the thumb's knot: and let there be open marks on two sides: and let their height be almost like a knot, or two knots: and let them make handles from iron out of place in the marks.
Then let it be lit in the fire, until it reddens, and let it throw sparks: then let it be placed on the pillow of the sick person who is lying on a healthy side. Then cauterize him with three round cuts in one line.
Then let go of him after three days. Then bind it with butter: and let go of the wound that has been opened for many days. Then the care of the wound with ointment, until it heals.
Albucasius says, with this kind of cauterization of the son, we are a little afraid, because of the appearance of it: and therefore, because we have few who wait over him.
But it is true that he who suffers from good cauterization, and finds with him the place of his wound.
But the cauterization is with the physicians who attend it, so that you make two holes in the arm of it, in which descends a pin of its door from iron or brass, the length of its walls: whose two knots are, or almost the same as themselves.
And let there be space that is between each of the two amounts of thickness of a finger, and let them be open below and above: and let there be what contains itself adinučem, according to this form.
Then put it on the patient lying on his back over a dry place. And press your hand strongly over the dry place. Then pour between the two circles of hot water, which is warmed with fire a little, and hold it for a time of time: and let the patient tolerate the bite of it, and his burn, because he finds the bite as fire, until he is quiet from the bite.
Then wipe your hand with an instrument, and wash away hot water from all of it with sweet water: then let go of it for three days.
Then put on it butter, until it is removed by the burn's blackness: and let go of it for a few days, and wash away the pus from it. It is indeed last in healing.
Then the care of that with ointment, until it heals.
If the pain extends to the hip or the leg: let him have a resting place in it which holds water, according to what you did in the wide one.
And this is the mode of hot water: and I have already written about it in the book of medicine's correction. Grind the alkali and the unbaked calcine of both in a part, and separate them; make two balls out of them, and put each into a new pot with a small hole at the bottom for the quantity that is to be added; then place one ball under the other; throw over the alkali and the calcine water from a sweet spring, so that they are completely submerged; then squeeze them well in your hand; and leave the pots until the sharp water has dropped out of the lower part of the pot.
Then collect all the water, and throw it over the other; and let it rest until it has dried up.
For this will then be very sharp, which is used for many surgical operations and to cauterize the remaining parts of the body. Because it achieves the purpose of fire itself.
And from the medicines are those that cauterize with broad, as well as thesis, and honey of the acorn, and lime with soap, so that both are mixed together.
And the doctor Galen himself reported that a certain man from ancient times was cured of pain in his anke and sciatic; and he praised it as being very effective. And he said that he did not like any other treatment, and that he was cured from one joint until he reported that perhaps he had entered a hot bath, and came out already healthy.
And it is, to be taken from the patient's own urine; and if the urine is not found, it is taken thus: well mixed with a little fat, and placed on the anke where the pain is, or in the hip, or wrapped around the hip; and bound up, and left for a certain amount of hours, three hours, or more as the sick person feels the pain of tiredness. Then introduce it into a bath.
When then his body becomes hot with the sweat, introduce him into the sun. The wound healed, and he was cured.
And know that it is not necessary to use any medicine with these medicines unless after the body has been drained.
And Dioscorides who said that when it is applied to the skin with sheep dung, it benefits those who have sciatica: and it becomes a second-degree burn. The wool is to be soaked in old oil and applied over the deep place, which is between the thumb of the foot and the heel, and is closer to the heel.
Then take sheep dung as it is, and set fire to it in the fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then put the charcoal over the wool and leave it on until it goes out. Then repeat that. So do not stop doing that until the sensation has subsided to the middle of the leg, and let the pain rest.
This method of burning is called the Vaccine cautery.
For the pain of the back.
When the pain occurs on the back for various causes, or from a fall, or from being hit, or from excess evacuation, and similar things, by the infusion of cold and moist matter: and the burn does not fall except in this alone, which is made by infusing cold and dry matter.
It is necessary that after the draining of the nurse with foetid pills, and those similar to them, in order to make them on the back where there is pain, three lines are marked on the skin according to the width of the arm, after which five cauterizations or more are made according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the nurse's power: and let the burn be made with the cauterize.
And if you wish, make three burns or four burns with a small needle according to this form.
On the method of burning in the gibbus.
These diseases frequently occur in young infants.
And the sign of this disease in children is that it occurs: which comes to him constriction in panting during elevation and movement, and inflammation at the last vertebrae of the spine and its joints, which has already begun to rise above the remaining vertebrae.
So when you see this, and do that, then burn him with fire according to this form.
And he should take the fire on all parts of the spine equally: and if you want to burn with fire two or three points around the spine: and there are points opposite each other.
Then care for the place, until it is healed with him that we have said.
And do not apply fire to the hunchback, which occurs due to a spasm of a nerve.
On the method of burning for gout and pains of joints.
When the pains of joints are from cold moisture that is spread to any member of the body, then when pains occur in the feet, it is the custom of doctors to call this Podagra by name.
So when Podagra of cold cause is cured with methods of cure, and the pains are not removed, then fire should remove those pains.
And it is as if he were burned around the joint of the foot with many burns: and let the fire be olive oil.
And if you can tolerate to touch points on the foot's surface, then do it with fire. That if the pains ascend to the knees or other joints, and this disease frequently occurs: then burn him on all sides of the knee with three burns or four from all parts, with this same fire of cloves.
If however you need many of these fires, then burn him. And do not submerge your hand with fire, but let there be a certain thickness of skin.
If, however, the pains ascend to the knees and back: then administer what we have said from the cautery in its own chapter.
That if the pains are only in the hands, then points around the fire, as the two lines resolve.
If, however, the pain remains in the fingers, then points them, over every knot a point, and over the palm of the hand.
If, however, the pains ascend after days to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize both sides entirely.
And do not leave the sick person in bad condition from good regime, from the reception of medicines. For if the regime is made good, and the phlegm is expelled, it will be healed with this aid of God.
§ On the mode of cauterizing in ruptures.
When a rupture has occurred in the groin, and has descended into the intestine, or to the testicle, and it is beginning to be close by: then you should order the sick person to leave his food on the day of his sickness. And he should use laxatives, so that the dung comes out from his own belly.
Then let him sit between your hands on his back, and order him to hold his breath until he goes out, or appears the testicle, or the intestine.
Then let him reduce himself with your fingers, and mark him with the caustice under the rupture over the edge of the pear-bone, with the mark whose extreme is equal to half a circle towards the upper part of the body.
Then let him hold the caustic fire in this shape, until it is white, and let him spit out the small pieces. Then let him reduce the intestine, or the testicle to its concavity. Then let the minister put his hand on the place so that he does not lose the intestine: and you have already opened between the thighs of the sick person, and placed below it a towel, and one serving as another leans over the thighs of him, and one lies on the chest of him who holds the hands.
Then deposit the caustic on the wound, with your hand holding the caustic in a straight position. And hold him, until you are satisfied with his condition: or else repeat the force with him a second time, if you are not satisfied with him in the first instance to the throat.
And carefully observe from the exit of the intestine at the time of your cauterization, so that you do not burn him, and let it pass through it into the disease or death, or a great ill.
And know, that when you do not succeed with the caustic to the throat, your operation is of no effect.
And it is necessary that the caustic be subtle for infants, according to their measure.
Then care with the rest of the ointment, until he is healed.
And let him lie prone on his back for forty days, until the wound is closed up.
And it is necessary that you place nutrition for the length of time of his cure, which softens his belly: so that he does not evacuate the intestine by straining and by feces.
Then when he is ready to rise after forty days, then administer a loosely made ligature, and let him hold it for another forty days.
And let him abstain from work, and from filling himself with food and drink, and from noisy speech.
For when he uses this regime, he is healed by whole cure.
And I will speak of the cure of ruptures with an incision in its own chapter.
When, however, ruptures occur in the rest of the belly, and are incipient, and do not enter, then cauterize his rupture with round caustic according to its quantity: and let it be as he is burned from then on like the third part. Then care for him, with him that we have said: and do not add to him.
And some first said that the rupture should be cauterized with round caustic, according to this form.
After the wound has been closed with caustic, and a line has been drawn across the lower part of the upper rupture, and another line has been drawn downward. And place your hand in the middle with the caustic ointment.
But the caustic is easier and better to begin with.
As for the way of applying the caustic, in pain due to injury, or because of pounding.
Chapter LXXVIII.
When pain occurs in some member due to injury or because of pounding, and that pain persistes for a long time and there is no benefit from medicine: then it should be treated with the caustic ointment of punctum.
And let the caustic be of the same size as the member, and its condition, and its weakness, and its strength, and its twist, and the pain from it.
But if he is healed by the first caustic, then it is good. If not: then repeat the application of the caustic.
Because from the custom of these kinds of pains is that they change from one member to that which approaches it. Why should those who follow be treated with the caustic, until the sick are healed?
As for the way of applying the caustic, in leprosy:
But lepers should be treated with the greatest care. And especially the kind of leprosy that is due to the putrefaction of phlegmon and melancholy: so consider carefully how you treat it with the caustic.
If, however, leprosy is incurable, and if you have treated it with that which we mentioned in the division, and if it has not fallen off, nor stayed on: and if the corruption comprehends the whole of its skin: then treat it with five caustics on the head: one in the middle of the scalp between the ears, and a second lower down towards the front at the end of the hair, and two above the two temples, and one behind the ear.
And lastly, with your hand slightly pressed down by the cauldron, until it impresses a puffy impression on the mouth, and the membranes are dislocated from it; so that the exhale of great vapors is alleviated from it, and also the cautery is cauterized over the same spleen, according to which it has preceded.
But if the leprosy has already spread on the sick person, and appears clearly; then it is necessary that you cauterize with these cauteries which we have said in the head, and cautery over the extreme end of the nose, and two cauteries over two cheeks, and two cauteries over the two sides of the neck, and six over the spine of the back, and one great one over the alhahoso at the ends of the tail and one above it, in which are wrapped: and two over the shoulders: that is, one over all the shoulder with one, and two over the knees: that is, one over each knee, and two over the shoulders, and two over the tender parts of the chest of his own: and cautery over all the joints, from the joints of the fingers of his hands, and his feet: and cautery over all the heel of his feet, and the nails of his hands.
And let you be careful of the nerves which are above the last heel, so that you do not burn them.
And when one is cauterized with a cauldron over the ossa pectiris, and another over the ossa stomachi, and another over the spar.
And you should know that the more you add cautery, the greater the benefit is, and the more it confers.
And you should know that the sick person does not find pain in cautery, as he finds it in a healthy body: therefore, because his body is already stupified.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be of a good size, and varied according to the limbs and joints: because they precede according to the tools of the instrument.
Then take care of the cauteries with flour of herb with honey, and with other cures, until it is healed.
To cauterize while in a stupor.
When a member is stuporized and treated with medicines, oils, plasters, and does not heal, then cauterize the said stupored member with cauterizations, according to which the magnitude of the member increases or the size of it decreases.
And let your cautery sit in the thickness of the skin a little. Then care for the said member with ointment until it heals.
And sometimes cauterized at some stupor that happened to the hand, and foot, in the vertebrae of the back near the exit of nerves that move that member: and the stupor is removed.
But do not hesitate about it, unless you are wise in the anatomy of members, and the exit of nerves that move the body.
Head.
When Albaras is burned and does not bring anything from the arts of medicine: then cauterize a little above that deep cautery, according to the thickness of the skin, until the skin changes color and turns.
Then care for the said member with wheatgrass, and rose oil, and leaves of arglochea, and pigeon blood, and duck blood: let one part be mixed, and be laid on a cloth, and adhere to the place until it heals.
The way to cauterize while in a stupor.
When Cancer is beginning, and the eye must be put on it: then cauterize the said eye with a circular cautery, as it turns around.
But wise people have said, "Let the last cautery be used in the middle.
But I do not see that: because I fear that it will ulcerate: and I have already seen it a few times.
And it is better to cauterize it on the circumference of it with a circle, as we have said: or with many cauteries.
To cauterize in adubelah.
When anyone has adubelah and is delayed in maturing, or because it is unnecessary to make it, or because of old age, so that it is a few blood, or because of time, and the sight of it is rushing into maturation, then cauterize around it with small blisters with points by puncturing. Then let go of it. For it will hasten in its maturation.
But if you pierce its sight with a cautery, then take this fire cautery, which has this shape.
And put it in the middle of adubelah, until it penetrates the skin: and place the cautery from it that follows behind, so that it eases the course of the blood.
Then take care of it until it heals.
The way to cauterize in a bad rotten place.
De modo cauterizandi in adubelati.
A rotten thing is not but decay in a member that walks, and it rots its own self: as fire dries up dry wood.
But if you see a rotten thing in a place that accepts a cautery with fire, then take many cautery-fire, small claws and big ones, according to what suits it in the place where the rotten thing is.
Then cauterize the person from all parts until you root out all the corruption, and there does not remain any of it within.
Then let go of the person for three days, and place sulfur-ash over the cauterized places with oil, until it eradicates all the scars, and all corruption.
Then take care of the person with ointments that generate flesh.
But if you see that, after three days, the flesh is born with a healthy birth, where there is no corruption, it is good.
And if not: then repeat the cautery on that which remained of the corrupted places.
He heals a corroding wound when it is sometimes treated with acute medicine. But she herself rises at the place of cauterization.
However, the cauterization is faster with fire: and indeed I have already said that cauterization with acute medicine is to be done gradually: so take it there when you are ready for it.
§ On the way of cauterizing in Clefts and Warts.
Chapter LVI.
This sickness often occurs in the lower parts of the feet: and it is a gross disease, filtered, which hurts the foot.
And indeed there are two ways of cauterizing them: cauterizing with fire, and cauterizing with hot water.
How much, then, is it with fire, so that the flames of the cautery are similar to the feathers of a branding iron: which is to be made of iron, according to the quantity that it contains at the joint from all parts: and let it be sharp at the edge.
Then place the burned one on the claw. Then turn the claw with the cautery around it, until the cautery reaches the depth of the claw: and leave it for three days, until it begins to emit pus. Then bind the wound with coarse silken threads, crushed with salt: and leave the plaster on the wound at night. For it will itself be根除根除根除
Then care for the place with a generous ointment of meat, until it is healed.
But if they are not turned into scabs, and often occur on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet: then administer to them hot water cauterization: and it is as though you receive a claw, made of iron, or a branding iron: place it on the claw, or a toothpick. Then drop a small amount of hot water into the pipe: hold your hand, and turn it slightly with your thumb, so that the edge of the pipe is imprinted in the root of the claw, and find hot water to the depth, to the root of the claw: and let the sick person wait for a while on the prickling of the hot water.
Then let go of him, for the claw is removed with its roots.
Then do this to them one by one, until you have come to all that are in the body.
Then take care of them after they have been removed, with that which generates flesh from the stump.
The way to cauterize in tremor.
When it happens to anyone that there is tremor from cold in a nerve, or from fever quartan, or some other: then it is necessary that one should cauterize him four times, or five on the spine at the back, and between all the spine a cauterization, and in his chest a cauterization, and above the stomach a cauterization.
For tremor is calmed by an olive oil cauterization, and quickened is the health of sickness of cold.
The way to cauterize according to Al-Bahir.
Chapter LVII.
When the Al-Bahir foul substances, that is, pustules which are made from gross corrupted materials, are discharged from the body.
It is necessary then, at first when they appear, that they should be cauterized over the whole head of the pustule with a fine cautery made of myrrh, whose end is incensed with fire. Or with the root of long Aristolochia. Or with a lenticular cauterizer.
And when they are cauterized with blood, at first their discharge according to this mode: and they do not increase: and they break off the excess, healing from them.
However, it is necessary that that be done after evacuation with phlebotomy.
The way to cauterize in a flow of blood from an artery in the arm.
However, this way of doing it is made: often a flow of blood comes from an artery cut in the arm, which has happened externally, or at the incision of an abscess, or at cauterization of a limb, and such: and it is difficult to remove him.For the blood does not come out easily, because it has congealed with the fat; and, if you try to press it, pain and a beating will result.
So if it happens to anyone of you, then hold the end of the artery with your hand and place the index finger on top of it: and squeeze it very much, until the blood stops flowing under your finger, and nothing comes out of it.
Then put a few small olive oil wicks on fire, and many more: and blow on them until they are very hot.
Then take from them one, or small, or big, according to the size and location of the broken artery, and place the wick on it, then remove your finger quickly: and hold the wick, until the blood comes out.
That if you expel it with your finger away from the opening of the artery, and put out the wick, then take another wick quickly from the wicks that are prepared on fire.
So you shall not stop doing this with one after another, until the blood stops coming out.
And be careful, so that you do not burn the wick that is there, and does not happen to another evil malice.
And know that when the blood flows out of an artery, then it is not possible to remove it: especially if the artery is large, unless with four measurements. Or with a wick, as we have said. Or with extraction, when it has not been extracted. For when it is extracted, its ends contract, and the blood comes out. Or it is bound with a strong yarn. Or are placed on top of the flesh for its property, whose blood should be stopped, and is squeezed with a feather-like compression.
Whoever performs this incision with a knot, and tightening with cloth, or positioning of burning things and others, does not give it a complete wound, unless rarely.
But if it happens to anyone of you, and the doctor is not present with him, nor medicine: then begin with the positioning of the index finger on top of the opening of the wound as we have said, and its compression very much, until the blood stops flowing from the upper part of the wound, and is placed on the artery. And do not move the finger, above it with cold water always moving the frosty, until the blood is congealed, and thickens, and is cut off.
And while considering, what does he need from the poultice or the medicine?
On incision, perforation, and phlebotomy on wounds and similar cases.
We have already said in the First Chapter about all sicknesses that are treated with fire and medicine combined, their occasions, causes, instruments, and forms of poultices.
And I placed there from the apex to the foot.
And I will proceed in this chapter in the same way: that he may find relief for his inquiry.
And before I begin that, you should know that this book is of fear as it was said in the First Chapter about the cauterization.
And for that, a greater caution is needed, since in the operation described in this chapter, often comes an effluxion of blood, with which the life goes out at the opening of the bowel, or incision on a blister, or opening of an exitula, or cure of a wound, or extraction of an arrow, or incision on a stone, and similar cases: from all of which tremor and fear associate, and death often comes in many of them.
And I warn you, so that it does not come to you that is of hesitation, for sometimes what comes to you in this art of men with the ways of sicknesses can also come to you. For from them is one who is angered with his sickness, and is easily dead: because of the severity that he finds from his sickness and the length of his illness. And when sickness is of fear that signifies death.
And from them is one who gives you his money and promises you with it, hoping for health, but his sickness is pernicious.
Therefore it is not necessary that you should agree with him who comes to you from them, whose mode is such. And be your caution greater than your greed and your avarice. And do not presume about anything from him, unless after knowing for certain that which comes to you by way of his achievement deserves praise.
And that you use all your skills in the care of all your sick patients, in prognosis and in indicating what is suitable for their cure.
In him indeed is your help in acquiring fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you, O son, with his understanding, and may he not remove from you his guidance and inspiration: for it is in his hands.
And I myself have arranged this chapter by distinguishing it into chapters, following the order that preceded in the Chapter of Cautery from the nape to the feet: so as to alleviate what you want from him and what you need.
Of the Care of Water Which is Added to the Heads of Young Boys.
Chapter I.
You should know that this illness often occurs in boys at the time of birth: or when the midwife grips the boy's head without gentle handling.
And whenever it also happens for an unknown reason which is not known.
And I myself have not seen this illness in others but in boys; and I consider all of them worthy of death: because of which, therefore, I have abandoned the practice of performing operations on them.
And I myself have seen from among them a boy whose head was swollen with water, and his head became great every day until he could not sit on himself of his own volition because of its size; and the moisture increased until he died.
And this moisture, or it is added between the skin and the jaw: or it is added under the bone over the jaw.
And the operation in that, if there is moisture between the skin and bone, and the abcess is small, then you should find a crack in the middle of the head's length: and let the length of the crack be almost two knots, until the moisture runs.
And this is the form of a scalpel.
But if the moisture is increased and the abcess is larger, then place them two cracks, according to this form.
And if the moisture is under the bone, and there is a sign of it, which you see as the comissures of the head are open from all sides: and when you compress it with your hand towards the inside, and it does not hide from you: then you should find in the middle of the head three cracks, according to this way.
And after cutting remove all the moisture. Then tighten the cracks with rags and powder. Then dip it in wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then dissolve the ligaments, and take care of the tendon with bandages and ointment.
And do not cease to tighten the head with equality. And feed the sick with dry food that is deficient in moisture until their member is healed and healed.
Another way of cutting is to consider where the abcess appears large, and where the collection of water is.
Because when it is larger at the back or the front or on the right or left.
So ascendi with the cut where you see the abcess and the filling of water, and cut it according to what is possible for you.
And observe that you do not hit an artery, and let blood flow, and the sick person dies from that flow with the evacuation of moisture.
Regarding the arteries that are behind the ears.
Head II.
When it happens to anyone that there is a cataract on the eyes or on the chest and it is old, and does not respond to treatment with medicine: then the last treatment in that is cutting these two arteries.
One should therefore when one wishes to incise them, so that the sick man may not shake his head. Then he will cover the place with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear. Then the sick man should tie his neck with any of his own cloths. Then consider where the new pulse is beating. And the places on either side are those which are behind the ears: and seldom except in some men do they hide themselves.
Then mark with the caustic on each side: and cut each with a sharp knife, while aiming for the mouth: and let it go through the thickness of the head.
And if you wish to cut the artery, introduce the blade beneath it, and cut it from above with an incision.
And make the length of the incision almost like two fingers joined together.
For when the new pulse is incised, blood flows out with a pulsating movement, which rises to the inside at frequent intervals.
If the artery does not appear to the touch, then you should measure the distance from the ear by three fingers' length. Then mark with the caustic and find until it reaches the mouth.
And what needs to be done is to let out six drops of blood, and perhaps you let out a little more or a little less. All this depends on the quantity which appears to you from the nerve when it is stretched, and on the filling of the artery.
Then consider towards the spine. If there remains anything at the mouth, cut it so as not to cause a blister, then tie the spine with linen thread.
Then take care of the patient with ointment until he is healed.
Regarding the extraction of arteries, which are in the temples.
Chapter III.
When it happens to a man that he has an old headache, or acute catarrah from acrid and irritating humidities, and heat in the temples, or old soda, bitter, and similar things: and he is treated with the methods of medical science, and does not provide this: then we have been experienced in these diseases in extracting the arteries from the temples, or cauterizing them, as we have described.
And the method of operation in their extraction is, that a wounded hair which is in the temporal region is removed, and directed toward the apparent artery in the temporal region. And it is shown to you from its own pulsation, and rarely concealed unless in a few people, or if it trembles sharply from cold.
If it is hidden from you, then the injured man should wrap his head with any cloth: and then he should find a dry place with a rough cloth. Or he should warm the spot with hot water until a clear vision appears to you. Then take a knife which is slightly sharpened. Then scrape with it the skin together with ease until you reach the artery. Then throw into it a hook, and pull it upward, until you have pulled it out of the skin, and let it flow from the tunics which are under it on all sides.
If however the artery is thin: then wrap it up with the hook's end. Then cut from it on one side in proportion to how long its ends are extended, and bind them together so that no blood flows out. For if it is not cut, and if it is not separated, the blood will not go deep.
Then let flow out of its blood half a drachm until three drachms.
If the artery is large: then it should be bound in two places with double thread, strong, and silk; or with horsehair so that it does not properly adhere to it before the wound has healed, and blood flows out.
Then cut away the excess which is between the two bindings. Do this at that hour, or after another hour.
And if you wish, burn it with a caustic until it reaches the mouth, with a surgical scalpel: so that its ends will be cut off, and it will stay in place of its own accord.
And this work is better if the sick person has a fever, or if he has a heated complexion. For the cautery is from those that remain to complete the moisture. Therefore it is better to bandage.
And after the extraction of the arteries, so that the place may be filled with old heat: and let be placed over it downy woolen cloth made loose.
And after solution with dry medicines, which make the flesh grow, and with liniments, until it heals.
That if, while you are operating, a flow of blood comes from an artery, then proceed to cut it off with the cautery, or to fill the place with blood: and tighten your hand, until the blood is cut off. That if you have nothing present for this, then place your finger on the spot, until the blood congeals. And dip the place in water of cold wetness, until the pain subsides, and tighten it according to what is necessary.
And from that which is softer and easier to extract the artery, it is, as if the knife with this cautery having two blades: and the sharpness of the two blades is like an almond. However, they are much less sharp than the two knives. Since if they are acute, as the two knives, it is fitting that both have coldness: and do not strike the flesh with speed. So that if there is a little roughness in them, heat of fire is held in them, and the flesh is cut off quickly: so that with this, it is better for every work, and softer, and easier.
And this is the form of the cautery.
And set a space that is the quantity of the roughness of the finger between the two knives after you have marked the two places with the caustic: and put both burning vigorously, until they come to the tip, and strike exactly in the two places: so that it extends what is between its extremities. Since they are not solidified by this cautery.
Chapter IV.
On the treatment of acute and chronic eye tears.
When the tears are persistent and the course of the tear channels is clear, they extend from the outer part of the skull to the front of the head; nor do they require any medicine with physicians, for the eyes begin to turn red and feel a stinging sensation in the forehead, like that of ants walking on it: the eyelids become hot due to the acuteness of the tears; then the ancient people used to treat them with this operation, and called this treatment "Ensa.
And is it not as you command the sick person to shave the hair on his forehead? Then make three incisions in the forehead equidistant from each other according to the length of the forehead; and let the length of the incision be almost two fingers, and let one incision be equidistant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second, according to the length of a little more than half a finger, from the first by the movement of the scalpel; and the third, from one side to the other: and take care not to cut the arteries that are in the two sides: and extend your hand from the junction of the two jaws, and let the space between each incision be the length of three joined fingers: and have you a sponge prepared or dry cloth with which to dry the blood.
Then insert the spatula at both ends of the acute incisions, whose following shape is: From the incision that is on the temporal side up to the second incision: and scrape with it all the skin that is between the two incisions with sifac, which is above the bone. Then also do this from the middle incision to the second incision. Then take this spatula out and insert into the first incision again another tool called an acute chisel, smooth on one side, not acute on the other. And this is its shape:
And place his acute side away from the flesh attached with skin, and his soft side opposite the bone: and push him forward until he reaches the middle crevice; and cut off with him all tools that come down from the head to the eyes: except that the incision continues until it appears from the skin.
Then place him in the middle crevice until he reaches another crevice.
And after the quantity of blood has run out equally, express the places from the clotted blood.
Then place in every crevice the ash of old bread, and place on top of them wet rags soaked in wine, oil, or vinegar. And be careful not to cause a swelling that is hot.
And on the third day loosen the ligaments and administer a strong infusion with lukewarm water. Then care for that with basilicum ointment, and with the rest of the ointments used to treat wounds: until it heals.
Head V.
On the care of acute tears and cataracts on the eyes from inside the head.
When any acute cataract, bitter, persistent, and the eyes seem exhausted, pale, and their appearance is already weakened: and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hair falls out from them, and there is a sharp pain in the depths of the head, and subsequent sneezing: then remove these accidents, because those materials do not come until they have been removed by many.
And a better treatment for them is this. And it is as if you were to shave the person's forehead. Then cut in one fissure in the middle of the forehead, or a little more around the width, and begin with the crevice from the left time to the right side: and make the incision all the way down to the bone: and extend your hand from the jaw bones that move during mastication: until it is closed completely: and you will dry out all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate between the two lips of the wound with a hot cloth, or with liniments from linen. Then bind above it with wool: and dip the wool in wine and oil, so that hot swelling does not occur.
And when you have loosened it, and you see that hot swelling is about to break out: then it is necessary that you cut off the nose, until it begins to grow there.
Then care for him with the drying treatment which causes flesh to grow: as if you had taken two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony: and prepare an ointment from it, and administer it for the growth of flesh in these wounds.
Chapter VI.
As for the care of him who falls into Golden Death.
All that falls into Gold is of four kinds: either stone-like substance, or similar to stone, such as iron and lead; or from plants, such as chickpeas and beans; or fluid substance, such as water and vinegar, and like substances; or some kind of creature.
When therefore a stone falls into Gold, or of a kind of stone that does not contribute to the growth of Gold, and does not grow in it, expose Gold to the sun: if then you see a stone, then distill in Gold some of oil inflected, or of mustard seed. Then administer the extraction of it, and make it snort with ointment, and anoint his nostrils when he is approaching from the wind, after you have put on him, around the ear, cloths or wool, and raise up the ear towards the sky.
For this treatment has often gone astray.
But if it does not go astray, then administer the extraction of it with a subtle hand: whose shape is this.
But if it goes astray with the hand, it is good.
And if not, then administer the extraction of it with a small, soft hook.
If then he does not go out by that [method], then make a tube of brass, and insert the extreme end of the tube into the hole of the ear much, and the dust which is in the circumference of the tube with the brass softened with oil, so that there is no passage for the wind except through the tube: then draw it out with your breath strongly.
For very often he went out with it when we were describing [it]. But if not in this way then take it from the skullcap, or from water, that is to say, gluten prepared with which they pluck feathers, and put the same on the end of the radius after you have dried up the ear from the moisture. Then insert it into the hole of the ear easily, after you have placed it askew: then insert it into the ear hole with ease, after you have placed it askew: then insert it into the ear hole with ease, after you have placed it askew:
But if not with all that we have described, then approach to cut off, before the hot apoplexy or spasm occurs.
And the way of the incision is so that the phlebotomy cuts into the head first: and draw out the blood from it according to the measure of its virtue. Then make the sick person sit between your hands, and turn his ear towards the top, and find a small hole in the base of its ear next to its fat in a depressed place: and let the hole be lunar shape, until you reach the stone: then remove it with that, which is possible for you from instruments.
Then close the hole at once with your breath, and be careful of it, until it heals.
If then what falls into the ear is from one grain, which grows, and swells up: then administer the extraction of it.
But if it does not obey you to come out, then take a thin straw, fine, according to this form.
And administer with it the cutting out of that piece from the grain which falls into the ear, and do not put it off when you think that that grain has already become moist by the ear's vapor, until you have laid many straws on it: then draw it out with a hook, or with a soft gesture, or with a suction, as we said, for the extraction of it is pleasant.
In the water, however, that is put into the ear, it should be used by the sick with Sternutation, when it is first put on; and he has already filled his ear with some boiled water: and he lies down on that ear, where the water is. If then he comes out through that, it is good.
And if not: then take many small stones, according to the length of a finger, soft, and warm them a little with fire, and put one of them into the hole of his ear; and let him spit on one of his feet from that part, and hit it with another stone that is in the ear. So therefore do not cease to do this with stones and rocks, until he comes out all water.
And now he comes out water so that you take from the stump, or from the branch of a tree, and put the end on one ear; and light the end with fire, until it is burned well. Then repeat the branch again and often do this until he comes out all water; and take it out with a tube according to what has been said before in the stone.
But in the extraction of an animal that enters into it, if it is a small body, like a flea, and such, take care of it as I said in the division.
But if it is a large body, which seems to the sense: then administer the extraction of it with gestures and hooks; and its nature is easier for all those who hold it in the ear.
But in the extraction of white animals that are in the ear, when you have to take care of it with what we said in division, and in the book of distillation, and your treatment does not benefit it: then you should look at the ear in the sun. If so then appears there something of white animals, then extract it with gestures, or with a thin hook.
But if there is nothing of white animals there, then take the tube, whose this form is, narrow below, wide above: and put the end into the ear, according to the quantity that the sick person can bear it: and then suck with it a strong suction. And so often, until all the blood comes out.
But if they do not obey you to go out, then put the cane around them with the cauldron, as I said on the stone.
That if they do not go out with him that we have said: then administer the distillations which the ancient ones know in the infection of the wounds: and you will find that in the treatise on distillations.
And may your flow be as if you pour oil and medicine into the ear with this instrument, whose form is depicted here. As you see, make it of silver, or of brass, lower down tight, in which sits a small hole, wide at the top.
So that he is set as if he pushes out what is in the constriction of the cane, he is made of brass slightly off-center. And if you wish, take the ray, and rub it at the end of its cotton with a gentle rubbing: then pour oil, or juice, or what you wish from these medicines into the cane: and let it sit in brass: then put in the ray with the cotton, which has been slightly heated, and squeeze it out by hand, until it pushes out the oil in the constriction of the ear, and feels it inside as weak: and that which is dropped into the ear, let it be already warmed a little with fire: and do not allow to be what is distilled into it when it is cold; for these medicines do not tolerate that.
Head VII.
On the treatment of the infection of gold.
When certain children come out of their mothers' wombs not pierced.
And it also happens to some men that there is opilation in the ear from a cut or meat born in it.
And this opilation sometimes happens in the deep foramen of the ear, which does not respond to heat: and when it occurs on the outside of the foramen a little, it responds to heat.
That which happens then in the deep foramen of the ear, and what does not respond to sight, is difficult to treat in many cases.
And when you see the resulting swelling, you should place a gold plaster on the sun and look at it; then, if you see an apparent operation, open it with a thin spatula, whose shape is this that follows, let the end of it be in some small width, some of whose parts are acute: and let the remaining spatula be soft on both sides: so that it does not hurt the ear.
If then the operation is born of flesh on the ear-lobe: then hold it with a small hook, and cut it with ease in moving, until all the flesh is taken away.
That if the operation is in the deep part of the ear: then take a small rayon, soft, and heat it slightly with fire: then put it on the ear-lobe.
If then you feel an operation with it that causes a problem with hearing with weight: try to operate on it with ease: and carefully, so as not to hurt the ear nerves.
Then put in the ear a little silver according to the quantity of width of the hole that you have made with Egyptian ointment: let it be for several days, until you are safe from the healing of the wound.
Or take a little silver, and pour it into rose water, and powder it on top, and use it.
That if you see the ear already blistered: then it is necessary that you take out silver, and let it be with other silver, which you have made in green oil with rose water, until it cools down the blister with heat: and then look after the ear until it heals.
If however there is a flow of blood: then dip a sponge or a cloth in cold water and put it on the ear: and use the remaining cure that stops the predicted flow of blood in the book of distillation.
Of the care of the eyelids of Althea.
Head 8.
These are the problems that occur in the eyelids of Althea when they are wet and dry.
You should therefore keep them with the tenales: or with the hook, and strike them with the spatumيلي from their roots. Then place over the places of the wound the third.
But if blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a subtle lenticular cautery.
And cauterize them, it is better after the incision. For many times they return when something remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned, and do not return.
Regarding the care of the eyelids of the eye.
Chapter IX.
This often happens in the eyelids that a certain substance is absorbed by Grandin in its strength and hardness, and because of it is called Grado: and is an aggregation of moistness of gross matter in the upper eyelid, and lower eyelid.
Operation then on them is, that you consider when, if the Grado proceeds in it, which appears from the eyelid, and moves to all parts, and the thing of it is easy.
Then find over it a slit through its width. Then scrape off the skin from all parts with ease, until it bleeds. Then suspend it with a hook, and cut it off.
But if you are not prepared to cut off its flesh, unless after you have made a slight incision in the eyelid, then it will hurt the sick in some way.
Which if the slit is wide: then aggregate it with a stitch: and care for it, until it heals.
And if it is small, will not come to you any harm from it. The patch will restore that skin and make it flesh again.
And if the Grado is falling towards the inner part of the ear towards the inside surface, then upside down the eyelid, and hang up the Grado with a hook: except that you cut off an incision, and press it from all parts.
If the eyelid is lengthened by an incision, that does not hurt in any way.
Then wash the eye after the incision with cold water, and care for the place where it has become inflamed, until the injury heals.
The Care of the Eyebrows.
Chapter Ten: The Care of the Eyes.
Axirnath is a grease that is generated in the eyelids of young men; and it often happens to boys; and it grates their eyes, and makes them have cataracts in the morning, and they cannot see the light of the sun, because the tears flow towards them, and therefore they always rest on their cheeks, and sleep upon them, and their eyelids are wet and swollen, and you can feel Axirnath between your fingers when you press the place.
And its mode of action is that the injured person puts his head in your lap.
Then take a piece of linen cloth, and prepare it with a fold, and make from it a circle according to the amount that contains Axirnath from all parts. Then put it on top of it, and press it with your fingers from all parts so that Axirnath is pressed in the middle of the circle.
Then find, in the middle of it, a wet place with a cotton swab that is incident on a crack across its width, and there is no greater crack than that which is made in phlebotomy in the depth.
Or you should find the whole skin, until you reach Axirnath, for in many dispositions Axirnath proceeds from a crack, according to the form of the white patch.
Then remove it with the cloth that you have soaked between your fingers towards the outside: and you should shake your hand to and fro, until it is scattered; and carefully, so that you do not add to the crack, so that you do not press with a cotton swab on the eye, and let it go.
If, however, you do not see the axillary nerve at the beginning of the incision, you should insert it into the incision with some ease until the axillary nerve comes out. Then, remove it from outside, as we have said.
Then, dip the cloth in vinegar and water, and place it on the spot, and tightly with flour.
And there are people who grind salt, and put it in the incision, so that what remains of the moisture melts.
Then take care of yourself, until it heals.
If, however, a blister occurs at the site, then take care of the blister with dry plasters, until it heals.
As for the modi of attakmir eyes, that is, when the eyelids become soft to the eye, since it can cause it to turn red as it should not.
Chapter XI.
When hairs grow in the eyelids besides their natural course, and run under them: then they hurt the eye, and cause diseases such as constant tears, softening of the eyelids, and cloudiness, until they destroy the eye.
And attakmir eyes are treated according to four modes. Or with fire. Or with acute medicine, as outlined in the chapter on cauterization. Or is treated by incision and suturing. Or with needles, as I call it.
It should be placed on the head of the nurse in your lap. Then, with your left hand, close the eye with your finger.
If it is closed, that is good. And if not: insert a needle into it, where there is a filament from the lower part of the eyelid, and let it penetrate with the thread from above, and let it sit next to the hairs themselves, that is, next to the edge of the eyelid, where the hairs grow: and draw the thread upward with the lid, and close it with a loop.
Then find the inner part of the eyelids under the lashes with the spatula incident from the greater lacrimal to the smaller lacrimal.
Then remove the filament and place a fine downy hair under the eyelid from bread or cloth: then mark on the eyelid with encaustic, which is like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
However, it is necessary that the figure be made according to the quantity and elevation of the eyelid; for this varies very much in man.
From these it is, that which needs to be made so that it incident from the eyelid quantity great, according to the quantity which softens by the eyelid.
Then find with the spatula over two lines which you marked, and begin from the greater lacrimal to the smaller lacrimal, and let there be one gap near the natural hair, as is the thickness of a radius.
Then introduce the hook into one of two angles of skin. Then scrape it all. Then gather with a suture two lips, with an acorn and a thin wool thread: and wipe away the blood, and let what is superfluous adhere from the hairs on the two eyelids, with some things that are invisible to you, if you wish to do so: and if not, it does not matter.
Then remove the suture and thread until three or four days: then take care of that.
And if you wish, remove the hook without a stitch, and take care of it with it, that it dries up and shrinks. For the eyelid is raised at the seal of the wound and aggregation thereof; but a better one will come later.
This way of treating Ataxmir taught the ancients.
However, there is a worry about the sick, and it is from a good operation, and there is no fear in that.
And another way is also for Ataxmir: and it is, as you mark a figure on the eyelid which is like the figure of a myrtle leaf, as we have reported.
Then with three separate hooks, or gathered together, wipe the eyelids, then cut what is superfluous with small scissors, according to this form, and with equal incision.
But if you cannot hold the hook and it does not fit [the wound]: then take a needle where the thread is, and insert it in the middle of the figure: and insert another thread next to the larger tear, and a second thread next to the smaller tear: and gather the threads between your fingers with equal tension.
Then wash your hand with equal washing: and wash the skin above where the seam is marked, as we have said.
Then gather together the two lips of the wound with a stitch: and take care of it until it heals.
But if a pimple should occur near your incision, or a crack: but let that pimple and those similar ones sit on oil-based ointment.
And when the eyelids also turn inward because of his hair.
It is therefore necessary that you use on it what we have said in the incision: but the stitch on both sides is more artificial. Of the care of Ataxmir with scissors.
And is it not that you turn inward the eyelids and split the crack which is inside, according to what we have said? Then with art make two scissors, or two thin sticks: whose length is according to the length of the eyelids, and their width is less than the width of a hairpin: and you have already cut at the ends of each side where you hold the threads.
Then gather together each one with delicacy on what is superfluous from the eyelid of the eye, and firmly tighten the two scissors on both sides with a strong tightening, and let go after a few days. For the skin is tight and will die, and will rot, and will decay until it falls away by itself.
But if it is delayed, then cut it with scissors. Then care for it, until it heals.
When then it is hardened, the lid is lifted off: and I do not prick the hair.
And this is the form of two cannas, which you shall make according to this figure, and the quantity in length and breadth.
Head XII.
§ On pricking the hairs in the eye with an aiguille.
The operation in that is, that you should take an aiguille fine, and insert it into the eye with a thread fine. Then tu dost bunch the ends of it, and knotted each knot with a fine thread: and let the length of the hairs be a palm.
Then you shall take another fine thread under the eye, and compose it with the first, and knot the ends of it if thou wilt.
Then you shall put the sick head in your lap, and set it nigh the sun, that the operation may be declared: for it is an subtle operation, or minute.
Then you shall insert the aiguille with the alinxotated in the root of the eyelid, and make it penetrate into the eyelid quickly, until you take it out above the natural hair.
Then draw the hair up till above the alinxotated: and insert it into the alinxotated hair: if it be one, or two, or three, not more.
Then draw thy hand with it, until the hair that is with the alinxotated comes out of the eyelid with the natural hair.
If then the alinxotated is drawn out, and the hair does not come with it: draw the alinxotated down, with the thread that thou hast composed in it, until the alinxotated comes out of the upper opening, and keepeth it from the sight of the eye: then draw out both, and shut them both up, and let them remain two days, or three, until the hair hath grown into its place, and hath begun to grow upon the flesh.
If hair is short, then either add a long hair from natural hairs, and remove it with it; or leave it alone until it grows longer after a space, and then remove it.
Chapter XIII: Head.
When it affects the eye, this is called Leporina.
And this Al-Zahrawi can be either a natural one or an accidental one.
So the accidental one is when it results from the consolidation of a wound, or a cut, or a cauterization, and similar things.
And the method of treatment for it is so that you find its consolidation, and that you separate its edges, and place a ligature between them from linen, and tie it up, until it heals.
And you should not use for its treatment those things that burn and tighten: because if you do so, it will return worse than it was before; but use for it those things that soften, such as garlic; and dip it with water in which althaea is boiled, and semen lini, and an oil; and rub it with a linen cloth, and care for it with it.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you should seek every device to prevent its consolidation, according to the form it had at first.
And this operation that I have described is no more than a certain correction of Albucasis so that the form of the place does not return at all after it has been completely changed.
Regarding the treatment of an injury to the lower eyelid, which is a wrinkling or tightening upward toward the right and left.
Chapter XXII: Head.
This Al-Zahrawi that affects the lower eyelid is what is called Al-Zahrawi. And it can be either a natural one or an accidental one.
And the accidental one is when it affects from a wound, or a tear, or a cauterization, and similar things.
And when you have performed the operation on her, take hold of it now, where there is a double thread, and dip it in flesh, and let it penetrate from the left tear sac to the right tear sac, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh upward with a sharp knife, and cut it with a scalpel on the side. If then the shape of the eyelid returns according to what needs to be done, it is good.
And if not, take the radium, and put it in the crack, and turn it with it: and find the two cracks on the inner side of the eyelid, and are the ends of the two cracks from two angles of incision, until they meet and become one angle: until when they come together, let this figure be made, and is a Greek letter praise.
Then take away the flesh by its quantity, which is the sharp lower side of it, from there that follows the eyelid. Then gather the separated parts together: sew them with wool thread.
Then take care of them with what I have said, about medicines that soften, and liniments, until they are healed.
And if it is a wound from a crack, and suturing, or cauterizing: then you need to find a flat crack under the eyelids' hairs, also according to what preceded it. Then separate the two lips with a liniment, according to what we have said.
And the whole speech about the care of an Alxatriate wound, when it is above, or below, is, that it may run in that operation, according to what is prepared from the form of Alxatri.
It is itself of many different shapes: and the skilled craftsman prepares it with whatever is possible for him, until he returns its shape to a natural one, or near to it, and also sickens himself, according to what is suitable for him from operation and instruments in many dispositions.
De adhaerentia palpebrae oculi cum
About the adherent membranes of the eyelid to the conjunctiva, or cornea.
And when this consolidation happens to many people, so that the upper eyelid is consolidated with the white of the eye, and prevents itself from its natural operations.
It is necessary that you insert the end of the ring under the eyelid and raise it up: or extend it with a tiny hook: then cut the adhesion with a very fine scissor, which is not sharp in the incision of the scissors, but rather blunt slightly: so that the sick person is not disturbed during the operation, and moves the scissor, and hurts his eye with its keenness: and make your incision as if you were peeling it off the adhesion, until when the eyelid returns to its natural form, and heals the whole adhesion.
Then pour into the eye salt water, with water washing it: or distill in it from an essence made from dissolved zinc with water.
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with linseed oil: and place on the eye wool infused with alum: and after three days use essence, and with consolidates, until it heals.
About the incision of the nail and the eminence of the flesh of the tears.
De incurvare ungulam qui est in corne
You know that the nail is curved according to two ways. Or it is nerveous: and it is similar to a hard sifac stone, thin. Or it is not nerveous, similar to frozen moisture of white: which when touches iron, or a hook takes it away with a hook, it does not adhere to it.
And both species do not begin, unless from the larger tear: until they are gradually detected, until they cover the whole eye, and prevent the light, and the movement of the eye.
And the way to operate on it is: so that the sick person puts his head in your lap. Then open his eyes and close his eyelids with your hand. Then take the nail with a little hook and extend it upward. Then take a needle, and insert it into the eye with a few hairs of a horse's mane or a wolf's tail: and make the thread strong, and double the end of the needle slightly, and fix it in the center of the nail: and pierce it with a sharp pin, and tie the thread to the nail, and extend it upward: and scrape the flesh with the hair of the side of the nail that follows the pupil, as if you were clamping it down with the hair until it reaches its base.
Then cut off the residue at the base of the eyelid with a sharp blade or a tiny awl: and let go of the natural tear-dripping flesh, so that the course of tears is not interrupted by the incision.
And when the nail is extended with a hook on its own: or with a thread, as we have said. Then scrape it with a soft blade whose shape is like this.
And beware that the blade does not touch the horny tunic, and that it does not break open and pierce the pupil.
Then, after the incision, pour into the eye some salt that has been crushed, or make a solution from rosewater, and let it sit until the next day. Then care for the eye with whatever is necessary, until it heals.
If the nail is not nerved, and you cannot insert an akind of hook into it, and the nail cannot be fixed with a nail: then often treat this kind of nail with medicines, and it heals as slowly as a nail does.
If you want to cut the nail, then open the eye to heal it, and take a very sharp blade, gentle in sharpness, of this kind: And with subtle sharpness scrape the nail from top to bottom. If you see that the nail is getting thinner and thinner, and it is being scraped by the rasp, then distil from your own eye at any time into the eye with crushed rosemary, or with ground salt, or with a strong solution: and blind the eye until the next day.
Then he cuts again on that part, until he has removed all of it. Unless there is a hot abcess in the eye: for then you should let go of that part, and take care of the abcess until it has healed.
Then he cuts again on that part with a razor, until it has healed.
Except for the tears of the eye, if it hurts very much, it should be suspended with a hook, and cut from that part; and you should not make the last cut, lest the course of tears be disrupted.
Then pour red wine into the eye, or make a paste out of zin: until it has healed.
Regarding the incision of Algardenic and the flesh that is born in the eye.
Chapter XVII.
It is born when, in the eyes of some men, red flesh is placed, either on top or covering it up until it covers the pupil, or approaches it, or squeezes it onto the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelids outward: and it is absorbed into the rosy chequers.
And the operation on that part is also to place a sick head in your lap. Then open his eyes, and take all that flesh with a hook suitable for it: and hold it with one fork, or grasp it.
Then cut into the flesh first, until you have finished off all of it with a knife. And cause a distance from the eye so that you do not hurt yourself during the operation: and let your cut be this one while you are cutting it, or with a chisel, which we have described in the incision of a nail: or with small forks, with which the hook is gathered, according to which form it will take after this chapter.
When your cut is complete and all of the Algardenic has been removed, then pour into the eye crushed salt: or distil into it red powder, and similar things from corrosives: and put on the eye a cloth with alum, so that it is secure against the hot abcess.
If something remains from the aludden [aloud] and warm blood prevails over you, and the swelling is warm: then release the eye, and take care of it as it rests the swelling.
Then apply again to the area with the operation, until it heals.
And also do the same for the flesh added which happens in the eye from this type.
However, it is necessary that you do not interrupt the cure of any weak eye from its natural way, or from an accidental way, operating with iron: and do not insert your hand in any of these operations, until it heals, since that limb is tolerating that operation.
Regarding the collection of sebum from the eye.
Chapter 18.
The sebum are bright red plaques that cover the eye, and prevent it from the operation of iron: and weaken the eye with the passage of days.
Therefore it is necessary that you first, if the eye in which there is sebum is strong, and there is no other illness in it besides the sebum: then collect the sebum of it.
And is, as you command the sick one, to put his head in your lap.
Then suspend those plaques with a hook one, or two, according to your prudence: and may the hook be thin, according to this form, or let there be two hooks in the body one, according to this form.
Then with subtle hooks gather those plaques with subtlety, and wash the blood an hour after an hour until they fall off the plaques from the eye, and are resolved: and do not leave the eye with sharp edges.
And let your operation be in the middle of the day before the sun, and be firm in your operation strongly: so that you do not fall except on those plaques.
And when you have emptied it, then distill into the eye strong iron, or red: so that its own acidity may corrode what remains of sebum.
If, however, you are not able to collect that whole thing in that hour, then bandage the eye with the ointment which soothes the pain of the eye; and leave him for a few days until his pain subsides: and keep him away from heat: then apply again to him in the same way until he is well.
And this is the method of the forbic.
The following is about reducing a wart to the nose.
Chapter XIX.
They mention a surgical instrument called the Arissati tube, which is used with caustic or burning medicine in accordance with what precedes in his narrative.
And if he does not recover, then there is no skill in it: unless you find the bump at his birth, and extract all the moisture that is in it and the puss, until the hole is discovered.
When therefore the hole is discovered, and you see corruption or discoloration in it, then shave him with an instrument whose form is this one.
And it is called the head of the aspergid.
Let it be made of iron bar and let the head be round like an aspergid, so that it is punctured with a file, or with a fine nail-file: and let him be placed on the site of the corruption of the bone.
Then roll him between your fingers, and press your hand gently, until you know that that corruption is now shaved: and do it several times.
Then restore the site with drying stipple medicine.
If, however, the site has consolidated and a bone has grown up in it, and the wound has healed and there is no ulceration or discharge, then you shall know that he is now well.
And if not, then there is no skill in it, unless you reduce the tube to the nose, according to this form.
And is, in order to discover a second bone with iron, or with sharp medicine: and when the bone is detected, then take a small hammer according to this form, its end being iron, triangular: and let the wood be extended to an angle, as you see it.
Then place that upon his own skull: and let it be near his tear ducts: and extend your hand from his eye slightly. Then rotate your hand with the skull, until it penetrates the bone and he feels pain: through this, he will notice that something is coming out of him when he holds his own hand over his nose.
Therefore at that time restore the position with the medicines that burn, as I taught you.
When therefore the flesh is born and the place hardens: then the matter that is poured out to the outside returns to the nose: so it is lighter on the sick.
De Reduction of Ocular eminence
Chapter 20.
When the eye emitteth all its own content, and does not happen to be without vision or diminution: then you should remove the disease: then phlebotomy him: then place wind instruments on the forehead without scarification, but with suction.
Then put on the eye a liniment made of acacia, and aloe, and olive oil, and sea-kollo: Then tighten the eye from above over the plaster with various dusts.
And the method of the dusts is this: that you take soft cloths, many, and double every cloth on four: make from them many: then put them one over another, according to the quantity which the eye needs: then tighten them together with a hard cloth in a strong fastening.
And again wind instruments without scarification.
Then remove the wind instruments, and release the eye after tightening it during the day and night.
If the ligament is again softened, then you should tighten it much: then remove the ligament after day and night, as we have said.
If therefore you see that the eye has already been re-tightened with new ointment, it is good: and if not, then again apply plaster, and dusts, and fastening, and wind instruments, until it is healed.
Regarding the incision of the royal tunics.
Chapter 21.
When a tear occurs in the royal tunic, then it is removed and taken out beyond the eyelids like a grain of wheat, and fed upon the shape of a man for that purpose, and the incision made in it: then the operation in it is, according to what I have said: and it is, so that you insert the point in the root of the King from below to above.
Then introduce another point where there is a double thread on the side of the eyelid, and let it penetrate: and then release the first one according to its disposition.
Then incision of the place of the double thread, and bind with it the side of the King around the point: and tighten it much.
Then remove it now, and place over the eye a wool dipped in theAlbugine (a substance exuded by the eye) : and release it, until the thread falls with the King.
Then take care of the eye with it, which comforts it, until the wound heals.
And when the King is tightened from all sides with a circle of cloth, until it adds to the eye an eminent  ( prominente) appearance.
Then it is pierced with a small spatula, which reaches to the depth of the eye, and moisture of Albugine  (a substance exuded by the eye) flows out, and the eye goes down, and enters immediately: then tighten it, until it heals.
Regarding the cure of Alcani.
Chapter 22.
This illness called Alcani, is not otherwise than a mucus that is gathered in the eye, similar to water flowing down, and it itself is not.
And the way of acting in it is, so that you make the sick sit on a prepared seat, or face to face.
Then take his head in your hands from both sides, and move it, until you feel the sickness coming to the lower eyes. Then it is bound, and does not fall down, and the light is closed: and let the sick person see things as they do; and if it does not fall down below, you should know that it is water.
But if the descent is not prepared with blood for him as we have said, then make him sit between your hands. Then take a fine spike and find with him above the corneous patch a little to the side of the connection with the corneous membrane on the crown, until the blood comes out.
But when it has gone out, then distill into the eye hot water in which you mixed honey: or water in which you have already boiled fennel and honey; then take care of the rest of the cure, until it is healed.
As for the care of the water that comes out into the eye or a cataract.
Chapter 23
We have already spoken about the kind of water, and which comes to pierce the saying and explaining, then take it again according to the health.
Then it is necessary that you make the sick person sit between your hands square, opposite to the light, near the sun; and bind the eye that has the water, and tighten it firmly: then palm the eyelid of the eye with your right hand, if the water is in the left eye, or with your left hand, if the water is in the right eye.
Then take almagre with your right hand, if the eye is on the left; or with your left hand, if the eye is on the right.
Then put the end of the almagre near the crown by the thickness of the radius in the same white of the eye apparent tear; then push the almagre with force; and you roll it with him with your hand, until it penetrates into the albuginous of the eye; and you feel that the almagre has already come to the dry remedy.
And it is necessary that there be a measurement of the trip of the almagre to the depth, a space which is from the pupil to the end of blackness; and this is the crown of the eye. You will see it in the same pupil with an eye vision, because of the clarity of the corneous membrane.
Then put the alum until the place where is water. Then press the lower one with a force by another.
If then has come down water immediately, then sick will see it over that which opens its own wound immediately, and alum in its eye.
Then you rest a little. If then has come down water, then put it again, except that it is discharged alum.
When then is formed, and does not rise up: then remove alum with ease: and you rub your hand little by little.
Then dissolve in water some of the clear salt of the gem: and wash with it the inner eye. Then put outside all the stubble, or wool wetted with oil and with the alba (a white substance), and bind it with it the healthy eye.
But we, and those who are our time, put on him ground of the triturated cumin mixed with alba (a white substance).
That if does not obey you alum to entrance in the eye for its hardness, because it is of a man, whose eye is very hard: then it is necessary that you take the seed-oil, which is called Alberid, whose this is form.
Then open it with it the same combination and not the last your hand into the orifice: and is not except that you do make a wound to the place of the alum soft.
Then introduce alum, according to what we have said.
And near the end of your work, is prepared for the sick a bed unlit made, in which sleeps on his back in a dark house: and it is forbidden all movements, and a cough: and put food his that heals nature its: and does not move his head to the right, or at all.
And sits the ligature according to its disposition until the third day.
Then dissolve it in that dark house, and experiment its force: and let see things. Then reduce the ligaments until the seventh day.
And it should not be done at the time of treatment or immediately after the incision: but rather it should be done away from it; for the water rises quickly through the wiry face.
But if a fever occurs: then it is appropriate that you should open his eye before the seventh day; and straightened out, that which has been drawn should be put back into place until it is healed: then you can wash away his breath, and put him on his face where his breath comes from under for several days, while he is in that dark house.
Then let him go out of the house step by step, and turn around in his couches.
And you should know that the student is not exempt from fever sometimes: then he may dare to look at the work.
And indeed one of those who are from Al-Rajah has come to us, who said, "It was done in Al-Rajah with a sharp needle, which sucks up water.
But it is not true that I have ever seen anyone in the land of the west who did this; nor does it appear in any of the old books: but it may be that it is new.
And these are the shapes of the wounds from the wound, so that they stand on her who does not know them.
Let them be made from fine iron; and let their ends be with this same subtle triangle, and the sharp end.
Head 24.
Regarding the care for a born nose.
When various meats grow in the nose, some of which is similar to the flesh of many feet; and from this is the flesh of cancer, stone-like, with a pale color; and from this is the soft flesh, not white-colored.
So then, of these various meats that are in the nose, if there is any soft meat, not fraudulent or cancerous, you should make him sit with his hands opposite the sun, and open his nostrils, and stick in hooks on those meats; and then pull them out from outside, and cut what you have caught with a sharp, fine hook until you are sure that all the flesh has been removed.
If something remains that cannot be cut off: then cut it with a slender instrument easily, until nothing remains of it. But if blood is your master, or a fever occurs: then oppose it as necessary: or if it is a malignant apoplexy, then approach it with cauterization, until the blood is cut off, and all flesh is taken away.
Then let it be applied to the nose after a cut with vinegar, or water, or wine. But if the nose is opened, and moisture proceeds from it to the palate, then know that he is already well.
But if the moisture does not penetrate, as it should, then know that within it there is flesh born in the upper bones of the nose, to which an instrument does not reach with an incision.
Then it is necessary that you insert a thread of linen which has some thickness, and nodes many in it; and place between each node the quantity of a finger, or less: and let go the sick person, so that he lets fall one end of the thread into the nose with a beam, or with whatever can be done for him after he has done himself similar azur: and he should hold his sense of smell, until it reaches as far as the throat, and comes out on top of his throat.
And many times this boy makes similar Atome in school: and it is a simple thing for him who wants to:
Then place the two ends of the thread, the end that comes out on top of the nose, and the other that remains in the nose. Then let the minister lock the flesh with the nodes that are in the thread. Let it be done until you know that the flesh is already with the nodes of the thread.
Then remove the thread: and put in the nose after abstinence of blood licinium which you drank in Egyptian ointment: let it be done for three days, or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the flesh.
Then place at the end of the matter in the nose a cannula of lead, for several days until it is healed.
If, however, the cure requires excision, then use that.
For making a nose wash, with which to distil oil and other medicines into the nose, make it of silver or brass: that it be like a small lamp, opened like a shell: and its opening also.
And if you want to make a closed cannula, like a reed.
And the shell of the instrument for making a nose wash should be full, and sealed: whose handle is at the back of it, which you hold when you heat oil or what you want to pour into it, and flowing substances.
Head 25.
A nosebleed often arises in the far extreme of the nose, and becomes larger and more intense over days until it looks like a breach.
And for this, at the beginning of its appearance, you should cut off all of it with scissors. Then place something hot or burning, or medicine that burns in its place.
If, however, the cutting takes long to stop bleeding until it becomes larger, then wait, if it is hard and dark in colour and not very soft: then do not touch it with a iron bar: for it is a sign of cancer.
For many times have I seen, who cut into the bone, and it has happened from that to a great evil on him who had it.
And if the apostema is gentle to the touch, not dark in colour, and you see that the cutting can be done throughout it, then wash the sick with water, and cut the whole of it without fear or trepidation: and cure the place along with it, until it is healed.
Chapter 26.
On suturing the nose, lips, and ears:
You should know that when the continuity of a cartilage is broken, little operation can be performed on it unless in some people.
Therefore, when this has happened to someone, you should think that if it is a recent fracture with its blood: and then add the painful wound with a stitch: then take care of it until it heals.
If the continuity of the solution has already separated and one is made healthy part: then it is necessary to remove all parts from its apparent skin, until it bleeds. Then add the two lips with a stitch and tighten them, and sprinkle the wound with dragon's blood powder and Frankincense: and put above the powders a piece of plaster made firm, and something else from the consolidated plasters: and leave it tied for two days or three. Then loosen it, and change the medicine: and leave it until the threads separate by themselves. Then take care of the wound with ointment, until it heals.
The method of the stitch is that you add the solution of the continuity, or with acribus, as we have told you about the stitch of the eye: or you add the solution with a thread, as I made you know.
Chapter 27.
§ On the Extraction of Knots from the Lips.
Many people have and in their inner lips there are often hard little lumps like grains of herbs: and some of them small, and some big.
Therefore you should turn the lips over, and find on every knot, and hang it with a hook, and drop it from all sides.
Then fill the place after the cut has been cleaned up, until blood stops flowing.
Then apply vinegar to it, and take care of the place with it, where the stain is, until the wounds heal.
Head XXVIII.
§ On the Cutting of the Meat from the Gummy.
A lot of times a person's car comes out from under the gums, which the ancients called "abulus.
It should be suspended with a hook or held with tongs and dropped at the root and allowed to run out freely, or let the blood flow.
Then put on a third place powder, or other astringent powder, dry it off.
If that same car returns after cure, for it often does so again, then cut it a second time and cauterize it: it does not return after cauterization.
Head XXIX.
Of the reasons for toothache with iron.
When teeth are gathered together on the surface from within and from the outside part, and between the gums there are rough spots, spines, and sometimes they rot, and turn yellow, until this corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth become rotten because of it.
Then it should be so that the sick person sits between your hands, and his head in your lap, and cut out the gum and tooth where you see the roots, and anything like sand: until nothing remains of them, and similarly for the blackness, and yellowing, and sourness, and until they are completely clean.
If then that which is in them from the beginning of the cause is taken out, it is good: but if not, then cut them a second time on another day, and a third time, until you have reached the last study about it that you wish to do.
And you should know that the tooth is resistant to many different shapes of blades: for your own purpose, prepare the blade with which it will be cut from below, because the blade with which the tooth is cut between the teeth is different from the blade with which it is cut from below.
And these shapes of blades are prepared for you, which you can see.
Chapter XXX.
Of the extraction of toothache.
It is necessary that one heal the tooth from its pain with all intelligence, and do not postpone the eradication of it. For it is not that one should replace a tooth when it is eradicated: for the substance is subtle; until there is no excuse for the eradication of it, then it must be considered when the patient is weak to eradicate it, so that it hardens and is certified before you the đauing tooth.
For many times the pain deceives the weak one, and he thinks that it is in the tooth and eradicates it himself: then the pain does not retreat until the tooth is eradicated.
For we have already seen this from the operation of bloodletting.
But when the tooth which is painful is certified before you, then it should be made to scarify around the tooth with a tweezers, in which there is some virtue; until it is opened from all sides: and then it should be moved with your fingers or with fine tweezers little by little, until it is raised.
Then when you have good locations in it, and hold the wound between your knees: which you held well so that it does not move; and then pull the tooth after its straightness, so that you do not break it.
But if it does not come out, then take some of these instruments, and push it under it from all sides with ease, and try to move it, as you did at first.
But if the tooth is pierced or corroded: then it should be filled with cloth: and you should tighten it with a fine edge, so that it does not break at the time of your clamp on top of it with tweezers.
And it should be necessary for you to understand how to do the scarification around the gum from all sides.
And keep your strength, so that you do not break it, and remain a part of it, and returns to the weak one from the same maliciousness which is greater pain with it first.
And be careful not to do what those who do phlebotomy do out of ignorance and their courage in eradicating it, except that they administer what we have said.
For often they bring about great ailments in men, which are more difficult to break than to heal, and leave behind all its roots or some of them: or take it out with some bones of the jaw: as we have often witnessed this.
Then let it be cleansed after the eradication of it with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
That if there should be a flow of blood from the places (for often it happens): then dry up something from the wound, and fill it with it: and if not, cauterize it if it does not give you relief.
The shape of the forceps is narrow so that they may move within the first place, have long extremities, short handle, thick so that they do not double when pressed on a tooth: they are as you see the thick handles, until when you squeeze them together, they do not bite themselves, and do not double: the short extremities, and are made of bent iron, or of curved metal, directed extremities: and there are teeth in their extremities, some of which enter into some things, and squeeze with a constriction that is suitable, strong.
And when they are made as the shape of an ear-hole which is called ciconia, and are strong constriction.
Chapter 31.
Of the eradication of teeth, and extraction of bones of the jaw fractures.
When something remains after the eradication of a tooth which is broken, then you should put on the place with butter for one or two days, until it softens: then introduce into it a chisel or forceps, whose extremities are as the shape of an ear-hole which is called ciconia. But this form is of the forceps.
Are their extremities made as a wedge inside: or like a file.
If then he does not obey you at the exit with these forceps, then it is necessary that you stop over the root, and remove all the flesh, and introduce the instrument which is called a small palanquin, whose form is this.
Cut short at the end, a little more than the bulk: and it should not be wetted, lest it break.
If then the root comes out through that, it is good: and if not, it should be helped with these other instruments whose forms are these.
Form of the first triangular extremity, where there is some bulkiness.
Form of the thin triangular extremity.
And with other instruments and tools which have preceded in the text of the teeth.
Also sit the support with this instrument which resembles a large hook, of this form, triangular extremity turned over, in which there is some bulkiness, so that it does not break: and do not wet it.
And know that there are many instruments for the teeth: and likewise the other instruments do not count, and the careful artisan finds out by himself the instrument itself according to what is signified to him of operation and diseases.
For from diseases there are various types of instruments which the ancients did not say, because of the diversity of their shapes.
But if the jaw breaks from a tooth, or from other bones of the mouth, or is putrid: then examine carefully on top of it at its own place with what belongs to him from instruments and forceps which I have mentioned in the extraction of the root, and help with these gestures, whose form is this.
Let it be a little more of bulkiness in this way, so that it is tightened, or held with it the jaw, and does not move and push back, until it comes out the jaw: and restore the place with suitable medicines to it.
If, however, there is decay in bone, then shave off that part from its decay and heal it, until it is healed.
Chapter 32.
Of the superior teeth, more than the others.
When the teeth do not set according to their natural course, they become decayed through that very form; and above all when this happens in women and girls, that is to say, young persons.
Therefore it is necessary that you consider. For if a tooth has come in after another tooth and does not fit in place, or cannot be filed and trimmed, then remove it; but if it is joined to the next tooth, then cut it out with this instrument, whose form I now describe.
It is similar in shape to a small chisel, and is made of iron, having an acute point.
And let your cut be deep, so that you cut it out over many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that it does not move another tooth.
But if it is exposed and has its own trimming: then trim it with a chisel made of iron, the form of which I now describe.
It is all made of iron, and its handle is small and sharp at the end, like a chisel with which they make holes; with this they trim the tooth little by little over many days with ease, so that it does not move any other teeth and falls out: then file it at the end with some rasps.
If the tooth breaks a part and wounds the tongue: then it is necessary to trim it also, until its sharpness has been softened: and smooth it off, so that it does not wound the tongue or damage speech.
Chapter 33.
Of teeth retained with gold.
When the anterior teeth are struck or shaken by an impact and do not hold on to it so as not to fall out: and they have not been relieved with stinging medicines, and the remedy does not help: then there is ingenuity in them, that they should hold on to a gold wire: for silver turns yellow and decays after a few days; but gold never changes.
And let it (the thread) be of average thickness in subtlety and crudeness according to the quantity that it takes between teeth.
And the form of retaining it is such that you take a thread and insert it between two healthy teeth: then you sew with its two extremities the thread between the teeth, or one, or more, until you reach with the thread up to the healthy tooth on the other side. Then you repeat the texture up to the part from which you began: and firmly hold your hand with subtlety and wisdom, until it does not move at all: and let your constriction be where you squeeze the thread, next to the roots of the teeth, so that it does not slip.
Then you cut off the ends of the thread that are excess: and collect both, and turn them around with a movement: and hide them between a healthy tooth and a tooth that is loose, so that it does not hurt the tongue: then let it be released so that it becomes less strict.
If it comes undone, or gets caught, hold them with another thread, and let it stand with it for a long time.
This is the form of teeth, and the shape of retaining two healthy teeth and two teeth that are loose, as you see it.
And when it comes to the point that a single tooth falls out and returns to its place after a fall and remains there: and does not do this unless the artisan is careful, skilled, and experienced.
And sometimes a bone is broken with a blow: and it becomes like the form of a tooth, and it is placed in its place, from which it receives support, and is held fast, as we have said: and remains, and abides with it for a long time.
Chapter 34
When this ligament that is under the tongue happens to be either natural, with which the human being is born, or accidental, from an arrow that has already healed.
And the operation is, so that you open his mouth and expose his tongue; then cut the nerve ligament from its width until his tongue is freed from its grip.
If there is anything hard and knotty within him, and if he has a lump from the wound; then push into it with a hook, and cut it across its width until you hit the ligament, and free the knot.
And be careful not to make a hole in the deep flesh, and cut the artery there, and let blood flow.
Then wash it with rose water or vinegar or cold water.
Then put under the tongue a plaster of linseed, which holds the injured in all night; so that it is not consolidated again.
If there is any blood flow, then place on the spot a poultice. But if he wounds you with blood, then caustic the spot with a caustic substance suitable for it; and then care for him with the rest of the cure, until he is healed.
Chapter 50
When there is a small blister under the tongue that absorbs the little wound, keeping the tongue away from its natural function; and perhaps it gets bigger until the bone is filled.
And the operation is, to open the jaw from the sun: and examine the blister.
But if you see it of a dark or black color, which is hard and the injured has no feeling: then do not touch it, because it is cancer.
But if it declines towards whiteness and is moist: then push into it with a hook, and cut it with a fine scalpel, and free it from all parts. If you wound yourself with blood during your operation, then place on the spot a poultice, until the blood stops; and then return to your operation, until you have removed all of it.
Then wash it with vinegar and salt: and treat that part in the manner suited to it, until it heals.
On the treatment of abscesses in the amygdaloids.
Chaps. 36-37.
When abscesses occur between the cheeks, that is to say, in the glands which resemble abscesses and occur on the sides: these are called the two amygdaloids: when you consider the treatment of them along with what we have said in the division, and they do not heal, then examine.
If, however, the abscess is hard, red, and of little smell: then do not touch the thing with iron.
And if its color is red, and its root is thick: then do not touch the thing with iron, fearing that blood will flow, and besides, leave the thing, until it is well. Then either pierce it: or let it burst of itself.
And if its color is white, round, and its root is fine: then the thing should be cut.
And the operation upon it is, that you should consider before the operation, whether if its abscess is hot and quiet, completed in its fullness, or is beginning to diminish a little: then therefore make the person sit in front of the sun, and place his head in your lap: and open his mouth, and let him take hold of it with his hands, and stroke his tongue down with an instrument, which has this form.
Let it be made of silver, or of brass, that it be fine as a knife.
When therefore you press it with the tongue, and it is shown to you, falling on your side: then take hold of a hook, and fasten it on the amygdaloids, and pull it out to the outside as much as you can, except that you drag some of the tunics with it.
Then cut it with an instrument, which has this form following. It is joined by ligatures: however its extremities are curved, so that the opening of each of them is on the opposite side acute: wherefore consider whether it is made of iron, or of a damp leather.
If this instrument is not present then cut it with a chisel whose shape is like this one. But if it is acuter on one side and less acute on the other, then cut it at an angle from one side to the other.
And after you have cut one side of the mandible, cut the other side according to this same incision shape.
Then afterwards rinse the patient with cold water or vinegar and water.
But if he bleeds, rinse him with water in which you have boiled the peel of the fig tree or leaves of the myrtle and other such astringents until the bleeding stops: then treat the wound, until it heals.
And when the phlegmon rises in the throat apart from the two glands, Then cut them according to what I have said in the incision of the two glands equally.
I have myself already treated a woman with a phlegmon that had risen between her throat, which made her speech hoarse and nearly drowned her; she could breathe only through an opening made by me in the throat; she could eat nothing, nor drink any fluid, and she was close to death: if it had continued for one more day or two, she would have died.
And the phlegmon had risen but a little, so that it had not covered the two holes of the nose.
I therefore hastened and fixed one of my scalpels in one of these holes. Then I pulled it out, and a large piece came away with it.
Then I cut off what was caught in the hole of the nose.
Then I did the same for him at the other hole in the nose.
Then I opened her mouth and pressed on her tongue; and then I fixed my scalpel into the phlegmon; then I cut off a part of it, and there was very little blood; so that at once her throat was clear, and she began to drink, and afterwards she ate something.
And so I didn't stop applying pressure to it for a long time; and the blister that was there would be replaced by another one that I applied pressure to, until it became too much and joined it.
And so I did some experimentation, and I cauterized the blister between the teeth.
It stood firm after the removal; then I walked away from it, and I don't know what God did with it afterwards.
On the Blisters in the Mouth.
Chapter XXVII. On the Blisters.
When a cold descends to the mouth, and blisters are formed, and they are large: then it is called the perpendicular one; and if it is on the lower part, round, then it is called a blister.
When it is treated with the method we have described under Division, and there is no improvement; and you will see that the blister becomes cool because of it, and it is thin: then it should be pricked.
And what is gathered there is round, and it has no length, and it is bloody or dark in color, and it has no feeling: then it should be pricked with an incision. For in the blister is a fear of illness.
Then when you see it according to the manner I have described from its whiteness and length, let you sit the sick before the sun; and press his tongue with an instrument whose description came before: then fix a hook on the blister, and pull it down; and cut it with one or two instruments I have described in the incision of the two nostrils.
And you should not apply pressure to it, unless it is added to the natural boundary without any addition.
For if you apply pressure to it any more, you will damage speech and conversation.
Then after the incision use what I have described in the incision of the two nostrils; and take care of it, until it is healed.
But if the sick person shudders because of the incision; then you should use your skill in cauterizing it without any fear or anxiety.
And the mode of cauterization is not in it, except with sharp water; and it is, that you put the head of the wound in your bosom. Then press her tongue with the instrument which we have said. Then take from the water which I have said you should take in the cauterizing chapter, and bind it with this extinguisher not extinguished, and put on it that is not thick or thin, and fill it with the concavity of this instrument, whose this is the shape.
Sit at the end of her where the medicine is placed, as is placed the concavity of the radius.
And put the instrument with the medicine on her wound: and the sick man sits lying on his side, so that salutary fluid flows from her mouth from the inner medicine, so that it does not flow down from it to her throat anything, and hurts her.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And you take from it first half of the medicine on her wound after an hour, until you see it has turned bad, and to sit her gently with the medicine's bit.
And if you want to take from it your meal, and spread it out on the end of the radius, and pour the medicine into it, and insert the radius with the meal into a tube until it sticks to the wound.
Make it many times, until you get the result that you want about the cauterization's new. Then let her go: for she will heal herself and falls after three days, or four.
That if you want to take medicine, repeat it: and after the cauterization wash her off with a new thing that is imbibed in butter, and clean with it what is in her circumference from the medicine: and let it rest with cold water.
And heal her outside with brooms, and inside with gargles, until she heals.
This then kind of cure is healthier than the incision, and longer in time from fear.
And sometimes the wound is also treated with a burn, which is finer than cautery and incision: it is treated with suffumigation in this way. And some salt, and hyssop, and oregano, and rue, and sseah, and chamomile, and abrotanum, and similar plants: and all of them are gathered together, or some of them in a pot, and are soaked with vinegar and boiled: and the pot is covered with an unsteady cloth: and a hole is made in the middle of the pot, above which a sharp instrument is placed according to this method.
Let it be made of silver or brass: and the end, in which is the grain, should enter into the hole of the needle, until the vapor rises to the hole on the cane, until the wound is much darkened.
Then repeat often on the same place until it heals.
And do not make this cure at the beginning of an eruption. For it adds something to the eruption: and you should not make this cure unless at the decline of the eruption's heat.
But if you do not have this instrument with you, then take a cane, and put at its end some of the skin of an onion: so that it does not burn the hole in the needle: for the skin of onions prevents the vapor from burning the hole. And this is good cure when done with care.
Regarding the extraction of spines and bones from the throat.
Head XLVIII.
Often a tooth remains stuck in the throat, or a fish's spine, or something else.
Then it is necessary that you extract what is apparent from them, which falls on the tongue when you press it with an instrument under the sun, and tell you that it is in the throat.
And if it does not show itself to you and is hidden in the throat, you should make a weak person sick before food digests in his stomach. Perhaps something that has stuck will come out through vomiting.
He swallows a piece of rope, or the root of lettuce, or dry bread; or he takes a piece of sea sponge that is dry and soft: and he binds it with a thread, then swallows it. When therefore he arrives at the place where are spines, or an oss, and is drawn out, then he walks away.
But if he does not walk away with it as we have said: then use the instrument of lead in the form of this.
Let it be thicker than a radius of a little bit, and at the end let there be a slenderness, which he shall introduce into his throat with ease: and he shall hold his head raised up.
And let him beware of the touch of his epiglottis, lest it should happen to him to cough, and push forth with it a bone, or insert himself with the instrument in his own hand.
But that the sick one shall insert himself, that is better: for he knows well the place of the thing annexed thereto: and he shall push forth below, or shall take up his hand with the instrument above, all this according to the quantity which is prepared for him, till he walk away.
On the extracting of blood.
Chapter XXXIX.
When you are treating with the bloodsucker, and it does not give, then consider in the throat before the sun, or beside the sun after you have pressed his tongue with the instrument which I have told you of.
But if your yawn falls upon the bloodsucker, extract it with a little hook, or with subtle gestures on the side.
But if it is not possible with them: then take a narrow tube, and insert it into the throat as far as the throat: then insert into the narrowness of the tube an iron that is ignited with fire. Make this many times over: and let the sick one abstain from all water during the day.
Then let him take a full drink of cold water, and open his mouth therein: and let him close his mouth with it, and let him not swallow anything out of it: and let him move his hand with the water. For when it feels water, it falls with ilium.
But if it does not leave when we tell it to, then let the sick person sit with lice, or with a moth, or with an instrument that we tell it to use for moth-killing.
Do this many times, because it will fall by itself.
And the method of operation is that you take a pot, in which there are licks with fire: and the pot is covered with a covering, and an opening is made in it; and the end of the instrument is placed in that opening.
Then throw the moth-killing, and let the sick person place his mouth at the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that it does not leave the moth-kill; until you know that the moth-kill has come to bloodsucker. For bloodsucker falls immediately.
Since if it does not fall, then repeat the moth-kill many times.
And let the sick person bear hunger, eat a sauce, and other things, and do not drink water.
So it is necessary that it leaves with this regime.
And this is the form of the instrument from which bloodsucker is taken out of the throat when it falls on that place of tickling.
It is like a pair of tweezers, as you see: except that there is a groove that enters into the throat. And its end is similar to the opening of an ear, which is called a cicona, in which there is a roughness like a file; and when it grasps anything, does not let go at all.
Regarding the opening of the aphes and its sectioning, and care in general.
Head 40.
The species of aphes are many, and many in regard to their memory, that is one, and one in this book: they differ in the perforation of them, and in the sectioning of them from two modes.
One of these species of aphes is found in itself, and because it grasps by moisture.
And the second method is for places where the injury has come from the body.
For the injury that occurs in the head is different from the injury that occurs in the anus; and the injury that occurs in the flesh is different from the injury that occurs in the joints; and each has its own judgment from the operation.
And of the scabs there are which do not need to be pierced, unless they have dried up blood in them and their completion; and from those there are which need to be pierced when they are raw and have not completed their growth.
As the scabs that are next to the joints.
For when the injury occurs near a joint and is prolonged, until what is putrefied in its circumference perhaps the ligaments corrode or the nerves of that joint: so it is the cause of closer contraction of that limb.
Or is an injury in a main member; for if you delay piercing it until it has healed, it will hurt or damage that main member or the body through that main member.
Or is near a member; then pierce it when immature: and do not need to pierce the raw injury, not complete digestion, unless it is near a member so that it does not putrefy inside, and lengthens towards the center of the loins, and becomes a fistula, or forms in the term (of that member) that it does not heal.
It is necessary that you know the time for piercing the wound; since it has healed according to its complement; and is at rest from pain, retreat from fever, decrease of redness, and pulse, and sharpness in the head wound; and the other signs.
And it is necessary that you make the same piercing in the lower places of the wound; and let the piercing be straight along the length of the body, if the wounds are in the hands and feet, and the places of the wrist, and the strings, and nerves, and arteries, and to the last in all equal places, where there is no reflection.
In those that reflect, go with a second incision in that limb.
When, however, the ecchymose is in fleshy places: then it is better that you should desist from piercing it, until its digestion is confirmed, as we have said, according to the second supplement.
For if you pierce it before that, the course of the virus from it will be prolonged; and it is full of secretions and putridity, and perhaps its lips will become thick, and its depth.
And some ecchemoses are pierced according to the width of the body when in need: or according to that which is lacking in the limb.
And it is necessary that you administer a small incision in little ecchymoses and a wide incision in big ecchymoses: or several incisions according to the similarity of the size of the ecchymoses.
And there are ecchymoses in which the skin must be closed: and an incision is made when it is already formed like a cloth, and in the border, because it has already died: such as happened to many, for instance, like a blister, and buboes.
And there are those that heal by means of an incision having three angles. And one of them is that in which the incision is made like a fig leaf.
As in an ecchymose of the groin.
And one of them is that in which a round incision is administered, and a lunar one: and similar ones from incisions.
That, however, in which there is no head, such as are the superficial ecchymoses, it is necessary that you pierce it with a superficial incision, or merely flat one.
And it is necessary that, when the ecchymosis is gross and has already collected a lot of serum, you pierce it so that it does not run out and pour all of it out at once: however, you extract a part from it. Then cover the ecchymosis until the next day. Then extract some of the pus again.
Let us test this many times according to the degree, until it is gone out: above all if he is weak in strength, or a woman pregnant, or a boy newborn, or an old man decrepitous: for the animal spirit of the animal is separated from him many times when he is going out of the blood: and perhaps the weak dies, and you do not feel it.
Therefore let us be very careful with this chapter.
And after you have made the wound, as these wounds are made, it is necessary that you wash with water: and consider. If then is a small wound-scab, or is a flat cut, then give him a liniment of old linen, or an ancient cloth. And if there is a large wound-scab, and there are many holes from the cut, then at that time let you put liniment into all the holes, until they close up together.
And if you have cut off a part of the skin in the wound, or have made it round: then let you fill it with old cloth, or as when the fabric is smooth, or is rubbed with linen-flour without moisture: and bind him tightly until the third day.
Then let you throw it off, and take care of that with him what needs to be done from the ointment, until it is healed.
But if there should be a flow of blood in the hour of your operation, then give him cold water and vinegar, after he has soaked it up with a cloth: and let you put it on the place of the flow of blood many times.
But if that blood flow persists, then you shall give medicine, and cure, and powders, which I tell in many places of our book here, and from a division.
But if it is in the time of winter, and the place of the wound has many nerves: then you shall pour powders with wine, and hot oil: and let you put them on the places.
And if it is in the summer, and the places are fatty: then you shall put powders that are soaked up in water, and oil, or with wine and oil, and all of that is cold. Until the third day of his death, as we have said, then it is necessary that you should untie the poultice, and wipe him clean, and administer to him what is appropriate for his cure, until he is healed.
This is therefore what is necessary from the knowledge of the cure of poultices generally.
According to the half of the distinction, I have already spoken about all poultices, how it is a way to cure it individually specifically.
Head 31.
About the sections of poultices that happen on the skin of the head.
Little poultices happen on the skin of the head, and they are of two species: Nodules, which are enclosed in tunica, which are sacs; almost as if they were hen's eggs.
And there are many species of them.
There are some that are thin; and there are those that contain a moisture similar to lime: and there are those that contain a moisture similar to flour and poultices: and those that are like them, and among those there are, which are hard stones.
And in the section of all of them, and their extraction is not fear, when it is near their section does not make opposition of arteries.
And the operation on their sections is, as you experience it with the instrument, whose form came after this, which is called Intramuscular, until you know what it contains.
For if that is what contains moisture, then make dry yourself with the second section according to the length of the superficial section: according to this form.
And begin with the second section from line B to line G. And when the moisture is emptied, then scrape the skin which contains that moisture, and do not leave anything inside it.
For many times if there remains something of it.
Then submerge the poultice in Egyptian ointment if it is present, and if not, in water and salt: and fill it with the ointment and leave it until the next day. For this reason, it rusted because what was left over from the jar.
Then, one should pound the wood again with Egyptian ointment, second and third time, and if you are satisfied with it, until you trust that nothing has remained in the jar, then, indeed, take care of the wound with ointment, until it heals.
If the abscess contains a big lump: then dry out the wood according to this form, having the form of the cross: and throw away the hooks between the clefts of the section, and scrape off the wood from all parts: and test your skill in extracting the skin which contains the wood.
But if the opposite causes you pain, then do as I will tell you after.
And do likewise in an abscess, if it is stone-like, from the section, and the same cure, as we have said.
And the section on a stone-like abscess is easier: for there is little blood and moisture. And sometimes there are some of these abscesses in the head of some men, where there is no depth of moisture.
That is: because I followed over an abscess in the head of a married woman, and I found an abscess like a solid stone, hard, white, which could not be broken: and if it was struck by anything, it would wound the wood.
But in other head abscesses, besides these that we have said, which happen in the heads of boys, and near the roots of the ears, all sections of them are superficial sections.
Or put a hole in them always from their lower part, so that the flow of blood goes to the lower side.
Then take care of them with what comes to them from the cure.
Regarding the section of Struggles in the neck.
Chapter 42.
These abscesses often happen in the neck, and under the ribs, and in the groin: and sometimes they happen all over the body.
And above those which happen to them in the neck, there is one and many; and they issue from a side; and all strophula come out of them within their own tunic, as it is in the knots and aphes of the head, as we have said.
And the kinds of strophula are many. For from them are the leaflets; and from them are those which contain moisture; and from them are the evil ones, which do not submit to cure.
Now in that part from which you see a good color in touch, whose skin is close and moves to all parts, and does not adhere to the nerves of the neck, nor to the arteries, nor is deep: it is necessary that you separate it from the superficial line from the upper part to the lower part of the body according to a line, g. and scrape it off from all sides: and extend two skin flaps with a hook, or with many hooks if you can bear it, as we have said in the aphes of the head, and draw them out slowly.
And it is necessary that you take care that the new blood does not flow or that a nerve is injured.
And let the scalpel not be too sharp and keen so that it does not hurt you with its touch, or cause to shake your hand, or fall down, and fall into something that is not necessary.
But if you cut a vein or an artery, or prevents you from operating, then place on the wound dried hay tricum, or some powder which stops the blood, and tighten the hay, and let it go, until the sharpness of the aphes subsides, and the hay softens: or it may begin to rot.
For the blood is cut off by the bandages; so turn back to your work, until you are finished.
Then examine with your index finger if there is anything left of the strophula by the small ones; then cut them, and clean them up.
For if there is a large new strophula in the root: then it is necessary that you do not cut that strophula from its root; but it is necessary that you tie it with a strong twisted thread, and let it go until it falls by itself without harm.
Then fill the wound with old cloth, which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then care for the wound itself.
If the entire tendon is injured, then you should bring together two wounds: and immediately when you see that there is no excess, mend them.
But if you see that there is excess due to the size of the tendon, then you should cut into the root of it and remove it: and administer the stitch that we have described.
And as for the tendons that contain moisture, pierce them with a superficial puncture: so that you can see the location of maturity of the tendon: and place the puncture from there down along the body, as we have said.
Then after the puncture administer a liniment with ointment, and similar things, so that it corrods what remains of corruption, until when you see that the tendon is now healed: then care for it with a generous ointment made from flesh, until it heals.
Chapter XLI.
As for the section of the epiglottis behind the apexy within the throat by accident.
The ancient ones called this section of the epiglottis and there was no one in our land who made it; and this is the writing of their teaching.
But in those who have a synechieu (a kind of joint), the epiglottis should be removed: for there is no advantage to it: since all the nerves and the lung are weak.
In those, however, who have a hot aphemia(a kind of swelling) in the mouth, or throat, or in both amygdalas, when there is no disease in the canal, it is necessary to use the section of the epiglottis, so as to escape from the destruction which happens through precation.
Therefore when we wish to remove the epiglottis, let us cut it with a little circle of the epiglottis, or four, at a width, that is situated between two circles by a quantity, that is the section in the sifilis(a kind of skin disease), not in the cartilage: and this place is suitable for the section, since it is hidden from the flesh, and the blood vessels come from it, far away.
If the surgeon is timid, then he should spread the skin with glue and a hook. Then he will find the skin, until it reaches the canal; he must stop the flow of blood if he sees any blood there.
Then dry up the wound with a sponge that we have provided: and indicate on the section of the canal the exit from it when it is moved away, and by the loss of blood.
And release the loose end at some time.
When, therefore, the wound is moved away from the time when there is a fear of an inflammation, the two lips of the wound will be gathered together and sewed up alone without cartilage.
Then administer medicines that make meat grow, until it heals.
Says Albucasis. Says Albucasis. The summary of this speech that we have related is an explanation as to when the poultices should be removed, for the disease will have passed its height when the mouth has been covered with pus and the sick person is rescued from death, and he will recover from his illness if he breathed in a certain way, and he will be saved from death. And for this reason they ordered to leave the loose end alone until the evil of the illness is gone, and it is almost gone: then they ordered to tighten the wound, and to take care of him, until he is healed.
And this that I saw with my own eyes, is that a servant girl took a knife and put it in her mouth, and cut it with the blade on the side of the lung canal.
And I was called to cure her, and I found her moaning, as a dead person moans.
I then removed the loose end, and I found blood flowing out from the small wound. Then I was confident that she had not cut her ligature, nor had it come loose: and wind flowed out from the wound.
So I healed the broken bone and the injury itself, until he was well; and nothing happened to the servant except a sore throat, and after a few days she recovered her good health.
That is why I say that there is no fear in the epiglottis.
Concerning the hernia of the throat.
Chapter XXIV.
This swelling called a throat hernia is a large one, of the color of the body; and it is common in women.
And it has two causes: or it is natural, or it is accidental.
Certainly there is no talent in the natural.
The accidental one, however, has two causes; one of which is similar to the nodules that are swollen; and the other is... And the other mode is similar to a swelling that is caused by an enlargement of an artery. And there is a fear in it; and you should not suppose that it should be done with iron unless it is small, but you should test it and examine it with an instrument. If, then, the swelling is similar to a large nodule, and it is not suspended with any vessels: then cut it off as you cut off nodules; and take it out with what contains it in a pouch, if it is in a pouch; and if not, then examine it all over. Then take care of the place with him, so that he may heal well, until he recovers his health.
Chapter XL.
Concerning the section above the kinds of nodules.
There are many kinds of nodules, and I have already spoken about their division; and it is necessary that I should describe the difference between a nodule and an inflammation, since there is doubt in the matter.
I say, then, that with inflammation there is heat, and fever, and sharp pains, until the excess fluid is dried up, and decay is completed; for then the fever and heat subside.
When the node is not hot, nor feverish, nor painful, and it will contain them kistis sifachin, which is their own sacs, and will be according to the color of the body: and is an obstacle to them such as chickpeas, and becomes like a plate, and greater and smaller.
And they are according to two species: or thin: or contain moisture. And the colors of moisture are many, according to what I said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to cure the node, you should experience it, and inquire about it with the instrument called Intromissum, according to which its form will be in the chapter that is after this.
And the method of inquiry about pustules and all nods is, that you take this instrument, and introduce it into a moist place, which you will find in the pustule: and you shall move your fingers with it gradually, until you know that the instrument has entered the skin. Then take your last hand according to the measure of the size of the pustule.
Then remove Intromissum, and consider what comes out of his opening into the groove.
If so then if moistness comes out running, whatever color it is: then dry the instrument by a superficial section, according to what I said in other pustules.
And if no moisture comes out in the groove of Intromissum, then you will know that it is fatty: so dry over the node with a section having the form of a cross, according to this form, as I have taught you: and suspend it with a hook, and scrape the skin from all parts with ease: and guard the chestnet if you can over it, so that you take out the sound one with the Node.
But if the chestnet is broken during the operation, and it is not possible to take out the sound one, often happens that it, then take it out roughly, until nothing remains of it.
For if there remains of it a little bit, or a lot, the Node will return according to many.
If he hurts you, and there remains a little of the wound: then fill the wound with some acute corrosive powder; and bind it closely, and put above it what is called a hot poultice; and take care of it with the rest of the cure until it is healed.
If there is therefore a large nodule, then cut off its two lips and take care of it with what is called the flesh-eating substance.
But if you have an opposite fresh pustule, or not a pustule: then wrap it up, and fill the place with dried土, and leave it tightly tied for two days, or three, until the wound putrefies, and the discharge ceases: then proceed to cut off what remains of the nodule.
Chapter XLVII.
Regarding instruments from outside the body for cutting and piercing.
Of these are the forms of introducers, which are of three kinds.
For from them there is a large one, and from them a medium one, and from them a small one.
Let there be made of iron four-sided prisms with inclined ends, that they may facilitate entrance into the incision.
These are forms of experimenters, and the number is four; that is to say, piercing; and they are of three kinds.
For from them there is a large one, and a medium one, and a small one.
They are convenient that they may be examined through the incisions, exits, fistulas, and abscesses from him who is lying there between the bones.
And others are round, sharp, smooth, such as the large aiguilles used for sewing up wounds; they are of brass, or copper, or iron, or silver.
And the better ones are those made of brass.
And there are experimenters made of black lead, which are convenient for examining fistulas; and they have reflections, so that they may reflect with their softness on the parts examined.
And there are again three species. For from them there are long ones, from them there are middle-sized ones, and from them there are short ones, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the strictness of its estreety.
Form of the anastomosis, and there are many species.
For from them there are simple ones, that is to say, those in which there is one width: and they are of three species as you see, Great, Middle, and Small.
And from them there are blind anastomoses: and they are of three species.
And from them there are hooks having two widths, and they are of three species: and from them there are hooks having three widths, and they are of three species: and all of these are necessary in their place.
And these are the forms of scalpel with which they cut and scrape nodules and staples: and they are of three species: for from them there is a great one, a middle one, and a small one.
Their extremities with which the cutting is done are acute, other extremities are not acute: and they are not placed so except when it is done with them that the incision into the skin, or nerve, heals by itself, and finds a little calm from the inflammation than it finds in the scaring of staples.
They are made of brass, and they are similar to the radio with which alcohol is prepared: and in the broad end there is a hidden spikelet: and it runs into the inside, and out when you want it, as you see.
Form of the spikelets which are hidden between the fingers at the perforation of staples: and they do not feel them, when they are touched; and they are of three species, a great one, a middle one, and a small one.
Form of the wind-pockets with which blood is separated from the wound: and they are of three species, a great one, a middle one, and a small one.
Let them be made of brass or copper, round, of about the same length as you see, and let them be fine.
And it should be that these shapes of the vents are great and small with you: so that you can cut blood away with speed when necessary, and then when there is no medicine present with you.
However, do not use them to cut blood in any part of the body, and do not use them except in fleshy places: such as the legs, hips, arms, breasts, feet, groin, and similar places from the flesh, damp.
And when they are made into small tools like the fists of a gloved hand, according to their shape: by which blood is cut off when it flows from the place of phlebotomy, or when incision is made in a vein or artery: and when they are also made into rounds according to this form.
THE SURGERY OF THE Breasts.
Regarding the care of the breasts of men who resemble female breasts.
When the breasts of some men swell at night (that is, when they begin to feel the desire to urinate in their sleep) until they resemble female breasts: and remain wet with urine.
Whoever desires to avoid this (that is, the desire to urinate in his sleep), let him tie his breast with a moon-shaped piece of cloth, according to this form from the line, b to the line, g: and then scrub the whole skin off. Then fill it with a medicated ointment. Then join together the two lips of the wound with a stitch, and care for it, until it heals.
If however the breast sways towards the lower side and becomes soft because of its size, as is the case with women: then it should be found in its two upper sides with two lunar-shaped pieces, each held by the other at its ends, so that the larger one is contained within the smaller one, according to this form from the line, b to the line, g: and then scrub the skin which is between the two lips, and remove the pudding, and administer what we have said about the stitch and powders, which is necessary for the cure, until it heals.
If, however, you do not want to make the incision necessary for you to make, due to the patient's restlessness, or due to the flow of blood: then you should fill the wound with a corrosive ointment and leave it alone until it has corroded what remains from the swelling. Then take care of the wound, until it heals.
Regarding the abscess that occurred during the expedition of Titus.
Chapter 58.
These abscesses that occur during the campaign of Titus are of two types: one is hard and contains pus, and the other is moist.
So these that contain moisture should be cleaned with a lunar section, according to this shape, from line B to line G. And when all that is in the abscess has been washed out with sweat, then fill it with old ointment and leave it alone until another day.
Then the ointment should be removed, and care taken with the ointment suitable for that wound, until it heals.
If the abscess is of the type of nodules of the strophula, then cut over it like we said in the section about strophulas that are equal.
But if the node is extended in this way so as to emit pus, then administer cauterization to it, according to what we said in that which was pre-empted.
Chapter 59.
Regarding the incision of an abscess that has occurred due to an artery or vein.
When an artery is interrupted and the skin that is above it consolidates, then many times a boil occurs from there; and also occurs to veins, so that a boil and swelling occur in them.
And the signs with which it is recognized that an abscess and swelling are due to an artery and vein are these: for when an abscess is due to an artery, it is long and collected in the depths of the body; and when you press on the fingers of your hand, you feel almost as if there were a hissing sound.
And that which is for the vein, is round in the apparent body.
And the section on this ulcer is an error, and especially that which is under the armpits, and in the groin, and on the neck, and in many places of the body: and it is great indeed. Therefore, so that his care may be taken away with iron, and that which is also from it in the extremities, or in the head, let it be taken away.
And on this, then, what is from it by swelling of the opening of an artery, find in the skin by a section in length. Then open the section with a hook, afterwards the artery: and free it from the tunics, until it is detected.
Then insert beneath it the hook, and let it penetrate until another side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I taught you in the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
Then prick the place, which is between the two ligaments with a needle, until all the blood which is in it has gone out, and the ulcer is healed over.
Then administer the cure which produces pus, until the ligaments fall: afterwards care for that with ointments suitable for it, until it heals.
If the ulcer is due to a vein section, then you must hold your hand so that it is possible for you to extract it from the ulcer with the skin. Then insert a hook under the place which you held with your hand, and let it penetrate: and let it remain in it a double thread, until you extract it from the other side. Then bind the ulcer with that good ligament: according as I told you in the binding of an ulcer, from the two parts with its two extremities with a thread.
But if you think that the thread should be extracted, then insert a hook with another thread under the ulcer completely by the incision of the knife: press, and tighten your threads in four places.
Then dry out the abscess in the middle of it until you see what is inside: then make an incision on top of the skin, and free what is bound up from within it.
Then put on the pulp over it that you dipped in wine, and oil. Then administer the cure, which is done with liniments and ointments, until it heals.
Head
The abscess that happened from a twist of the nerves.
As has happened with an abscess in an artery or vein, so too has happened with an abscess in a nerve: it is due to a blow, or due to excessive work, and the like: and it often happens in places of aid, or of a calcaneal joint, and in any place where joints move: and it is a gray abscess.
It is similar in color to the rest of the body, and it is in many dispositions without pain: and when it is stretched with a wince, it feels in it a similar numbing.
And this is not an abscess aggregated deep inside the body, but rather it is under the skin, and it moves all over, and does not make a noise either forward or backward, nor backward towards the rear.
So then what is in the joints does not need to be moved with an iron wisp. Perhaps, indeed, it happens that a contraction occurs.
But in that which is from them in the head, or in the forehead, find skin with a smoothening. If then there is a small abscess, then hold it with forceps, and cut it off from its root.
And if there is a big one, then hang it from a hook, and scrape it off: then remove it, and join a stump with a stitch: and cure the abscess, until it heals.
Head
On the cutting of abscesses, which happens in the belly.
Such a condition sometimes occurs often in the intestines and other parts of their bodies, which are called Tinea, because they are similar to lice in their likeness to fungi.
For its root is subtle, and their head is thick, and their lips are loose. And of them is one who is small, and of them is one who is very large.
And I have seen a man already; and in his belly were two kind of things, which were more than like to other things which are fungis: there was no difference between them, they had white roots, and their lips were loose, and they drooped, and there ran out from them always moisture.
So I laid hold upon them, and found in weight one as much as X and VIII ounces, and in another as much as VI ounces. And the operation in cutting them is, that you consider then, if it is weak, moist, and the color of the roots is white, moist, subtile: then cut him with a broad chisel, and let the cauterium be present before you in the fire.
For often is cast out by section of it much blood: approach then if blood captivates thee, then cauterize him.
That if you see a weak and fearful man who is afraid of the incision with the iron, then take a wire made from copper which is made slightly curved, and bind it to him with a thong: whose manner is that which I have said, and let go of him for two days.
Then add in the tightening of the brass. So do not cease to tighten the brass, when it presses upon the flesh, until it is cut off, and falls by itself without work.
But if the roots of the flesh are thick, then there is some fear and terror in cutting him: especially for it is in the belly.
However, possibly you can cut a half of it. Then cauterize him, that he not return.
Then take care of the flesh, until it is healed.
And do not suspect to cut that flesh which is of a dark color, of few senses, and of an appetizing appearance: for it is an ulcerous cancer: and I come with the remembrance of the cancer after this.
Chapter LII. On the treatment of an eminence of the umbil
On the treatment of an eminence of the umbilicus.
There are many causes of an eminence of the umbilical area. It may arise from a fistula running below the belly, or from an outbreak of pus, or from the intestines, according to whether it occurs in the remaining ruptures. Or from blood which flows from a vein, or from an artery, as has been said above. Or from a constricted windpipe in that area.
But if it is due to a fistula running below the belly, and the discharge is thick: then it is of the color of a blood clot, similar in color to the body; and it is soft, without pain, and seems to be of various depth. And if it is due to the ejection of the intestines, then its position is with what we have described above, and its variety is more pronounced. But when you press it with your fingers, it is hidden: but then it returns, and there may be a sound with it; and it increases greatly at the entrance of the belly, and causes pain and trembling.
But if it is due to moisture, it is soft; then it does not disappear when pressed with your hand, and does not become tighter, and is not added.
But if it is due to blood, then, with these signs, there appears a clot toward the dark edge.
But if it is due to born flesh: then it is a grayish, thick, hard clot, and its shape depends on the quantity.
But if it is due to a windflow, then the touch is soft.
And the operation for it is this: if you wish to treat it, then you should refrain from treating it, since, if it is due to the blood of an artery or vein or a windflow, the treatment is not to be attempted. For in that there is fear and horror, as I taught you in the chapter where I said that clots are due to an artery or vein.
If the eminence of the umbilicus is due to the intestine, or the navel: then you should order the sick person to hold his breath and stand still, with his arms extended. Then, if there is a mark around the umbilicus, burn it completely. Then order him to lie down on his back between your hands. Then, with a blade of steel, cut around the umbilicus from the spot you marked with the burning. Then, spread the middle part of the wound from above with a large hook. Then tie it strongly around the wound with a strong thread, or with a silken cord that is well knotted; and let the knot be well secured by the stretching of the bandage.
Then open the middle part of the wound that has been spread above the knot. If you then find that he has already been caught by the knot: then remove the knotted part and introduce your finger into him, pushing the intestines towards the inside of his abdomen: and if you find a navel, then take hold of it with a hook and cut off the excess.
If, however, the opposite artery is on your right or left: then tie him around very tightly. Then return to your operation. And take two sharp needles and insert two strong strings into them: and introduce two needles into the wound that you have made around the umbilicus in the shape of a cross, so that they penetrate.
Then tie the wound on all four sides around the needles; and if you want to, remove the needles, and let the place where the wound was be allowed to rot: or cut it open when it has become a little rotten: or cut it open when it is slightly rotten.
Then take care of him with ointment, as necessary, until he is healed.
If the eminence of the umbilicus is due to flesh that has become inflamed or moist: then you should close up the wound, as we have said. And draw out any blood or moisture that you find in him.
Then care for himself with regard to the solidification of the place.
Head LIII.
THE CURE OF CANCER.
I have now finished with the division of the species of Cancer, and how it should be treated with medicines; and forbearance from treating it with iron, lest it should ulcerate; and I have spoken of cancer which is generated in the womb, and forbearance also in its treatment.
The ancients also say that whenever cancer is in a place where it can be eradicated, as for example in the breast or in the thigh, and in other such parts of the body which lie outside and can be completely taken away, it should be removed especially when it is only just beginning to form.
When however it has become old and great, it should not be approached near.
For I was not able to cure any from it; nor did I see anyone before me who had done so.
And the operation on it, when it is situated as we have said, is this: first of all you make an incision and drain the pus which is black. Then, if the wound is filled with a visible pus, you should bleed the patient; then, after he has recovered from the bleeding, administer the medicine.
Then prepare the sick one by means of preparation when the operation is performed.
Then throw on the cancer those hooks which are suitable for it. Then cover the whole of it with a paste, after having examined it, until not a single root remains; and let the blood flow freely, and do not cut it off quickly, but rather press the spots and wipe away the gross blood with your hand or with whatever instrument is at hand.
If however the blood flow from the incision of an artery or a vein opposes you, then burn away the vein, until the blood stops flowing. Then care for himself with regard to the rest of the cure, until he is healed.
THE CURE OF HYDROPSY.
Chapter LIIIII. We have already discussed the different species of hydrophobia and how water is formed; we shall now examine the various forms of the disease and its treatment with medicines.
And those that are treated with iron, there is only one type of ochlosis; and it does not approach iron for the species of ear- disease: nor for the hyposarcous species, for that is fatal.
When you have already treated this species of hydrophobia with medicines and your treatment has not been successful, then reflect. For if the patient is already weak, or there is another kind of weakness besides hydrophobia; such as a cough, or a watery eyes, and such like: then do not treat with iron: for there is a fear of that.
But if you see that the patient is weak of vigor, and there is no other illness besides hydrophobia; and he is not a boy or an old man: then the mode of operation in him is, so that you stand with your hands near his head, and let him express water from his hand towards the lower part of the pallet.
Then take a small and sharp spatula: it should be shaped like this. It should have two acute ends, one long, and the other acute, like a small spatula. But there should be something smooth on it little by little, so that it does not cut during the operation towards the intestines and injures him:
Then reflect. For if the generation of hydrophobia is from the lower part of the intestines, then it is necessary to extend with a section of three fingers' length from the navel towards the lower side of the pallet.
But if the generation of hydrophobia is due to liver illness; then your section should be left from the navel by three fingers' length.
And if the generation of it is due to the spleen; then your section should be on the right side: and it is not necessary that you also make a section on the side where the sick one lies, so that there do not flow too many secretions into that weak place.
Then pierce with the instrument all the skin. Then introduce the knife into it, and rub your hand with the chisel between the skin, and scrape, as if you were cleaning it up: and let the amount that is scraped be equal to the quantity of the nail, or about it.
Then pierce with the chisel until the knife reaches a vacant spot: and there is a spot of water. Then pull out the flesh, and introduce into the opening the instrument, which has this shape. And it is similar to a cannula: it is made of silver, or brass, or gold, or lead, or tin: and in its lower part there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes, two on one side, and one on the other side: and its end is cut according to the shape of the knife, as you see: at its upper end there is an annulus.
For when the instrument reaches water, it immediately goes down on top of the instrument, therefore it dries out from water at an average rate.
Since if you drain it more than is necessary, in an hour perhaps a weak person will die by the resolution of his animal spirit: or it may happen to him that he has a fit that approaches death.
But drain it out according to the strength of its power, and according to what I tell you about the dispositions of nurses from its pulsation, and from its goodness.
Then pull out the instrument, and keep the water.
That is, because it retains immediately due to the skin that holds back the opening that is above the chisel: so that I tell you, that you pierce it according to that method.
Then repeat the instrument on the other side, if you see that it is weak in tolerating that thing: and pull out also from water a small quantity.
Do that for several days without fear, and guard yourself from error: until there is not much left of the water.
But if you are healing a weak person, and you let go of a large amount of water: then guard that person with burial in hot sand, and with much sweating in a bath and in the sun, and let it wait on its hunger: and cauterize above the stomach, and the entrails, and the spleen after extraction of the water: following which I will tell you in advance.
On the care for infants who are born with their bladders not punctured.
Chapter 50. On the treatment of infants that are
When any infant is born from the womb of its mother and its scrotum is not punctured or has a narrow opening or is in an odd place.
Therefore, it is necessary to help with the perforation as soon as he is born, with a delicate towel, according to this form.
Then put a small clamp from lead into the opening and tie it: and hold him for three days or four.
When he then wants to emit urine, remove it, and let it go. Then reduce the child.
And if you do not put lead on, it is possible that the urine which runs over the place does not allow the child to be closed.
But this one whose opening is narrow, is treated with lead, as we have said, for many days, until it widens.
But those who have an opening in an odd place are injured. That is, because from those who are born, the opening is at the end of the penis: so he cannot urinate in front, until he raises his penis with his hand towards the top. And there is no generation for him, therefore semen cannot reach the mother's womb according to its straightness: and it is a foul disease.
And the method of action in that is, so that he lies on his back. Then extend the penis of him with your left hand by a strong extension, and cut the head of the penis from an edge, or with a sharp knife: as if you were cutting a cane, or like you are cutting something, so that it is similar to the head of the penis: and let the opening fall in the middle according to what should be.
And cause yourself during your operation to have no blood flow. This often happens. Therefore, he did not go with him when he cut off his blood and tended to the wound until it healed.
Regarding the lesions that occur on the foreskin and skull, as well as greasiness, blackening, and adhesions.
Chapter LVI: On the treatment of phimosis and other conditions of
regarding various problems that occur on the penis; there is an eminence of foul flesh.
And from it come other evil things and others are not evil.
Therefore, you should hang it with a fine hook and cut it off completely until it is clean all around. Then place on top of it a container submerged in Egyptian ointment. Then care for the wound with dyachydin ointment after that until it heals.
If the albather is evil and of a foul color, then you should administer cauterization on it after making an incision and shaving it.
If, however, the albather is caught in the foreskin and is not circumcised, and there is a part of the albather inside the foreskin and another outside: then you should remove the albather that is inside first, until it hardens completely, then care for the one that is outside: for if you care for it at the same time, the foreskin does not heal.
And also happen other things in the testicles and darkening and corruption of the foreskin. Therefore, you should put together everything that has become dark and what wants to be corrupted, or what has already been corrupted.
Then spread a line of honey over the wound that has already been crushed with flour and bread crumbs and dried herbs.
Then care for it with the remainder of the curing process until it heals.
If, however, blood flow occurs, then administer cauterization with lunar cautery, according to this form.
For the cauterization is suitable for two things at the same time, namely for the blood flow and the wound when it corrupts.
If the head of the penis is corroded and destroyed in an instant: then it is necessary that you introduce a plug made of lead into the meatus so that the sick person can urinate on it.
Indeed, if the foreskin sticks to the head of the penis and this adhesion does not occur unless the foreskin is healthy and circumcision is not required on it, and when adhesion occurs due to a wound or hematoma: then it should be cut with an dull pin until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is released from all sides.
If it is difficult to discern it with care, then you should cut some of the head of the penis and from the foreskin. That is because the foreskin is easily punctured due to its slenderness.
Then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a soft cloth, which has already been soaked in cold water so that it does not stick again.
Then treat it with wine containing iron, until it heals.
Chapter LVII.
On the purification of infants and the treatment of errors or accidents.
Circumcision is not a solution to continence, like the rest of the wounds: however, since it is the result of our operation, our desire, and its use is in boys on their own, it is necessary that we mark this operation as better, and always easier leading to salvation.
I therefore say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision in any of their books: because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only what we have acquired through experimentation.
That is because I have discovered most of the arts, and the use of scalpel and scissors in purification, circumcising with a sharp blade, and tying with wire and cutting with a nail.
And I have already tested all these methods, and I did not find anything better than purification with scissors and wire binding.
For when the wound is cleaned, the skin often escapes. Since the skin of the prepuce has two coats: so perhaps the upper coat may be torn, and the lower coat may be left intact: it is therefore necessary to cut into the second, so that the pain might not be felt. And when the cleaning which is made by the finger, that is to say, the digit, where surgeons operate, does not secure an incision at the extremities of the male member: since perhaps it enters into its hole.
In the cleaning done with the nail, perhaps it will scratch the iron, and ruin your operation; and since the skin of the boy is short by nature, and often grows so that it does not need to be cleaned: and I have seen this myself.
But the cleaning done with forceps and thread, a good experiment has shown to me; because the forceps are proportional to the incision: since the sharpness that is above is like the sharpness that is below. When you squeeze your hand, the two sharpnesses are proportionate, and they make an incision of one kind at one time: and it is a compression of the same figure, containing the skin of the penis from all sides, so that there falls no error at all.
And the method of operation is your own, so that you can cut off, especially the boy, if he is one of those who understand only a little, which you do not do, unless you tie the thread to his penis alone: and you leave him until the next day.
Then let him be happy and rejoice in every way possible for you, since he receives his understanding. Then let him stand between your hands prepared to stand, and not sitting down: and hide the forceps in your sleeve, or under your foot, so that he does not see them at all, nor any of the tools.
Then introduce your hand into his penis, and blow on the skin, and pull it up until the head of the penis comes out. Then cleanse it from that which has been gathered there of filthiness.
Then bind up the place marked with thread. Afterwards, bind the lower part with a ligature about half as thick as the first. Then grasp it with your thumb between the two ligatures and cut through both with your knife. Then wipe away the blood quickly with a cloth, and pull out the head of the blade. Then let the blood flow little by little (for this is best) and place the powder above: and above the powder, a cloth in which the thread is spread out, washed with rosewater mixed with fresh oil: and leave it on top until another day: and tend to the wound with further care until it heals.
The shape of the forceps for cleaning is like this.
The two ends should be bent and meet together: let no sprig of the claw project from it: and the length of the two curved parts should be equal to the length of the two handles.
But a slip during cleaning is error: for perhaps it omits all the inner skin, or part of it near the incision.
Therefore you should extend it from your hand with your nail before touching the place: and cut it to length according to equality.
If you cannot hold it with your nail, then take it with a forceps and cut it.
If however it has passed three days, and what is left under the swelled skin is raw flesh, then let go of it until the heat has subsided, and with ease, remove the flesh, cut it according to your preparation, and sew up for you from the head of the blade. For that will not harm it.
So take care that the wound is covered with powder, which we described in the book on powders: and if it has incised above the line, and extends upwards, it does not harm it either.
So treat that injury with what we have said, until it is healed.
Cura ergo illud cum eo quod diximus,
On the Extraction of a Retained Bone from an Arrow Wound.
The treatment for the retention of urine in an arrow wound, is that mentioned above, which we have described, until it is cured.
If the urine does not become cured, and there is a stone in the urethra, which has now reached the neck of the bladder: then the patient should be bedridden, treated with care. Then he should put his feet on his back, and stretch his belly from the upper part of his back, and the patient should try to hold his breath as much as possible. So the patient is placed with his neck towards the rear, in order to expel the stone; from which it follows that the urine is cured.
If it does not become cured with what we have said above, and the patient is ill: then you should administer the extraction of it with an instrument called a syringe, which has this shape; made of silver, and fine, soft, smooth as a bird's feather in its thinness, long like the palm of a hand, and in the middle: to which there is a fine cannula at the tip.
And the method of exit for urine through it, is that you should take a double thread, and tie the end with wool, or twine, a good knot: and insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the syringe; and cut with scissors if there is any excess of wool, really insert into the cannula with care, as you would raise it.
Then insert the syringe with oil, or with butter, and with alum; and make the patient sit on a chair, and dip the bladder, and his penis with wet oils, and olive oil, and warm water.
Then insert the syringe into the penis with ease, until it reaches the base of the bladder.
Then cut twice from above the navel.
Then push the syringe inside until it reaches the bladder, and let him feel that he has already arrived at the empty place: and do not make this second order unless the meatus, in which you put it, is where the curvature is.
Then slowly extend the string with wool. For the thread follows the wool.
Then take it out and let the thread run through the urethra: and again push the syringe, and do not cease doing this until the bladder is emptied, and let him feel a relief of pain.
As for the quality of catheterizing the bladder with a clepsydra.
Chapter LIX.
When a wound happens in the bladder, or blood freezes inside it, or pus is accumulated inside it, and water and medicines are distilled inside it: then make use of an instrument called a clepsydra, and this is its form.
It is closed, that is, shut. And in it are three openings, two on one side and one on the other, as you see them.
And the concaved place, where the push is located, should be according to the quantity that it gets without addition, until when it is taken away with it something is attracted from the humidity: and when it is pushed, it expels it far away: second, because it makes a clepsydra, which pours out naphtha, that is, Greek fire in battles of war.
When you pour water into the bladder, introduce the extremity of the clepsydra into the water, and pull it out with what pushes it upwards, for the water is drawn into the concaved part of the clepsydra.
Then introduce the extremity into the penis, according to what we have said about the syringe. Then push the water with it, for that water reaches the bladder immediately, so that he feels a relief of pain.
To form a thin cloth so that it is wound about the urethra.
Let it be made of silver or brass; let its head be higher than the corresponding alcama with a small ligament beneath it, by which the urethra is covered.
Then take the urethra of a ram, and place it in it the moisture with which you want to cauterize the urethra. Then tie it between two sinuses with a strong ligament and a double thread; and heat it a little more over fire.
Then introduce the end of the cloth into the penis, and then grasp your hand over the urethra with the moisture being tightened, until the sick person feels that the moisture has already reached the urethra.
But if you do not have the present urethra, then take a piece of pergament and make it into a circle, and pierce it from all its roundness. Then introduce a strong thread into these holes, as they turn. Then gather the circle together, as is gathered also the wool; then you put into it that which you want of moisture, and of oils, and of water.
Then tie it in the instrument; and do with it as you did with the urethra by means of your hand, until the moisture has reached the urethra.
10.
§ On the extraction of stone.
We have already spoken in the division of the species of stone, and its treatment with medicines; and we have distinguished between stone generated in the kidneys, urethra, and other parts, and also between that which is formed in the bladder with the hand and section; but this stone which is generated in the urethra is especially called "stone in the urethra"; and this stone which is generated in the penis is called "stone in the penis"; and I will now speak of these things more fully with a clear and short exposition.
I say, that stone generated in the urethra often happens to boys.
And of the signs of it is that the urine issues from the urethra like water in its subtility; and there appears in it white sand, and it irritates the penis of the sick person, and causes him to ache, and often hangs down. Then he erects it and turns it with him; the anus is moved in many of them.
And it is easy to cure boys until they are fourteen years old. And it is difficult in the elderly. But in young people it is medium, because it lies between the two; and the cure is easier when the stone is small, but if it is large, it is difficult to cure it; and if it is small, it is cured easily from within.
When we come to the cure, at first we should change the sick man's faeces with a laxative, so that he may eliminate all the dung that is in his intestines; for sometimes it prevents the examination of the stone.
Then we should take the sick man by the feet and shake him, and move him downward; so that the stone may fall into the deep part of the bladder or sometimes jump out from its high place.
Then we should make him sit between your hands with his knees pulled up, so that the bladder is completely emptied downward towards the bottom.
Then examine it and feel it from outside.
If you feel the stone in a space, then move immediately with your knife on top of it.
If it does not fall under your hand at all, then you should wipe your index finger with oil from the left hand, if the sick person is a boy; or with the middle finger if he is fully grown: and push him into some part of his anus, and feel for the stone until it lies under your finger: and slowly turn him towards his bladder neck.
Then press on top of it with your finger and push him towards the outside against the place where you want to make the section; and order one minister to press the bladder with his hand, and another minister to stretch the testicles with his right hand upward; and with his left hand, to move the skin that is under the testicles in the part where the section is.
Then introduce the spatulum incidentally, which has this form. And find in it what is between the testicles and the anus, and not in the middle, towards the left side of birth: and let the cut be made on top of the stone, and your finger be placed in the anus: and let the cut be made transversely, so that the outside cut is wide and the inside cut is tight, according to what is possible for the exit of the stone out of it not be larger.
Perhaps your finger that is in the anus, which holds the stone near the cut, and it comes out without difficulty.
And you know that from the stone are its corners and edges, so it is difficult to come out for that reason.
And from it is smooth, like a gland, and round: and its exit is easy.
So then add to the fissure for those who have corners and edges.
If it does not come out like this, then you should invent on top of it: or tighten it with a twitch on the sides, whose end is as the moon, which tightens over the stone and does not break away from it: or put under it a thin instrument, with curved ends.
But if you cannot do it above, then increase the hole slightly. If something wins your blood, cut off the stone with a knife.
But if the stone is more than one, then push it into the first large opening of the urethra. Then cut on top of the stone. Then push a little behind it, and do the same if there are more than two.
If it is very large, then ignorance is how to cut off the stone with a large cut. Since it has happened to an ill person of the two things, or that he dies, or because his urine has become frequent: soon, because the place is not consolidated at all.
But give him the means to expel it, until he comes out: or use a hook on its break, until you take it out quickly.
When you have completed your operation, then fill the ulnar cavity with thure, aloe, and dragon's blood; and bind it tightly, and place a wet cloth over it with oil and wine, or rose water, and cold water: that an apostema may be sedated by the heat.
Then let the patient lie down on his back with his neck supported, and do not loosen the ligatures until the third day. When you have loosed him, embalm the place with much oil and water.
Then care for the patient with the dyafinicon ointment and the basilicon ointment until he is healed.
But if an apostema of the warm sort has been added, and it has corroded and is similar to that which congels in a vein; let there be no urine passed from it, and let it be recognized by the exit of blood with urine. Then insert your finger into the ulnar cavity and extract the blood. For if any remains, it incites to the corruption of a vein and its putrefaction.
Then wash the ulnar cavity with vinegar, water, and salt; and oppose to it whatever is suitable from the healing process until it is healed.
And in the hours of the cure throughout, bind two knees, and gather together herbs which are laid on the place, with medicines that are placed over it.
But if the stone is small and sits in the meatus of the urethra and has become fixed there and prevents urine from passing: then care for the patient with this stone before you cut it open. For this cure will often delay the section; for I have already tested it.
And it is as follows: take a perforator from iron, of this form, with a triangular end, acute and fixed on a wood.
Then take a thread, and bind it to the penis under the stone so that it does not recede into the urethra.
Then introduce the piercing iron into his penis with ease, until it reaches its stone: and remove the piercing iron from your hand on that stone bit by bit: and feel his piercing, until you make him pierce from the other part.
Urine then is immediately cleaned out.
Then press your hand on that which remained of the stone from the outside part of the penis. For it itself is broken, and comes out with urine, and the sick one is healed.
But if this cure has not been prepared for you because of something that keeps him back: then tie a cord under the stone, and a different cord above the stone. Then dry up on the stone in the penis between the two ligatures. Then take out him. Then remove the ligature, and clean up the frozen blood which formed in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie the cord under the stone unless it recedes towards the skin: and a different cord from above, unless when the cord is released after the stone has come out, the skin turns back to its place, and closes the wound as before your other ligature, and because of that necessity you must tie the upper cord so that it turns the skin upward, so that it returns with your other ligature, and closes the wound, as we have said.
CHAPTER LXI.
The extraction of the Stone in Women.
Stone is generated little in women.
But if any one of them has the stone: then the cure is difficult, and it is prevented because of many ways.
One of them is this: that perhaps she is a virgin.
And the second is, because you do not visit a woman who takes care of herself by a physician when she is chaste, or among those who have husbands.
And the third is, because you do not visit a woman who knows this art well, especially the work with the hand.
The fourth is distance from the stone: why does it need deep incision, and there is danger in that.
That if necessity compels to that, then you should take a woman physician who is well-versed in it: and little is found.
But if you really want to do that, then ask a competent, subtle doctor; and present a woman obstetrician who is well-versed in the matter of women, or a woman who has some skill in this art: so make her present, and above all things ask her to do whatever you command her to do in respect of the stone.
First of all, that is, so that she may see if the woman is a virgin: then it should be necessary for her to insert her finger into her and feel the stone.
But if she finds it, she should cut it with her finger, and then command the obstetrician to insert his finger into the weak place, and feel for the stone, after he has put his left hand on the hip and pressed it with a good grip.
But if she finds the stone, then it should be necessary for her to move it gradually from the opening of the hip to the lower part with all her strength, until she has brought it to the root of the pelvis.
Then she should cut it on the opposite side of the hip at the root, from whichever side it is ready for her, and feel the stone in that part: and her finger should not move away from the stone, holding it down: and a small incision should be made first. Then she should insert the tip of the blade on top of that cut.
Then she should insert the tip of the blade on top of that cut. But if she feels the stone, then she should add to the second cut an amount proportional to how much the stone moves away from her.
And you shall know that there are many kinds of stones. For from these there is a small one, and a large one, a smooth one and an asper one, a long one, and one that is round having branches.
Understand his nature, so that it may be explained to you through this regarding what you wish to know.
If then blood makes you win, then add in the place of the wound three things and hold it for an hour, until the blood is dried up.
Then go back to your work, until the stone comes out: and make, so that you prepare with you from instruments, which I said in extracting the stone in the urinary tract, so as to help with them in your work.
That if you win over you the flow of blood, and know that the expulsio of blood is from the artery that has been cut: then put powder on the place, and bind it with a powder stricture going down: and do not change that: and let go of the stone, and do not remove it. Perhaps the woman will die if she becomes weak. Then care for the wound.
When then sharpness of blood sits after days, and the place is putrefied, then go back to your work, until the stone comes out.
Head LII.
§ About the section over Hernias with water.
The aqueous Ramet is not, unless an aggregation of moisture in the skin of the penis, which is a one-inch square that lies under the skin of the scrotum: and is called sifac.
And when it is in its own pannus itself, which nature has prepared for it in part unless it becomes purulent: that is another one, and it is the skin of the testicles between the sifac white, which I have said: and it does not do this except rarely.
And generation of this ramification, is from the weakness that happens to the testicles: so that it is spilled on them this substance. And when there comes from a blow on the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors. Or indeed the color of it declines into citroniness, or is bloody rubies, or feculentous, black, or is aqueous white, and that which is more: and this is what is more.
And the signs by which it is known where the aggregation of water is, are these. For if it is in the scrotum or that which we have said, then the swelling is round to the length roughly like the figure of a circle: and the testicle does not appear, because moisture contains it from all sides.
And if there is moisture in the fold itself for itself, then the swelling is round with part of it, and for this reason a man estimates that another is, because it is one other.
And if moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white scrotum, then it falls down.
When therefore you wish to know the color of moisture, then experience the color of moisture in the swelling with the square insertion, whose shape preceded. Accordingly, because it is removed from the entrance into the insertion, judge of it that which is between itself.
When we have come to the cure with the iron, then it is necessary that you order the sick person, if it can be done, to let blood for him, and you will see the body of him full.
Then he shall lie down on his back upon a raised thing slightly, and put many cloths under him.
Then you shall sit on his left side, and order the minister to sit on his right side, who shall stretch out his penis between the two sides of the skin of the testicles, and to the part of the scrotum.
Then take a flat and broad blade of grass, and dry up the skin of the testicles from the middle along its length, up to the chest: and let the section be according to a straight line which divides the skin of the testicles, until it comes to the white scrotum encompassing it: and examine the flesh itself, or rather hide it out of it, as much as you can: and carefully look at it with the scarification according to the amount that is possible for you.
Then pierce the white scrotum full of water with a wide perforation, and draw out all the water.
Then separate the two lips of the incision with a hook, and spread the skin upward, and do not touch the skin that encompasses the testicles: and cut the skin in any way you can cut it yourself, or completely, or partially, especially its side is thin. For if you do not examine it carefully, there will be no security in the incision, except that the water should be washed away.
But if it proceeds outward from your skin at the time of your operation: then, when you have finished the incision, reduce the skin. Then join together the two lips of the skin of the testicles with a suture.
Then care for the skin as you do for other wounds, until it heals.
That if any of the skin becomes corrupted from another color, then you must use the ties of the suspenders, fearing a flow of blood.
Then cut off the testicle with the suspender, and take out the sperm: then care for it with what I have said.
But if water is gathered on both sides, then you should know that there are two branches: so dry one side equally according to what you have done to the other branch.
And if it is even for you, so that there is a single operation: then do it; then wash away the blood. And introduce the wool that is dipped in oil, or in oil rosin: and put a second wool that you have dipped in wine and oil on top of the two testicles, and press the eyes of the testicles: and put two pieces of cloth on top of them, and make them flat: and tie them together with a thread that has six turns according to this form.
Then take two cloths, and tie them up, and fill them with carmine, according to this similarity: and let the ends that are pressed by thorns, or by wet wool: and join them together with a knot at the back of the arms: and one end should take hold of something on top until it reaches the back, and the other end should take hold of the side of the pelvis: and let the two ends come together at the bottom of the sides, and let the other end come together at the two hips, and let the whole knot be joined together at the back of the arms.
And, when this wire is surgically treated with a cautery at the site of the cut with an iron: and it is, so that you accept the kultellare cautery subtilely, and separate with it the skin of the testicles: and it is lit up, according to what we have said: until it is detected when the सफک album containing water: then take the cautery, according to this form.
It assimilates Greek letters.
Then pierce with it that sifac, and it is lit up, until all the moisture exits.
Then extend that sifac with a hook, and scrape with the subtle lit cautery, and cut himself as much as is possible for you, until you completely remove it all.
And let the egg not touch his own flesh.
And you should know that this operation is healthier, and further away from the flow of blood, and better than the operation with a cut.
But if the contradiction that you cause in the hour of the cut, or in the hour of the cautery, hot swelling, or blood flow, or something else: then it should be that you cure what the contradiction that you cause ex illo with the cure that suits him, according to what we have said above.
But if he is shy and does not expect this operation on his own, due to its horrible nature: then administer the cut according to what I narrate above: and it is.
When you are certain to yourself with regard to what we have said about the meanings of the wire, that it is water: then it should be that you make the sick sit on a raised seat.
Then pierce the swelling at its lower part with a sharp blade: and place the cut according to the length of his body, and leave the opening wide, until all the water runs out.
Then put a cloth over the site of the cut, and tie him up, and let him run to drain off the remaining water: then care for him, until he heals.
If, however, there is a resistance to the exit of water at the time when you pierce it: and this should not be done except for that reason, because the white pannus makes a resistance in the opening of the wound, and prevents the exit of water: then you should put your finger into the wound, or the instrument from which the water of hydrops is extracted, whose form has preceded: or add a little to the operation of the wound.
And know that water returns, and is added after six months, or around them. So when it is added, then it returns in the same way, and the sick person will spend his days.
Chapter LIII.
On the care of the ram's horn.
You should know that in this section on the ram, there is a fear that leads to harm in many dispositions. Therefore I return to you from it, so that you may be healed from it.
And I am reminded of the operation in it, and the appearance of blisters.
I therefore say that many blisters occur in the bodies, from which the testicles are composed: and it is due to many causes, namely.
Or from acute surplush, or from acrimony, which is discharged onto the testicles. Or from a blow.
And the color of the blister corresponds to the color of the body, and it does not hurt: and the blisters are gray.
And perhaps it is a blister of stone, the color of which is dark, and there is no sensation.
And sometimes it is due to the knotting of arteries, and their swelling: as I have already reminded you: or from swelling of the veins.
So what is due to swelling of the arteries, it is recognized by the appearance of a blister when you squeeze it with your fingers. And you should not touch it at all.
That is true that what is due to swelling of the veins does not disperse anything when you squeeze it with your fingers.
It is also possible that a section be made on this form and on the remaining flesh; it is, in order to cut off the skin of the testes. Then extend your hand to the top and take it out with the scrotum or; free the suspenders from the stream, and tie the stream: and cut the suspenders after you have freed it from all parts of the parts that you.
So if your consolidated hand is with those flesh-born flesh, then it must be that you attract your hand and cut it off.
And if the adhesion is between any of the scrotum, or in it that is between the stream: then you must free all this adhesion and cut it off with a round incision.
If however the birth of flesh is at the place of adhesion that is behind: then it must be that you cut off all this one, and take out your hand, as we have said.
When you have finished your operation, then fill the wound with wool infused with rose oil and wine: and then take care of the wound with the remaining cure, until it heals.
Head LXIIII.
Of the cure of the vine, which is with the grapevine.
It is useful an embolism in a certain way by embolization, similar to a boil, with the softening of the testes: and it becomes difficult on the movement of the sick and exercise, and walking.
And in the cure of this illness is from fear, because of the which was the recollection of that which preceded it.
But it should be said, let us say the operation in that according to what did the first.
I say, then, that you need to make the sick sit on a raised seat. Then push the suspenders of the testes towards the lower side. Then hold the skin of the testes with your fingers, where they are next to the vine: and keep them by another, and extend them with a strong extension.
Then cut with a sharp chisel by cutting transversely through the direct vasorum, until the vas are recognized.
Then scrape away all parts, as we have told you when extracting the arteries which are in the temples.
Then fix in them the acumen where there is a double filament, and tie it in the first places where the vines occur: and tie it again in the last of them. Then dry them out in a straight medium section along the length of the body, and remove what is aggregated from the corrupt腐敗的湿潤物。
Then take care of the wound with the cure of the remaining wounds, in which the blood is generated, so that the vessels which nourish one testicle fall. For this is not a fault through that.
But if all the vessels are cut off, then they should be removed from this testicle with the vessels because otherwise the blood will not be nourished by it, for the incision, and will dry up or become inflamed, and will not be a cure for it with them.
Chapter LXV:
The cure of the intestinal ramus:
The head of this ramus is from a section which occurs in the side of the stomach in the part of the groin from the inner edge of the thigh.
Why do the intestines descend from that rupture to one testicle? And this rupture is either from the small intestine or from the extension of it.
And these two kinds of causes occur for many reasons: either from a blow, or from a fall, or from a noise, or from lifting a heavy thing, and the like.
And a sign, when it is from the extension of the small intestine. It is that which occurs gradually over a long time and not suddenly: and it is a swelling of the same size as the depth: because the small intestine is compressed by the hernia.
And a sign of it is when it occurs from the section of the hernia, because it causes sudden severe pain from its origin: and it is a swelling which appears under the skin nearby: and this is because of the exit of the intestine, and the course of it to the external hernia.
And sometimes when he goes out with the small intestine: and this is called the intestinal ramex, and zirbia; and sometimes it is done with a windiness.
And sometimes when it runs into feces in the intestine and is held there: and there with him is a sore nurse; because it causes pain before, and especially when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of this kind of disease with iron there is a danger; for which reason one must be careful to avoid such a risk.
And the mode of operation is this: you must teach the sick person to bring his intestine by hand into his hollow place, if he obeys the return. Then he shall lie on his back between your hands; and wipe his legs.
Then extend the skin that follows the skin upward, and dry the skin of the testicles from top to bottom. Then put the nails in two lips of the incision, according to how you open the incision with them: and the section be as big as possible, that it may come out of it without any difficulty.
Then scrape the skin of the testicles, and that which is under the skin, until when it is touched, white siphac comes out from all parts: then introduce your finger into that which follows the testicle, into that which is between white siphac, which is under the skin, and between the second siphac, and break the attachment which is in the back part of the scrotum.
Then move with your right hand into the inside of the skin of the testicles: and while doing so, extend white siphac upward with your left hand: and wipe the oozing with siphac to the section: and order the minister to extend the oozing upward: and you shall break the attachment, which is behind the complete solution.
Then seek with your fingers that there is nothing there of the intestines that have been torn in siphac or hard. If, however, something has come out from it: then push him toward the lower wind.
Then take hold of the sack, in which there is a thick thread, made from ten threads: and insert it between the last sifach, that is, the tunic, which is under the skin of the testicles, following the section: then cut off the extremities which protrude from the thread, until there are four threads. Then join some of them together with a shape that is in the form of a cross: and bind them with an alsifach, of which we have spoken, because it is a binding under the skin of the testicles, so that there cannot be any sending out of the sweat which nourishes them to send to them anything, lest there be a fever. And put again another ligature second, far from the first by two fingers. And after these two ligatures have been, leave out of the sifach, which is under the skin of the testicles, a quantity as big as a finger: and cut off the rest all around, and take out one.
Then dry in the lower part of the skin of the testicles, from which runs blood and pus: as we have told you before.
Then administer the wool that has been soaked in oil, and put it on a twig: and administer the ligature which we have told you. And when the sifach of white wax, of which we have spoken, is cauterized after the incision, fearing a flow of blood. This often happens. Then let go of the ligature, until it falls by itself.
But if the falling is delayed, then simmer it with hot water: and put on top of that which we have spoken, until it falls.
Then care for the twig with the rest of the wound's treatment, until it is healed.
Chapter LVI.
[The ramie plant.]
In this ramage there was no one who dared to cure it with iron.
And first they said that it happened as we have told you in the ramage which is with the vine. That is, so that the strings are used after the section on it with ease below: then dry in the middle, and care afterwards with what opens itself, until the strings fall: and cure of the knot, according to what we said, until it heals.
Chapter LVII. On the head.
On the dissection which takes place in the groin.
When a rupture takes place in the groin, as we have said, and a space is revealed, and nothing of the intestines descends to the testicles: and if it does descend, it is little, and returns in all seasons: indeed, if it lingers with that time, a fissure is added to the sifach, until the intestines descend into the sifach.
And what happens from the extension of the sifach, which is in the groin, as we have said. That is, because the sifach extends: then softens, and a space appears, and it is revealed.
And its cure is with poultice, as precedes its narration.
And when it is cured with iron, in this way: and it is so, that the sick person lies on his back between your hands. Then dry up the space of the rupture which has been revealed and prominent, by a section across its width, according to the quantity of three fingers.
Then tighten the sifach with a string and, what is under the skin, until, when it is touched, the white part of the sifach which is under the skin is revealed, that is following itself.
Then take a ray, and put the person on the prominent place from the sifach, and press the person towards the root of the penis.
Then open two prominent places on the end of the ray from the sifach, and connect them with a stitch one to another: then remove the end of the ray.
And do not drop the sifach at all, nor stretch one, nor any other, as I have told you to know in the cure of the intestinal branch.
Then care for that care of the wound. So when you strike the line, clean that up, and restore the splinter, until it hardens.
Because the blade is struck, and no excellence is added to the rupture.
And the cautery is better in this place; because it is closer to salvation.
Head LVIII.
About softening the skin of the testes.
The skin of the testes is often softened in certain men, because the flesh that is between them becomes soft and sallow.
Therefore it is necessary for him who is asked to cure him, that he lay down the sick man on his back, and strike all of the softened skin over the natural skin.
Then he will aggregate two lips with a stitch; and if there is an excess of the softened skin, in the first place three stitches, or four, and a firm stitch.
Then he will cut between the stitches.
Then care for the cure of the other wounds, until they are healed, and the splinters fall out.
Head LIX.
About Castration:
You should know that castration is excommunicated in our law; and because of it I should remind you in this book not to remember it, unless for two reasons.
The first is that it may be in the knowledge of a physician when he is questioned about it; and so that he knows how to treat it for him who has suffered from it.
And the other reason is that we often lack the use of castration in certain animals, for our own purposes through them, such as rams, horses, and cats, and similar animals.
I say, then, that castration is done in two ways. Or by abrasion. Or by a slit and a cut.
In that which is done by abrasion the method of operation is: that we may make the animal sit in hot water until his testes become softened and lax, and hang down; then we will dry them with our hand, until they resolve and do not appear under the touch.
In castratione autem per fissuram et sectionem, oportet ut teneas animal, et premas cutem testiculorum eius cum manu sinistra.
But in the castration by incision and section, you must hold the animal, and with your left hand press the skin of his testicles. Then tie the suspensorium, and dry all the section in one place until the two testicles come out: then cut them after you have cleaned them both, and do not leave anything on them from the sutures except for a thin thread that is above the urethra.
And this method of castration is better than that which is done by friction: for by friction there may be left some of the testicles, so that the animal desires to have coitus.
Then take care of the wound, until it heals.
Head
There are two methods for treating hermaphroditism:
Hermaphrodite is from the testicles, according to two ways. The vagus is from them, because it appears to be a hair growing between the two testes or on the skin of the testes, and sometimes urine flows out of it which appears on the skin of the testes.
But in women there is one form, and it is a vaginous form like the testicles of a male, protruding towards the outside: of which one is like the penis of a male, and the two are like the two testes.
And the treatment of the three species, the two testicles from a male and one testicle from a female, is this: for you should cut off the flesh that has been added until the impression disappears. Then take care of them in their cure until all wounds are healed.
But in the second species of men, from which urine flows from the skin of the testes, there is no operation, nor is there any cure at all.
Head
On the incision of the hymen and the protrusion of flesh in a woman's vagina.
The hymen may be added with care to its natural position until it is nourished and its appearance is improved: and sometimes it becomes so enlarged in some women that it reaches up to intercourse.
Therefore you should hold the tentigo with your hand, or with a hook, and fall upon it: and do not make the incision late, especially in a deep root: so that blood does not flow.
Then take care of the cure of the wound, until it is healed.
Now the middle part is precious, that which comes forth out of the womb, until it fills itself up: and perhaps it goes out to the outside according to the similarity of a tail: and because of this they call some sort of sickness having a tail. Therefore you should make the incision on it as we made it on the tentigo, and take care of it, until it is healed.
Regarding the treatment of the hymen, which is a wound in a woman that has not been penetrated.
Chapter 72.
The Alratica is, so that it may be a wound in a woman that has not been penetrated, or that there may be a small opening. And it is either natural or accidental.
The accidental one is from a previous sickness, and that itself is either born of flesh that has been added, or a splinter, or filth: and it is in the depth of the womb, or on its sides, or on top of it, or at its bottom; and prevents coitus and impregnation, and birth, and perhaps also menstruation.
And the knowledge of this is obtained by the appearance of the midwife, if the swelling is close at hand.
But if it is not apparent, then ask her with your fingers, or with a ray.
If the swelling is from a small splinter, and it is close to two lips: then lean near, and clean it out.
And it is, so that you put on two lips some dust.
Then place your fingers of both hands at the same time, and the woman should lie on her back with her legs spread wide. Then stretch the two lips with force, until the small splinter is dislodged, and the swelling opens.
Then take a piece of cloth, dip it in oil, and place it over the wound; and let a woman touch it every day so that the wound does not heal with other fluid.
If, however, the wound is large or dense: then it is necessary that the wound be separated by a thin leaf of Myrtle.
If, however, the wound is caused by putrid flesh: then suspend it with a hook and cut it: and have ready the medicines that stop the flow of blood without causing itching, such as acacia and dragon's blood, and the white of an egg with alum.
Then administer a large silver tube so that the wound does not heal quickly, keep it for several days: and administer wolf-flea oil made from dry linen, then cure the rest with the usual cure, until it is healed.
And when the animals are born from their mother's womb, it is necessary that they be born according to this method: while there is no apoplexy of cancerous flesh, since cancerous flesh comes from the womb, there should be no contrast with iron at all.
Chapter LIII.
For the treatment of hemorrhoids, Athelil and Bothor of red rubers in the wound of a woman.
Hemorrhoids are an opening of the anal orifice, until it runs with a lot of blood regularly.
When, however, hemorrhoids increase, they become Athelil; and I have already spoken in the division of their kinds and signs, and I will tell here those that receive the cure from them, and those who do not.
I say, then, that the hemorrhoids which are in the womb' opening, and do not appear to have any sensation: then there is no cure for them with iron.
But those which are in the womb' opening above what drops down, are the ones that are healed.
Therefore it is necessary that you put the woman into a cold house. Then extend Athelil with forceps or with a rough cloth, and cut them from their roots.
Then powder over the wound of flowing blood from one powder-cut without mortification: like acacia, and dragon's blood, and thistle, and similar to them.
Then he pressed his feet against the wall for an hour. Then he put it into cold water.
That if the flow of blood persisted: then let her sit in a decoction of sumac, and of gum mastic, and of gall-nut, and similar things.
Then take barley flour, and make it into a paste with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it for his back.
If then blood is shed with it, it is good: and if not, make it adhere to the back of hair-picks, and of milk-teets, without scarification.
Then take wool, and dip it in tar-weed juice, or in lamb's tongue juice, or in willow-branch juice, that is, without taste, in Pontic wine, and make it adhere to his loin.
When then the poultice has dried up, then take care of the place with ointment, until it is healed.
Albarth is really like a red cap and has a rough appearance.
Then it is necessary that you should cut off what appears from it, according to what I said in the book about wounds being equal: and take care of itself, until it is healed.
Chapter LXXII on the Perforation which takes place in the Womb:
De Perforatione In Matre
Take place in the womb species of poultices, such as cancer, and hard poultice, and ulcers, and blisters, and scabs, and sores, and the lilies, and hot poultice.
And I have already said all about these ailments and their species, and the signs of them, and their cures, in a division: it is necessary that I should say in this book of hot poultice which takes place in the womb, when it is from poultices which gather the sap, and how to know its opening with iron.
You should therefore consider. Then if the pain of the wound is sharp in its beginning and with his percussion, and there is a flame and fever: and you see it red: if he falls on him, then do not suit with his perforation: and take care of him with that which he can bear over maturation, until when it stops, then its sharpness of accidents.
Then it is necessary that you make a woman sit on a chair that will support two seats, and recline, or lean down, and bring her feet to the lower side of her leg: and let her hips be spread out, and put her arms under her knees, and tie each with a ligament fitting her.
Then the midwife should sit on the right side, and administer the instrument with which she opens the opening of the womb.
And it is necessary that when you administer this instrument, you should make it come out of the womb of the woman as if it were a string: so that it does not enter into the instrument more than the depth of the womb, and does not hurt the weak.
But if the instrument is more than the depth, then it is necessary that you put a little hole over the depth of the womb: so as to prevent the entrance of the whole instrument into the depth of the womb: and it is necessary that you put a little roll, which runs in the instrument from the upper side, and holds the instrument, and makes it turn, until the opening of the depth.
Then when it appears to come out, and is touched by hand, and is soft and smooth: then it is necessary that you separate it from the head with a wide spatula.
Then when the liquid comes out, then it is necessary that you put a little iron rod immersed in olive oil: or olive oil, in which there is some stiffness: and put the iron, and draw out a segment in the depth of the womb.
And put outside on the womb, and on the wool, which is clean, immersed in water, in which there are boiled eggs.
Then let it be bandaged for two days with the ointment which suits that, until it is healed.
And when the matrix and the knot have been washed away so that they are covered with a scab, so that it clatters with water and honey: then let it be returned to the ointment.
If the knot is hidden within the matrix, then it is necessary to refrain from treating it with iron, but rather to take care of itself with it as we have said in the division.
70th Head.
Doctrines on Obstetrics, how embryos are treated by the womb, according to a not natural figure of exit.
It is necessary for the obstetrician to recognize in the first place the natural figure of childbirth.
From these signs then, when you see the woman compressing herself towards the lower parts, and longs for air, and eases herself upon her who is about to give birth, and hurries out the child's exit; then know that this birth is according to the natural figure, and its exit is over its head, and second with it: or hanging, or swinging from the navel.
When then you see these signs, then let the woman compress her abdomen, that the embryo may descend quickly.
For when it has descended over its head, the second has descended with it, and is washed out from them by good purification of effluents.
But if this birth is not such, let it be known as an unnatural, unacceptable one.
For when the fetus has exited his feet and the body of him has gone out before its head, and its feet and hands one, or its foot and hand the other way: or if its head and hands have gone out; or if it has gone out by the navel, and perhaps has turned over its neck, and similar figures which are unacceptable.
It is necessary for the obstetrician to be prudent and cautious in all these matters, and to guard himself against error and deception: and I am showing you every figure from them, and what ability there is in it, and making known by it, and shouting over it.
When the child has come out of its mother's womb by a natural delivery, and has become heavy upon her, and labor has become difficult for her, and her strength has begun to fail: then let them make her sit on a chair, or let women support her; and let them pour upon her the water of foenugraeco with a decoction, and with moist oils.
Then the midwife shall insert her fingers between her thighs and find the second child, and dry it with her nail, until she has taken what is there out of her moisture; and she shall press the woman's belly, until the child falls.
If it does not fall down, then let the woman be made to sit on a cloth of foenugraeco with sisamus oil.
Then command her to compress herself; and let her sneeze while she is holding her nose, at one time. For the child will come out immediately.
If two hands of the child come out first, then you shall reduce them with ease little by little. But if it does not obey in the entry, then let the woman sit on a chair, and raise her feet up; then let her turn the chair over onto the ground; and let women support her so that she does not fall with the vibration.
But if the hands do not come out, and the child dies: then let them make an incision, and take out the remaining child; and bind her hand with a cloth, and take him out with equality: for he will come out.
The exit of the child is on its feet. When the child comes out of its feet, then you shall push them up; and gradually turn the child around; and then make it even.
Then let her take one foot of the child, and stretch it out little by little.
But when they come out as far as the thighs, then command her to compress herself, and make her sneeze while she is holding her nose: for it shall come out if God wills it.
And if he does not come out with it as we have said, then bring the fetus back slowly until you put him in the natural form. For he himself will come out then if we make an easy exit.
That if it is forbidden with him all that we have said: then take out of a bag of nettle, and oil of sesame, and of dissolved gum: and strike everything in the mortar with good beating: then line with him the woman's uterus, and lower his feet. Then make her sit in warm water until she gets a hiccup.
But when you see that his lower parts are now warmed, then give him a drink of myrrh: and support himself. When he has held the drink for an hour, then make her sit on a chair. Then make her sneeze: and tighten his mouth and nose: and press the lower part of his uterus with gentle pressure. For fire will come out immediately.
Exit of the fetus on to his knees and hands. When it has come out according to this form, then support by introducing your hands slowly. Then the woman should lie on her back and hang her feet down to the ground: and she herself lying on a bed, and make her hands tight. Then press on her belly slowly. Then extract what is under his feet from the genitals, until she is prepared in the lower part. That if the fetus does not come out, then take his feet, and move them with a sudden motion. Then press what is above the hip bone slowly, until the fetus goes up to the upper parts. Then introduce your hands, and make the fetus go slowly: and order the woman, that she tightens, until the fetus comes out.
Exit of the fetus hanging from the hands. Is supported by introducing his hands. If he cannot reduce it, then he should send for a woman, and make her walk about.
But if she is unable to walk, then let her lie on a bed; and by a vigorous shaking of her legs, let him try to bring about a reduction.
Then, administer the ointment that you have prepared from mucus.
If she accepts it [the treatment], then let her sit on a chair. Then, study the reduction of the hand, and make it as equal as possible to its natural shape: and make the woman sneeze, and tell her to squeeze herself until she has gone out [i.e., recovered full use].
The exit of the fetus over the collarbone, with expanded hands, and it is the face towards the mother's back. It should be that the midwife holds the fetus by the hand, then gently turns it, and makes it easy to bring about its Gleichung [i.e., full development].
When it is thus made equal, then place it on the cushion that we have prepared with oil and mucus.
Then tell her to move slowly. When you have done this, then let her sit on a chair, and tell her to lean on the right side. Then tell her to squeeze herself: and make her sneeze with pepper.
The prepared exit of the fetus is on the side. When it descended into the mother' second opening in this way  [with the second finger], then cut the second finger with your nail, until it is discharged from the moisture.
If it is suspended over the face of the fetus and its collar, then cut it from the navel   [incision]: so that it does not remain, and dies.
Then push the fetus into the inside  [uterus], until you have placed it in the right place]: and tell the woman to squeeze herself now and then: for he will come out by itself, being light.
The exit of the twins, or the fetus of many. You should know that twins are often born: and sometimes three, and four. However, that is strange, and seldom happens.
Five, however, is a thing against nature, and they do not live in peace: and although they multiply, the second one remains united to them: and separates them, distinguishing between them by a knot in the navel of each.
And sometimes they go out like a single fetus going out by a natural exit, easily: and they go out by an admirable exit, as we have related.
If any of them have difficulty at birth, and go towards that which we have said from an unnatural exit, then take care of them as we have related: and let it lie on a soft bed, and make what it makes with ease and slowness, and contrive according to all the shape with him that it is prepared by nature leading him to salvation.
Remember that it is formed in the womb from embryos, and aborts.
When one is formed in the womb, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten: and it has already been proved with me that a woman has abortion to seven, and another thirteen, all formed.
Which has been proved by the measurement of a glorious sage.
This is what needs to be in the knowledge of obstetrics. Perhaps it will come to that same one: then oppose it with that which is necessary:
Chapter LVI.
On the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you have trouble with the dead fetus because I said in the division of medication, and does not come out, and forces you to use surgery by hand, then you should reflect.
If then the woman is of sound virtue, and is not with any of the accidents from which she fears destruction: then it should be so that the woman lies on a bed, on her back, and has her head inclined downward, and her legs raised: and the assistant should hold her from both sides, or bind her to the bed, so that her body is not taken out during the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the bone with oil of olive, with mucus of the sea-oak, and with fenugreek seed and linseed oil.
Then let the obstetrician moisten her hands with these oils and mucus; then let her enter the womb with ease. Then let him seek out a suitable place to insert the hook from the fetus, and suitable places for that.
Consider then, if the fetus is ready to come down on top of its head: then insert the hooks into its eyes, or its neck, or its mouth, or its palate, or under its beard, or under its chin, or in its sides, and in the nearby places, and under its collarbone.
But if descent is on its feet: then in the spine, and in its middle ribs.
And it should hold the hook with its right hand; and place a loop on that which is between the fingers of its left hand; and let her insert with ease, and fasten the hook in one of those places which we have said, until she has reached the free part.
Then let her fasten another hook in opposition to that one, or a third one, if it is not uncomfortable: so that there be an equal contraction, and it does not decline on one side.
Then let it be extended with an equal extension, and not only be extended according to the straightness only, but also move in all directions, so that its passage is eased: as happens with a tooth during its extraction.
And it should be in that which is between that one, so that the extension is softened. That if a part of it is retained: then let the obstetrician moisten some fingers with oil, and insert them from the part which is retained, so that they rotate with them, which retains what is being held.
But if a part of the fetus comes out: then shift the hooks to another place which is higher: do this until the entire fetus has come out.
If therefore the hand has gone out before another, and it is not possible to reduce it, because of its constriction: then it should be that a cloth is wrapped over it. Then remove it completely, when it has gone out, cut it or in the joint of the plant, or on the thigh: and so you should do to make the same on the other hand, and in two feet.
If however the head of the fetus is large, or has happened to it constriction in exit, or there is water gathered on its head: then it should be that he sticks between the fingers the Spatumile spinosum, and finds with him the head, and removes the water: or tears it out with an instrument which is called Almisdac: of whose form comes with the forms of the other instruments in the chapter which follows.
Similarly do if the nature of the fetus is large head, then it should be that he separates the algengemato: or remove it out with Misdach, as we have said. Then attract bones with forceps.
If however the head has gone out, and is constricted near the fork: then find it, until the moisture which is in the chest is discharged.
If however it is not complicated, and does not submit to the exit: then cut the head quickly, according to what is possible for you.
If however the lower leg is inflamed, or there is water in it: then it should be that you pierce it, until the moisture flows out.
If however the fetus is on its own feet, then attracting it is easy, and its direction towards the mouth of the mother is slight.
If however it is constricted near the belly, or the chest: then you should remove it with the cloth that you wrapped on your hand: and find the belly, or the chest, until what is in them flows out.
If however are removed other limbs, and returns the head: then the Midwife should put her left hand. If the mouth of the mother is open, then insert your hand into the depth of the mother's mouth, and feel with your fingers her head, and draw it toward you by the teeth: then insert into it one hook, or two hooks, and draw it toward you by them.
If the mouth of the mother is clenched, because of the heat that occurs to her: then it is not necessary for him to work on top of it, but rather at that time it is necessary to administer the flow of wet substances, thick: and to administer plaster: and to sit in water that softens and moistens.
If the fetus is on its side, then it is possible to make it even: then administer what we have said about the single fetus.
If that is not possible, then cut short, and remove it out.
And it is necessary so that you do not leave anything inside at all from the second one.
When you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said about the hot apostemes that happen in the wombs.
If blood flows, then go down into the water of strictness, and administer the remaining cure.
And I have already seen a woman, in whose womb the fetus was dead: then she became pregnant on top of it with another force, and after that the fetus died again, and another also. Then happened to her after a long time an aposteme in her navel, and it swelled up, until it opened: and it began to emit pus.
I was called to her cure, and I treated her at a long time: and the wound was not consolidated.
I placed on top of it from some strong plasters of attraction: and she came out from the place of the mouth. Then passed a few days for her, and she came out with another mouth. I was amazed from there, when there is no mouth in the womb.
I thought, because there were bones of a dead fetus.
I therefore inquired into the matter and drew out many bones, seeing that she was of better disposition than her husband; and now she had stayed such a long time and sent word from her place with a little delay.
And I did not find this strange here, unless that there is knowledge and aid to it, which the doctor-artisan administers with his own hands from healing.
Chapter LXVII.
On the forms of instruments necessary for extracting the fetus.
Form of the strigil which opens the womb.
Here is the lower form of the strigil, which are equidistant from the ends of two pins fixed on two boards. However, this form of the strigil should be made slightly finer than the strigil; and to make it so, either let it be of ebony or of hickory wood.
And the width of each piece of wood should be about two fingers wide; and the edge of either of them should be about a finger wide, and their length should be a palm and half as long as that; and there should be two additions of the same kind of wood in the middle of both, which have already been fixed on both sides, whose length is half a palm and a little less than that; and the width of each is about two fingers or a little less.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the womb, so that it opens with them as you rotate the two Strigiles.
Another form, similar to it, but finer and lighter.
Let it be made of ebony wood or hickory, according to the similarity of the forceps. However, at its end there are two additions as you see here above: and the length of each addition is about a palm; and the width of either is about two fingers.
So when you open the womb with it, then cause the woman to sit on a bed with her feet hanging down, and open what is between her thighs. Then introduce the two additions joined together into the womb; and you are to hold the lower end of the instrument between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument, as you would with pincers, equally according to the quantity that you wish from the opening of the mouth of the matrix, until the midwife does what she wants.
The form of the other vertigo than the ancients said Form of Driven where driven fetus.
Form of Almizdak, by which is contorted the great head: and it is assimilated to the forceps, which have teeth at the end, as you see.
And when it is made round, like the forceps in this form, as you see, which have teeth like saw-teeth, so that it incises and contorts.
Form of the pin having one spike.
Form of the pin having two spikes.
Form of scissor having two ends for cutting the head.
Form of the two scissors also carrying away.
These instruments are all used, and the more their kinds multiply, and are prepared by the artisan, the faster they are in their work, and the higher among men because of their quantity.
So do not despise these instruments, since it is with you that they are prepared. For necessity of them is inexcusable.
Head 78.
On the extraction of the second.
When the second holds back at childbirth, then you should take the weak one, so that it retain its breath. Then make her sneeze with a condiscension: and tighten your hand upon her nose, and the nostrils of her. If then she goes out through this, it is good.
If not: then take a hammer, and pierce in the coopertorium hole: and put in it herbs opening the mouth of the matrix, like calamentum, ruta, and anethum, and camomile, and chamomile, and cassia lineous, and centaurea: take all the herbs, or some of them, and submerge them with water, and put them on the fire.
Then put on a bandage around the foramen of the cooperatorium of the foot, and another at the end of the molar: and hold it until the vapor has reached the concavity of the tooth.
Then let her sneeze, as we have said. For the second time she will come out with ease.
But if after this cure she remains stuck and does not come out: then order the Midwife, that she may dip her hand in olive oil or mucilage of aloes. Then insert it into the vulva and ask her if she is in second labor. But when she has found her, then take her, and slowly stretch her.
But if she is stuck deep in the womb, then insert your hand, as we have described, until she finds the second stage, and slowly pulls her out according to the direction, so that the womb does not fall because of a sudden tug: it should be turned over with ease to the right and left: then add the amount of traction. For she will submit then, and cry out, and release herself from the attachments.
If the mouth of the womb is constricted, as we have already described: take care of her with sneezing, and after the application of the ointment with herbs.
But if she does not come out with all that we have described, then be careful not to tire yourself out trying to extract her.
But it is necessary that, when she comes out from the womb at the mouth, some ties are tied to the woman's hips. Then clean her with the four-part ointment. For it will decay her after a few days, and dissolve her, and she will come out.
But when she is decaying, there will come out from her a bad smell toward the stomach and head, and it will afflict it with sickness. Therefore it should be that appropriate vaporizations are administered to it.
Some people have already been experienced in using nasturtium smoke and dried fig leaves.
The form of the instrument with which a woman is suffumed during her second and menstrual period.
Let a cloth similar to hemp or linen be made, and let the wide end be placed on fire; and the smoke should be placed on plums; hold it until that smoke is consumed; and then take another one.
Head LVII.
Regarding the treatment of an unborn child not pierced.
Many boys are born, and the womb of their mothers is not pierced by the needle of Syphus; they are now affected by a subtle heat of SiPhac. It is necessary that the midwife pierce the SiPhac with her finger; and if she does not do so, let her pierce it herself with a sharp awl: and let her be careful not to touch the snake, lest she be bitten by it.
Then place over it the wool dipped in wine and oil. Then care for the wound with ointment until it heals.
But if you suspect that it is affected by heat, then place a lead pipe in the wound for several days, and remove it when the boy begins to urinate again.
And it also happens that the womb is affected by heat from the cooling of a wound or pus. It is necessary that this consolidation be removed; and then care for it with what we have said regarding the treatment of a wound and lead.
Head LIII.
Regarding the treatment of fistulas that occur in the lower part.
Fistulas that occur in the lower part are a kind of swelling and thicker substance near the anus of the buttocks: or in a single space of one part; and there is one fistula, or several.
But when this swelling is dried up, it opens, and from it a liquid moisture, white and thin, flows out, or a subtle pus.
And when these fistulas are penetrating. Thus the penetrating ones are known by that which issues from the effluentation and the moisture, when a sick person uses it; and perhaps they issue from them dry.
And they are from them Fistulae when they are in the space penetrating up to the uesicam, and up to the meatum virgea. And they are from them Penetrating up to the joint of the hip, and up to the knot of the tail.
From this therefore is recognized Fistula Penetrating up to a joint, also from the non-penetrating, that is, you put your finger of the index in a joint: and you introduce a tenuous attempt in the Fistula made of bronze or iron: when there is no tortuosity.
What if in it there is a tortuosity, then put in it a attempt made of a tenuous lead, or a bolt from the bolts of the horses, until you feel the attempt, or a bolt in your finger.
What if you don't feel it the same way, and does not go out from a pore any excretion, and no verve, and no skin as I said: then you know that it is not penetrating: so then turn to the cure.
And when the Fistula is penetrating up to the uesicam, or up to the meatum of the urine: then the meaning of it is the exit of the urine from it, and the prevention of it from this in order that the place consolidate with medicines.
But if it is penetrating up to the joint of the hip, or up to the jaw of the hip: then the sign of it is that it reaches the attempt so far, if there is no tortuosity so far to the jaw: and the finding of pain in the circumference of the part, and that it is discharged pus from it always: and that it doesn't ooze in it the medication, and doesn't consolidate with an unguent.
And in all these Penetrating Fistulae there is no cure at all: and the cure of them is a work and a waste to it, from stupid doctors, who form one.
But in that which is not penetrating, and not old, there is hope of cure with a serrou: second, for I tell you, and I have already proved it: and it is, so that the sick man lies between your hands on his back: and you wash his legs up to above his knees, and his knees are bent towards his belly. Then introduce lead or air, if it is in a winding fistula, until you know where the opening lies.
If, however, he feels it to be weak at a certain point, then you should introduce your finger with the index at that point.
If, then, you feel that the tenting has already penetrated into yourself through your finger and between your finger and the sifac, or meat: so you will certainly know that it has penetrated; do not therefore work on it, because it is not its cure, as we have said.
They said, However, that it heals in some people by meat, and from the treatment which they hope will help, that is, to introduce a small torch of fire along the length of the fistula, as mentioned above, and to introduce the torch into the fistula until it reaches a certain point. Then repeat that several times, twice or three times, until you know that all the added filtered meat, which is similar to a feather-like tube, has dried up.
Then the cure with liniments of oil, until the meat which has dried up comes out: then the cure with ointments that generate flesh and consolidate it.
If he is healed, it is good.
And if not, then he is not healed with any other cure.
And if the fistula comes out, and does not reach as far as your finger which is in the anus, and is between the fistula and a thick piece of meat, or sifac: and you see that the fistula follows the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you will find that the dried-up part has come out with the fistula, until it reaches the point where the end of the tenting comes out, and the tenting is released and falls.
Then clean those filtered meats which are similar to feather-like tubes so that nothing of them remains.
If, however, the blood makes you win and it separates from you and your operation in such a way as to separate those meats: then it is better that it should be done and with greater speed of aid, cauterize it with fire, or with sharp medicine.
Since the cauterization with fire brings good habits, to the burning of those tissues, and to the separation of blood, and to the drying up of humors.
Then that care with smooth liniments in butter, or with ground rags, until the place lets out pus, and those dried-up meats come out.
Then care then with consolidating ointments, which generate hard meat: and there are medicines in which are sterility and drying up.
For when they have healed, then you have cured: and do not put off the application.
If, however, the fistula has reached down to the depth of the hip, and it is elongated from the excess of the body's fluid: then introduce your hand into that place, and ask it.
If, therefore, you feel an attempt at it, and there is a weapon between you and it, whether of stone or of meat, and it is near to the penetration: then that operation in that place should not be done, except by way of trust and hope.
That is, for there are two ways of dealing with it: or, as we have said, to cauterize it, or to separate it, until you get a complete concavity of it, so that you can introduce a liniment, and healing from near. And do not proceed much with the section, so that you do not fall upon a constrictor which is in some part of the body, and happens to an unwanted exit of the expiration without will. Then care for that with it, as we have said.
Perhaps then it will be cured: or, if you prolong that weapon, and dry it up a little after the other part, as we have said, or with an attempt, or with another acute instrument. Then clean those filthy meats which are in the incision, as far as you can see with examination.
Then consider the restoration of the whole wound with the incision, and the hole above where it is healed: and there remains a fistula open in the interior part of the anus, and it will be looser over the weak one.
And when this kind of fistula follows: and it is when you introduce a stick into the fistula: and it is on the side of the anus near the surface of the body with skin and margin of the anus: then take the end of the stick which is like a needle, that is, the prepucial skin, according to this shape. And introduce into it the string wound up in five threads, and around it. Then introduce a stick with a thread into the fistula, until you get a knot.
If it therefore penetrates into the inner margin of the anus near, then remove the string from that hole: so that you can introduce your finger into the anus, and remove the end of the thread, and gather the two ends together at the same time: and tighten each one, and leave it for a day or two days: and as much as the thread pierces the flesh, tighten it well, until those meats which are between the two ends of the string fall off: then take care of the wound, until it is healed and cured.
If however the hole of the fistula is not penetrating: then make it penetrate wherever you prepare it for yourself, unless it is in a deep place. For it is not good for you, that you should make it like a snake, lest you hit yourself.
Then do with it as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the hook which is found in the fistula, whose curve is sharp very much, and the other part is not curved, so that it does not hit what is not necessary, as you see.
Chapter LIII.
From the suture of hemorrhoids, from which runs blood from the incision of them: and take care of the fissures.
There are hemorrhoids in two ways. Or they are inside the anus, like charcoal, or prunes; or almost like grains of sand. And from them there are small ones and large ones; and the blood always flows from them, and one is not enough, and many are needed. And they are outside the anus, and at its extremes.
However, those outside the anus are mostly a little wetness from which yellow water flows, or a little blood flows regularly: and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment that is inside the anus is, as you instruct the sick to sit on it: and it is squeezed out, until it comes out of the anus, and appears to you like a stone. Therefore also hang it with a hook: or hold them with your nail. Then cut them at their roots.
But if they do not retain hooks because of their moisture and softness: then take them with a rough cloth, or with a twine of loose wool, and pull them out with your fingers. Then cut them and sprinkle some hot powder on them after the cut so that they stand in place of a cauldron. Or cauterize them according to what was said in the chapter of cauterizing. Then care for them with the remaining treatment until they are healed.
That if the anus does not obey the exit, then enema the sick with an enema in which there is a small mordicatio, so that it flows with it what is in the ano, and obeys the exit quickly, when it is expressed, since the sick.
But if the stone is external to the ano, then the matter of them is light and easy: and it is like you take them with your nail, or take them with a hook, and cut them off. Then care for them with that which I have said, until they are healed.
And whoever hates to cut with iron, then it is necessary that you administer the suture to them in this way. Take a thread that has been washed, and insert it into the wound. Then remove the thread to the top, and make it penetrate with the needle from one side: and bind the two ends of the thread together, below on the part of the needle: and make them lie parallelly: and tighten the knot strongly. Then tie a knot in the thread, and remove the needle.
Make that also with all of the threads, and let go of one of them: and do not tie your own, so that it may flow out of it any surplus blood.
Then place on a cloth soaked in rose-water or balm-water, and place it on: and order the sick person to lie down. Then let go of him, until he falls down.
When the threads have fallen off, take care of them with ointment, and with the rest of the cure, until they are healed.
§ On the Care of Sores. Often do sore-heads come about from drying up with stool, and from nature's contraction.
When they begin to get white and do not heal with medicine: then you should scrape them with the point of a scalpel or with your own nail, until they are moist, and remove from them the upper crust which prevents them from being consolidated. Then take care of them, until they are consolidated, according to what needs to be done.
If they do not consolidate: then scrape them again with a sharper scalpel than before, until they bleed much and become sore again: and then take care of them, until they are healed.
§ On the Cure of Scurvy, which affects only the skin: and of dry wounds, and of bees.
Chapter LIII.
Know that scurvy is a small round knot, similar to the head of an awl, which appears throughout the body, especially in the lower parts of the feet and fingers: and it causes pain on walking.
It is necessary that you should cut off what is in the situation of the claw, and be held with pliers, or with a hook, and be uprooted from its root.
Then take care of that: and if you want to cauterize it, follow what has preceded in his chapter.
But from the above mentioned there is a small eminence, rough, filtered, round above the surface of the body. And often happen to the hands of boys.
And the cure of it is, that you should spread out the knuckle, and hit it: or string it with silk thread: or with hair, until it falls off. And if you want to cauterize the knuckle according to what has preceded, with fire or with sharp medicine; and already are rooted out the knuckles immersed, and not immersed with an instrument that I call it.
But the ant is also a small eminence, filtered, thick, on the surface of the body, diving into the depths: and when it is found it feels like a tiny sting of an ant, and it becomes throughout the body: and much of it is formed in the hands.
And the cure of it is, that you should take a tube from a goose feather, or a strong turkey feather: and put this tube on the ant, until it holds a circle of the tube from its parts. Then turn your hand with the tube, until you separate what is in the situation of the ant; and put it in the depth of the flesh, and eradicate the ant from its root.
And if you want to, do it with an air tube, or a iron tube, according to this form.
Let the tube be placed above the limit, dragging a dull furrow, so as to ease the pressure of its grip and its turn.
And if you want to cauterize the ant according to what has preceded in cauterizing Athelil in the chapter on cauterization.
Chapter Liii. On the forms of instruments used for enemas to treat diseases
On the forms of instruments used for enemas to treat diseases of the rectum, and for irrigating the eyes and treating the colon.
When cl isteries are made of silver, or of gold-plated silver, or of brass, or of hammered bronze.
And when they are made from these small or large instruments, depending on those in which they are administered.
Therefore that which is administered to the cure of young boys should be small; and if their anus are weak or painful, then also their enemas should be small.
A large enema.
The cane of the instrument, that is to say, the upper part in which it is tied to the womb, should be wide according to this manner: and let there be a distinction so that it is tied as you see, and the lower extremity which enters into the anus, is flat, that is, not open, soft, greatly, drawing towards subtility: and on one side of its there are two holes, and on the other side a hole.
And let the width of the holes be according to the thickness of the radii, and the thicker the better, and let the womb be in which the medicines are put from a liquid animal: or from paper which is according to the form of an atom small: whose root is a palm.
And let there be many holes pierced as it was rolled up, and let there be space which is the width of a finger between each hole. Then introduce into those holes a strong thread from raw flax, that it should be of ten strands, or about them, and bind with it so that it is like an atom. When it is put into this womb, let it be drawn up in the head of the enema between two distinctions with a strong constriction. Then wash out the enema with it.
And this is the form of a circle as it is depicted here, and of the holes.
The quality of washing out the enema with it is: to fill the womb, or the medicine which is warmed according to the tolerance of the nurse: and let not be hot greatly, or cold greatly.
Then he should lie on his back and raise his legs up: and place under him a mattress or a blanket.
Then he should dip the limb in oil, or in chalk, or in mucus of fenugreek, or something similar. Then insert it into the body hole with ease. Then he should take a servant and both of them should press it out with force, until all that is in the clister is drained into the intestine.
Then remove the clister, and let the sick person raise his legs towards the wall.
That if the medicine makes him want to defecate, then he should hold back as much as he can. And if he sleeps with it all night, it is more effective in healing.
But if you use the clisterization in the solution of a long-standing disease, and the defecation is sudden: then repeat the clisterization until the person is healed.
That if there are hemorrhoids or itching in the anus, then use a very subtle clisterization with olive oil, wax, or mucus of fenugreek, or something similar.
And this is the form of a subtle clisterization on top of which there is a tight skin.
Chapter LXXIII.
I have already said in the division of the treatment of wounds which suited the book, and I now say here the treatment of these with the hand, and with second aid.
I say, therefore, that wounds differ according to the cause of the wound, and according to the place on which it falls.
Therefore the wounds which are often caused are like the impact of stones: or a cut from a knife, or a blow from a lance, or a piece of wood, or an arrow: and similar things from many other causes.
But wounds which are caused according to the places of the body are, such as a wound that falls on the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the belly, or the members thereof.
And I am telling about some wounds, so that I may set forth a reason and rule for the remaining wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds: since the memory of composers will come at the beginning of chapter three.
I say: When it has happened in the head, a simple wound, and there is no fracture of bone: consider then, if it is from a throw of a stone, or similar, and has already torn the skin only: and it is a great wound, and you fear about possible gangrene of the heat: then hasten, and immediately phlebotomy cephalic: and do not delay that: and draw out of it blood according to its quantity of strength: if it were not prohibiting anything from phlebotomy, especially if it were the blood which comes out from the wound little. And let there be phlebotomy from the opposite side of the wounded part.
And let there be phlebotomy from the opposite side of the wounded part. And let the sick person refrain from drinking, and wine, and coarse food.
If however a little restraint prohibits anything, then let him abstain from food, and do not come near to meat, or wine.
And put on the wound if it has happened to it a hot aphorism, or the infusum mixed with rose oil alone, or with wine in which there is stipticitis.
If however you are safe from a hot aphorism, then put on the wound if it is new with its own blood, and has not changed air, then I will tell about the powder after a little: and if it has already changed air, then put on to it some ointment, until it heals.
If however the wound is large, or is from an incision of a sword, and similar: and if its lips do not come together by means of powder, then bind it together with a suture, according to which I will tell about the sutures in the wounds of the feet concerning their sutures.
If however the wound has already touched bone, and hangs down, and there is no retention of it, unless in a small suspender: then cut it. Then care for the wound with medicine, and restore to it hard flesh at the place of skin, and order the sick person to eat food in which there is grosness, such as are heads, and boiled wheat, until he is like a pulse; and give them similar food.
That if the wound is in the skin and does not adhere to bone: then cut off the entire putrefied part, and throw it away; then care for it.
But if there is an artery or a blood vessel that flows from the wound and does not break open with medicine: then inquire about the artery. If then you do not cut it but dry it with pitch or bind it. That if necessity requires when it does not give what I have said, then causticate it, until the blood stops flowing.
But if these wounds are small and simple, then the matter of them is easy and light: so that powder applied to them turns them into powder: for they harden before they change with air.
The method of Powder for Inguinal Wounds. Take a part of olive oil, and two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of burnt lime: grind them all together, and sift them: and fill the wound with it, and bind it with a good constriction, until it adheres well to the place, and clings with blood.
Then bind it from above with powder, and leave it, and do not remove it until it has hardened so that it does not move. For the medicine will not drive it out until it is cured.
And when it has done this by itself, for you do not have olive oil and dragon' s blood in front of you at the moment, and it does the same operation on many large wounds, when it is put on them and bound, and they are recent wounds with their own blood, which does not change with air.
That if it has changed them at all by a certain change, especially when it is in the season of summer, then this powder's intention is not in position: so take care to put on them such an ointment as is digested: or put on them a poultice made from barley flour, made with water and honey, until they emit pus. Then take care of the remaining wounds, until they heal.
If a fracture indeed occurs with an injured bone and is small, then extract it with the Wrench: I will already say about curing fractures of the skull as it will happen.
The following are the words "Regarding wounds of the neck".
If an injury occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment when it is between the neck and when it is a simple injury to the head.
But if a cut has already occurred in the nerve of the neck, or an artery: then if it is a nerve, there is no skill in its treatment unless it is used to produce a sharp constriction, like tar and bandages, and for this and similar things. Because they harm nerves and make them bruise.
And do not place anything cold at all on a wound: because the substance of nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is an excellent member: and let that be treated by doctors with a lubricating agent, like lead mixed with sweet water sometimes infused with oil, or with rose water, and resin, when it is washed even with sweet water: and also with various minerals, in this way, and wet ointments.
But if the wound is large, then apply suture: or cover its lips with powder. Then take care of the injury itself, until it heals.
But if an injury is deep, or has occurred a cavity in the lower part of it in which pus has already accumulated, then pierce it in a depressed place in it.
If a cut has already occurred in the nerve of an artery and its flow of blood is followed: then separate it, dry it, or tie it: or burn it, if necessity demands to do so.
But if the spondylitis has already occurred, or is complete, and the back seems bent: then bring together the skin around it with a suture on a thread, and do not touch the spine, but reduce the wound to its natural shape. Then bind him firmly with a ligature, and leave him for a few days. Then care for the wound with ointment until it heals over.
If the injury has already made an impression on the bone, then examine the wound: if there are any fragments of bone, remove them all, or as many as you can: and if it is not prepared [i.e., ready to be treated], leave it until the injury putsrefies, and separates and comes out with the discharge.
If the injury is new, then dust powder over the wound which you have wrapped. If it is a wound that has become a fistula, then care for it with the treatment whose reminder appears in its own chapter.
On wounds with spatulas.
If the wound is from a lance or a knife, and you can see its depth, then examine it carefully. If the discharge from the wound is pus, and it smells bad when it lets go, then know that the wound is fatal.
If it is not deep and is fresh with its own blood, then do not put powder on it at first, nor bind it tightly, so that the blood does not stay in its depth, and go to the heart, and cause it to be sick: but put attractivo ointment on it, and loosen it twice a day.
If the attractivo ointment is not present with you, then put a well-oiled cloth on the wound to suck out what comes from it due to moisture: and let the sick person sleep on the wound so that what accumulates in it may run out.
If the wound has been there for three or more days and there is no sickness, no tremor of the heart, no tightness in breathing, and other good signs remain: then know that the wound is healed. Then care for it and with ease, and with the rest of the cure, until it heals over.
If indeed the healing is excused and it has already opened always, then you shall know that it has already become a fistula. Therefore heal her herself from this chapter.
And if the wound is from a cut or an incisor and it is simple on the surface of the breast or back: then heal that itself with what preceded it from suture, if it is great: or with dust, if it is small.
But if it has already made an impression on the bone and incised from it a strap: then inquire about the wound, and approach to remove those straps, if they are separate. But if they are not separate, then let them go, until the wound rotten, for the extraction of them is eased.
But of the remaining wounds and accidents in the remaining members, the judgment in the cure, is the judgment of her who we have said.
Regarding wounds of the belly and the exit of the intestines and the emergence of them.
The rupture which has happened to the belly is great, and medium, and small.
So then from what concerns the great and when the intestines have emerged, or the number of them.
Why does it happen to fall in them, and their suture more difficult and harder?
And the small rupture also is difficult from a different way. So then, as it concerns the reduction of them, if you do not hurry to return to its place immediately after its emergence: for it swells up, opens up, and grows greater: why does it become difficult to enter it?
So then, for this reason, the rupture which is medium is better: because when it is not difficult to reduce the intestines, as it happens in these two cases.
Know that the suture of the wound is according to four ways.
The two common sutures meet together in the suture of the belly, and in the suture of the remaining wounds of the body: and the two other own sutures communicate to the rest of the wounds. Indeed, they are more appropriate with the stitching of the wound; and I tell you both with explanation and demonstration.
I say, because when the wound is small, and something has come out of the intestines, and it is difficult to reduce it: then it is for two reasons. Or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said; Or because there is swelling in the intestines from cold air.
When therefore it is like that, then it should be heated, so that it is immersed in a sponge, or a wet cloth in warm water alone. Or you boil it in water with squill, and hyssop, and a spice, and steep it with it until the swelling subsides.
When therefore it is good for the wound to be stitchy: and it is better than water alone in resolving the swelling.
When therefore you see that the swelling has already resolved, then wet the intestines with the water in which it was boiled, or make it bitter. For by this the entrance is relieved when it is small.
If however the return of the intestines is excused after this treatment, then find a little disruption with the instrument with which they are cut out.
And the first cure is better when it is prepared, than cutting; and there is no compulsion to cut after need and failure of the instrument.
Let one part of it be curved, acute, and the other not acute, and the end is not sharp with Spatulim's sharpness, but rather blunt a little; and it is like a cauld, as you see.
When therefore the wound is enlarged and the intestines are drawn in, then it should be reduced according to its own natural form in its own place, if possible above that; for it is better.
When therefore the disruption is wide in the lower part of the abdomen: then it should be laid down on its back, and its legs should be made higher than its head. And if it is in the upper part of the leg, then put its head, and the chest of him higher than his lower.
And likewise if the fracture is in one of two parts of the leg, then put your intention, and your thought always on this, that the part that has the injury should be higher than the other side.
And thus it should be, so that you administer that in large wounds, and in medium wounds.
But in small wounds, put that according to what is prepared for you.
Then make it present between your hands the faithful minister who holds all the fracture in his hand: and open his lips. Then detect from him the one who follows, a piece of thread after another: and this is the way of common surgery of one.
And it is, so that you take them quickly, or a number of them according to the quantity of the width of the wound. Then let go from the end of the fracture a quantity of the index finger, that is, the doctor: and fix now one after you put in it the thread in the two ends of the skin, with both ends of the scaffolds that are under the skin from inside, until you make it penetrate from the other side, and you have already added the two ends of the skin, and the two ends of the scaffolds: and there are four orders.
Then tighten with a double thread around the needle from both sides at the same time, until the two lips of the wound have been added according to the falling.
Then let go the thickness of the finger as well, and fix now another one: then make it straight with a thread, as you did with the first. Nor therefore stops doing that with him when you stop from the needle, until you complete the constriction of the wound in its entirety.
And there is a medium needle between the thickness and the subtility: because the needle with subtlety cuts quickly through flesh: and the thick ones are difficult to enter into skin: for this reason, so that they are medium in subtility, and in thickness.
And it is not appropriate that the needles be placed in the two extremities of the skin near each other: so that the flesh does not rapidly hurt, and the wound before its consolidation, and also with the stitch, so that the wound is not prevented from consolidation.
Then cut the end of the needles so that they do not hurt the sick person during sleep: and place on them little pieces of cloth from all sides that hold the ends of the needles: and let them go until you know that the wound has been consolidated.
And this type of stitch with needles is more suitable for small wounds. Since it suffices in the stitch of these needles one, or two, or around them.
But the second common stitch is to join with the stitch the four ends: the two ends of the skin, and the two ends of the thread in one line, with a needle of equal thinness and thickness.
Then when you pierce with the needle the four ends, bring it back from the part from which you began in the same way, so that the thread is caught on the top part of the skin: so that the stitch remains, as it is when the cloth is sewn by a piece of cloth, and put between each stitch the thickness of the little finger.
This type of stitch is known to men.
And with this stitch I sewed for a man in his abdomen, who had been wounded by a knife, and the wound was bigger than a palm: and came out from the intestines around two palms from the middle intestine, and the break was in the middle of the abdomen.
So I reduced that after he had stood for twenty-four hours.
So the wound had been consolidated in the space that was about fifteen days: and I nursed him, and he recovered: and after that many years he lived, living in his own affairs.
And the doctors judged that it would not heal.
And from a miracle it was that I didn't cure him with ointment. For I was in a place where no ointment was found, nor any medicine. So I put on the splint twice a day with ointment and washed it with honey water until it healed.
But two kinds of stitches are mentioned by the text: those that use what is proper to them, according to the description of the text.
And it is so, as you begin with the sharp stitch: and you insert it from the outside to the inside part.
When the needle therefore enters into the skin and goes according to its length and width through all of the body: release the tip of the needle in a place where you have inserted it, so that another may penetrate from the inside part to the outside at another extremity farther on.
When you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate according to this in the same extremity further on from the outside part to the inside: and release the tip of the needle, which is in that place, so that another may penetrate from the inside part to the outside at another extremity farther on. And when you have made it penetrate with your penetration so that it penetrates into the tip of the needle, which is in that part, until it penetrates all of it: then release the tip of the needle and make it repenetrare in eam extremitatem, donec totum corpus penetret.
Then also begin from that same part, and draw it out with its extremity, which is from the tip of the needle in that other place, and remove now the needle from the skin as far as it has penetrated.
Then also reduce it into that skin, and draw out the tip of the needle from the opposite part to this extremity with the same mirach: and remove it from the skin which is in that part, and make it bend one way and the other: and make it bend after bending, until you have finished all according to the said example.
And the height of this stitch is so that its stitches overlap the skin like the skin: so that its tip of the needle bends one way from one part of the skin: and so that you release it bending the other way from another part, until you have finished it all.
Second type of stitch, which Galeetus said was his own.
This speech was told as such, so that it would join all parts in accordance with nature: and apply the edge of the needle to one end, and the edge of the thread to another end. And this is how I will tell you.
You must fix the thread at one end near to you from the outer side and let it penetrate into the inside in that place: and release the two ends of the needle. Then turn the thread around, and let it penetrate from the outside to the inside at both ends of the needle, that is to say, on both sides.
Then turn both of them around, and also let them penetrate from the inside to the outside at both ends of the needle, that is to say, on both sides opposite each other.
And this way of stitching is better than the common easy one, and it is a stitch whose predecessor's memory you just recalled.
This is therefore Gale's speech as well.
And some said. The stitch of the hand should be with two thumbs. That is, so that you put one thread into them both: and begin with the insertion of the needle, since it is with you, and let it penetrate to the other side according to the stitch of those who make their stitches equal.
And know that when the break is in the middle of the hand: then the stitch of it is more difficult than at other places of the hand.
However, the judgment of surgery on wounds, is the judgment of the rest of the wound.
That is, for when you have just gained a wound with its own blood, before it has had time to change itself; and reduce the intestines, and their contents, and prepare the body: then place on the dust of carnation.
If the air has already changed the wound: then place on the body a kind of ointment that is present with you, so that it makes pus: and let the threads fall, and harden together needle-stitches, and fasten together needles. Then this cure is to be used as a treatment for the other wounds until they are healed.
But if you do not have the present medicines, then immediately place him on it, so that it starts to emit pus, and change it twice a day, as I have taught you, until he is healed.
For you will not need any other medicine in many cases when the wounds are simple.
But if you are feeling pain that affects the main members of the body in an injury, then it is necessary to dip the wound in oil with a moderate temperature, or in rose oil: and place it around the areas between the hips, and under the armpits.
For if he feels pain, or twitches, or putrefaction in his intestines (for this often happens), then make a enema with black ochre, warm wine: especially if putrid matter has already entered the intestines and has caused painful twitching.
And you should know that what comes from the large intestine is easier to heal: and what comes from the small one is more difficult to heal.
But the intestine which is called the small one does not accept healing from any wound that has happened in it: and this is because of its multitude, since it is made of fibers, and its size, and because of the fineness of its tissue, and the closeness of its nerves to each other.
But if the wound that has come out is sharp, and you have managed to control it: reduce it according to your ability, so that you make the intestines equal in length.
But if there is a distance from the wound, and it has already turned yellow, or black: then you should tie it up with a thread above the place that has become dark, so that blood does not flow out. For in the small intestine there are arteries and veins.
Then cut that ligament which is beyond the wound, and place two ends of a thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside the body: so that it will relieve itself from you by attraction, and remove it from the area where the small intestine is bent, and emit pus from the wound.
A reminder about the wound that occurred in the intestine.
When a disruption occurred in the intestine, and it was minor: then it is possible, for some people to be restored: because I saw who was wounded in his belly with a lance thrust, and there was a wound on the right side of his stomach, and an old wound: and a fistula was made, and went out from it, and there was vomit.
I therefore applied the treatment, until I was not confident in his recovery: and I did not hesitate to examine him, until he was healed, and the site had hardened.
After I saw the place now consolidated, I feared for the disease, that a bad accident might happen in his belly: and it did not happen to him from that accident at all. And he remained in better health, eating and drinking, and enjoying himself, and entering a bath, and exercising himself in his diet.
And some experimenters said, because when it happens in the intestine a wound, and it is small: then it should be bound according to this method. And it is, so that you take the great head of ants. Then aggregate the two lips of the wound, and put one ant on them which has an open mouth over the two lips of the wound. So when you come to it, and he tightens his mouth on them, cut off its head, because it adheres to them, and does not come off.
Then put another ant next to the first, and do not cease to make it with the ant after the second amount of wound on the whole.
Then reduce the wound, and tie up his wound. Those head parts remaining next to the intestine, until it is fed into the intestine, and heals, and does not cause any damage inside.
And it is possible, that the intestine be bound also with a thin thread: which is taken away from the intestine of the animal, joined to it after it enters into the sack.
And it is, so that you may take hold of the end of this son's intestines, and there is much excision. Then bind with a thin linen thread the end of this son's intestine. Then introduce that thread into the cavity, and draw it out with it the intestinal contents. Then reduce the person to his right senses.
And this method of suturing with the needle and thread is not worth trust or hope except as a last resort.
You should know that the wound is a large one, broad especially if it is in one of the thin intestines; then it is not a question of skill but of carefulness and there is no cure at all.
As for the care of Zuchiemen and Fistulae.
You should know that any wound, or ulcer when it is old and has become dry, and is always discharging pus, and does not close: then it is called a Fistula everywhere that it may be, and we call it Zuchiemen.
And a Fistula is, according to the duration of its duration, a filtered, hard, white nodule; with which there is no pain, and whose concavity feels sharp-edged: and because of this one is called by some Risati, that is, a needle.
And it is in some hours moist, which discharges pus. And perhaps it splits the moisture in some hours. And when this moisture is much, and it is little; and it is thick, and it is thin.
And I have already precluded in the division, then when I said wounds, that every wound which does not heal, and does not form flesh, is not anything but because of a new cause of disease.
One of these is, or because of the lack of blood in the body; or because of the wickedness of it; or because it is between itself and over its lips hard flesh, preventing the formation of flesh; or because there is much dirt and filth; or because the wound is putrid within itself, and the matter which it discharges is of bad quality; or because the remedy is inadequate in its cure; or because corruption from a fall in the region is a kind of pestilence, or through property in the region, as happened at Caesar Augustus: in which it is difficult to digest ailments, and late in its cure by nature: or because there is one hole, or a number of bones.
And I have already shown you all the causes and signs of these conditions, and their treatments with the physicians separately: and it is necessary here that I make you aware of the treatment of Fistula and Zuken, which is done through a surgical incision with the hand.
So know, then, that Fistula occurs in all parts of the body. Namque ex eis sunt Fistulae quae perueniunt ad uenas magnas et arterias, aut neruos, aut sifacos; aut ad intestinum, aut ad uesicam, aut ad aliquam ex costis; aut ad aliquam ex spondilibus dorsi; aut ad aliquam iuncturarum compositarum compositione; sicut manus, et pedis.
Which then of these Fistulas is from a difficult disease, and does not receive a cure, and the occupation with it is labour and ignorance. Aliquis enim ex his qui in prope uena magna est, vel in neruo, aut in sifaco, aut in intestino, aut in uesicada, aut in aliquo ex costis, aut in aliquo ex spondilibus dorsi, aut in aliquo iuncturarum compositarum
That if it is from any of these Fistulas whose depth does not reach these places which I have said: and you hope, and you trust in its cure, and you seek to understand it, then you accept a trial from brass or iron, if the Fistula extends according to a straight line, and you examine it with it.
If, however, there is tortuosity in the Fistula, then investigate it with a thin lead probe. For lead, with its leniity, allays itself to the body, and seeks after any tortuosity.
That if the Fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to indicate it with a lead probe. Alium enim ex tentis, quae sunt ad hoc usadas, est cuius modus ut in fistulas perueniat qui non habeat orificia So then, of the probes which are used for this purpose, there is one who can penetrate into Fistulas which do not have openings - a probe of lead: so that it
So then, of the moisture which causes the lead to spread towards other openings, and it runs from them. Et quae peruenit ad haec loca, non est in eum uolgitur, sed in prope uena, aut in nerv
Then go and inquire carefully how it is possible for you: to know that there is a mouth or a nerve, and the fistula is remote or nearby: or a single fistula whose openings are many, and is located over all of it with great strength of yours: in your question, which you ask about the sick, and find pain in compression with your hand on the place, and similar signs and causes of accident apostemati.
When you have thus stood firm on all these stations with true stability, then go to cure with confidence: and is, when you consider then, if it is a nearby fistula that appears, or in a healthy place far from the joint, or from a nerve, or artery, or new, or one of the places I told you: then dry up the fistula according to what has been said in my story, and take out what is in it from filtration, and rotten flesh, which arises in its opening from flesh, or the membrane, and similar things: and cure it, until it heals.
But if the fistula is a deep one, and is straight: then it must be cut off in depth as much as is possible for you. Then clean it out of all its corrupt flesh.
Then add a liquid in which the acute medicines are dissolved: and introduce it up to the depth of the fistula that you have held with the iron: do this several times, until the acute medicine corroded all that remained in the depth of the fistula from corruption.
Then restore it with an ointment that generates healthy flesh, until it heals.
But if it does not heal by this, then cauterize it according to what we have described.
But if the cause of the fistula is a mouth, and it is certified with you that it is: then ask about it, and dry it out according to what I told you: if it does not forbid you anything from the small entrails, or a nerve, or a main member, as we have said.
If therefore an oss is found in thee, and there is some corruption therein, and it turns black: then saw it off, until the whole corruption be taken away from it. And then take care of that which is ingrown with him, until healing takes place.
If it does not heal, and it discharges pus as before: then you shall know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption.
Therefore detect on top of him again, and examine whether there is any rational explanation for it, and with your last strength clean it up thoroughly.
Then restore him. If he then heals, it is good: and if not, then you shall know that that corruption is in the depth of the body far from you, which you have not been able to reach. It is therefore not in your power to do so, unless you let it go by nature's law.
If the corruption is in a small oss, and it is possible for you, attract it with subtle hooks which are suitable for it.
If there are many bones, then examine how to attract them all, and do not leave any of them behind with your strength.
If however there is opposition to you from any moisture, and it is not in cutting them, neither fear nor mistake: then cut off those moistures and the flesh, if there is any, and free the bones.
If however you are not prepared to remove the bones from your time, then place over the bone that it may rot: and leave it alone, until that which is in the surroundings of the bones from flesh and moisture has rotted.
And guard the bone so that it does not consolidate. And constrict the incision which you followed in your operation. At the bottom place over the bone, if you wish, soaked three times with oil: or soaked three times in Egyptian ointment, or some other type of ointment.
For when those moistures are rotting, and the bones separate from them, their removal is eased, and their attraction.
But if it is one large bone, such as the femur, or the pelvis, and similar to them, and that which is rotten from it is a great part: then cut off the whole last by means of a saw, until that blackness and corruption are taken away. Then restore the bone.
If, however, what is rotten in it is a great part, and the corruption has already reached the bone marrow, then it is necessary to saw off the whole thing, and to cut into it all the way until the place where the corruption stops: then take care of the wound, until it heals.
And I will tell you about the wound that happened to a man in his thigh, so that you may have an example and an aid for your operation.
He was a young man of about thirty years of age, to whom a pain occurred in his thigh, from a cause that moved from the inside towards the bone, that is, from within, until it reached the bone, and there were blisters, which were great: but there was no external cause.
Then a long time passed with the mistake of the doctors until the blister opened, and many substances came out with it. And his treatment was postponed until the thigh was wrapped up, and many holes were made in it: all of which discharged pus, and wetness from the body.
He was treated by a number of doctors for about two years, and there was no wise man in art of hands, until I was called, and I saw his thigh, and the substances that were flowing from those holes in great course: also all of his body was very much swollen, and his color was cerulean.
Then I inserted my finger into one of the openings, and it came to a bone.
Then I scrutinized all the openings: and I found them reaching to the same place from all parts of the thigh.
Then I dished it out, and I followed the path of one of those openings until I discovered a bone: and I found that part rotten: which was already rotted, and deteriorated, and pierced through, until it penetrated to the marrow.
I therefore took the piece that had been found and prepared it from a corrupted bone.
And I thought that there was nothing in the bone but that corruption, which should be cut off, and then I fixed it together. And I have already removed it.
Then I placed the restoration of the wound with long-drying glue. And is not consolidated.
Then I tried it, and I found on top of the first detection: there was a continuing corruption with bone: and I fixed it together, because it also appeared to me from that corruption.
Then I tried to restore it. And it was not restored.
I therefore took hold of it again, and did not cease to cut the bone in pieces, and tried to restore it: and it was not restored until I had cut out a little palm from the bone, and pulled it out with its medulla.
Then I restored it with glue, and it was quickly consolidated, and healed: and this repetition of the operation and sectioning of it was not necessary, unless for the weakness of the nurse, and her lack of tolerance, and my fear over it from death: because it happened to him in all times from a bad syncope discharge.
He therefore healed with an intact healing: and bone grew up in its place, and its disposition in his body was good, and his strength returned: and he recovered in his dispositions: and he did not do him any harm at all in walking.
If, however, the bone is broken high up in the body: then you should fix it together, according to this manner: that you take a ligament, and tighten it at the end of the prominent bone: and you order someone who will stretch it upwards: and put another thick ligament onto it first. Then bind the bone together on top of the flesh that is attached to the bone: and extend its end so that you pull the flesh down below: and you cover the flesh over the place that you want to fix together, so that it does not hurt the saw when sawing the flesh.
Place a piece of wood or a board beneath the affected bone; for when you do this, it is not forbidden that you may cause pain to the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that a lock be placed upon the place of corruption to some extent, so that the corruption of the bone is not in danger; and it does not appear in its appearance to the sense, but prompts to its own lock by another means.
That if the bone is corrupted and it does not rise up, a part of it continues with another part; and corruption is in its middle or in some part of it: then you will find flesh from all its parts. Then place wood beneath.
Then make the lock from the first part where there is corruption continue to the second part; and place the lock according to the length of the corruption, as I have said.
That if corruption is at the joint, cut that joint which is corrupted, and make the lock of the bone where it continues from the other part.
But if corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no intelligence in that but a scar.
That if corruption is in the palm of the hand, or in the palm of the foot: then the matter is difficult to understand. But it is necessary for you to inquire how corruption appears to you. And cut it and clean it according to whatever arrangement you can make possible for yourself, and with whatever intelligence it corrects itself for yourself; when it does not give you a contrary vein or nerve.
And know that the incisions and locks to cut these bones are many, according to the position of the bones, and their preparation, and their roughness, and their subtlety, and their magnitude, and their size, and their variety. Therefore it is necessary that you prepare any instrument of the kind suitable for that operation.
And know that these operations mean to you according to the appearance of the instrument in which you work, when you have a long study. And know the ways of this art, the witness of the modes of sickness; for then indeed you will find that which is fitting to him from the instruments for every sickness.
And I am confirming to you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments, which you shall place before your eyes as examples on which you shall operate, and trial that you have experienced on others.
Form of another Saw.
Form of Scissors joined. Let the head of this Razor be formed according to the form of a star-shaped claw: and let its edges be formed according to the form of dots of an elk's horn.
And it is not fitting, unless they are joined with him, the heads of the scissors, when they are corroded, or a wide and great hole, and it is large.
Form of a larger Razor.
Form of a wide Razor.
Form of a Razor, in which is built-in.
Form of a thin Razor other.
Form of a Razor other, with curved extremities.
Form of a small, thin Razor for the tip of the finger.
This is similar to the awl, and its end is like a Saw: it exhibits itself in many places from the cutting of bones.
Form of a Razor, which is suitable for the piercing of his bone.
End of him triangular, its ends are acute.
Suited from India. And likewise it is necessary that all which we have said of the Razors, and Scissors, and Saw be.
On the incisions of the limbs and on the locking of bones.
The extremities may become putrid, either through an external cause or through an internal one.
If, however, you have treated the corruption with medicine, and it does not respond to treatment: and you see that corruption is affecting a limb, but it does not affect any other part: then you should cut off that limb as far as the corruption extends, so that the sick person may be cured by it, or by the greater harm of losing the limb.
And the sign that this happens is that the limb becomes discolored, until it putsrefies: either because fire has scorched it, or after it has become black from corruption: until the putrefaction extends to that limb, and spreads throughout the whole body.
Therefore, when you make the incision, and likewise if the cause of the corruption is from the percussion of certain venenosos [venomous plants]: such as the sea scorpion, the horse-mussel, the mustard, and others.
If, however, the corruption or the percussion is at the tip of a finger, then cut off that finger, and not leave any space for the corruption, so that it may be cut off up to the remaining hand.
And likewise if it happens in a hand, then cut off that hand from the root of the nail, and not leave any space for the corruption, until it takes hold in the arm.
And if it has lodged in it, then cut off the arm at the elbow joint.
If, however, the corruption passes through, and you see it around the elbow: then death is in that limb. And administering other than this medicine, is a matter of dosage.
And likewise do for the foot, if the corruption has lodged in a finger, then cut off that foot from the ankle joint: and if it has lodged in the shin bone of the foot, then cut off the whole foot. If it has risen up to the knee, then cut the leg at the joint of the knee.
If the corruption has already reached above the knee, then there is no hope for recovery, only amputation and abandonment to death.
And the way to incise the limb, or to sever it, is to grasp the lower ligament, which you wish to incise: and seize a second ligament above the spot. And extend one minister of the ligaments downward: and extend another minister of the ligaments upward upward. And you shall separate the flesh which is between the two ligaments, with a sharp blade, until the whole flesh is separated. Then it shall be incised, or severed.
And you should put a cloth over all the parts, so that the blade does not touch the sound place: and it shall happen to the sick with added injury, and feverishness.
If, however, there should be a flow of blood inward while you are operating, then quickly cauterize the place: or put some dust upon it which stops the blood. Then return to your own medication, until it is completed.
Then bind the wounded limb with a suitable ligament, and take care of it, until it is healed.
And I will tell you what happened to the man in his foot, this same thing that I am telling you.
That is, because it happened in his black foot, with the scorch which resembles the burning of fire: and that corruption first began in his toe, until it covered his whole foot.
Then that man came forward of himself, after he had seen the corruption inciding in his member with its swiftness, which he knew from its pain and scorch: and he incised himself at the joint, and was healed.
And after he had passed a long time, that corruption happened to him again in the same way in his little finger of his hand.
Then he came to me, and I tried to restore that excess with him when I put on the hand with medicine after washing his body: and that excess did not recur, and it began to incise in another finger: until the corruption began in the hand.
I therefore held him by the hand to examine it; and I did not wish to do so, hoping that there would be no excess of blood from his wound; and I was also afraid of death from the incision of his hand. For the strength of the man was greater than the danger.
And after he had despaired of me, he turned back to his own country; and he came to me because I desired him, and he struck his entire hand on mine; and he was healed.
And I have not brought this story forward except as an aid to what is about to happen in this type of illness; and that it may be a sign, and according to which it occurs.
Regarding the treatment of gangrene, and the quality of clotting with medicines.
When gangrene occurs in some fleshy part of the body and the space of gangrene is prolonged until it forms a clot: then it bursts, or pierces, and what is in it comes out, leaving a hollow place like a wound; and the skin that is on top of it looks like a thin cloth; and does not penetrate to its ultimate corruption, nor does it enter the mouth, the nerves, or the ligaments: it deserves to be called Sinus: but it is not so named; but if it continues to prolong, until it penetrates the corruption into some of these members, then it is called a Fistula, or a pus-hole.
And the care of it is that you strike off all its skin as if it were unwound; and above all when it has become thin, and looks like cloth; and trust that it will not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
If, however, you hope that the skin will adhere and not follow that last consequence of corruption: and if there is a thickness of flesh on the skin, then treat it with Clister; and you are to consider as regard Sinus.
Then if it is large, and the pus that is discharged from it has a foul odor; then clisterize it with Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, oil, and zinc, taking equal parts, mixing them together in wine; and let them boil on the fire until they turn red: and make them into a paste of honey.
Then take from him what you need: and dissolve it with water and honey, and clisterize it with the sinuses: and tighten the opening of it, and let the medicine go into it for the quantity of two hours.
Then extract him with an expression: let him be days until the sinuses are cleaned up and the foul smell is gone.
And sometimes when it is clisterized with black water, when this medicine is not present with you: and it is, so that you take the ash of wood that has been burned, or the ash from oak wood: and you pour it over her water. Then dip it, and clisterize it with it until you are sure that the sinuses have been washed away.
That if the sick person does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or water of ash, then clisterize it with water and honey, in which there is already some crushed zingiber mixed. Or clisterize it with honey and wine because the property of honey is that it cleanses and washes away, and the wine makes the sinuses adhere, especially when there is an abundance of astringency and dryness in it.
When you do this sometimes, and are sure that the corruption of the sinuses has already gone away: then clisterize it with him so that he can generate flesh in it.
And it is so that you take from the plaster of dyphpine: and dissolve it with rose oil, and wine astringent: or clisterize it with some other medicines, and with ointments, whose properties I have written in the book of ointments.
That if the opening of the sinus is tight, in which the tube of the clister does not enter: then increase it with a little iron: or put in it the licorice that is soaked in Egyptian ointment, or in basilic ointment, until it is increased.
And similarly if the opening is also wide, then join the lips together with a suturing thread: and let go from it the quantity that enters the clister without adding anything to it.
And likewise if the opening from which the infection flows is raised higher up: then dry it off in a lower place that is in itself, so that the infection may flow out of it down to below: for when the infection is constricted in the depth of the sinus, it prevents meat from growing in it.
If it is not possible for you to dry out the sinus all around below it according to your wish: then be careful, so that you prepare the limb with preparation through which the infection may flow out of it easily according to what is prepared for you. Be careful that nothing of the pus is left in it at all: and take the solid medicines which are placed over the wound, fitting for what you wish. And extend them over the cloth. And have a cloth of such a quantity that it may come into communication with all the sinus. Then cut with forceps in the direct opening of the sinus a hole, a little larger hole. Then extend from the unguent a soft cloth over another cloth according to the quantity of the hole: and place it on the limb in a distant position from the opening of the sinus, so that the exit of pus from it may be facilitated: and do not remove the large cloth until after some days.
But that which is over the opening of the sinus, is he whom you stir up every hour, so that he moves out what is gathered in it from pus: and know that the infection which flows out of it, is very much or little: or digested or undigested.
And with this repeatedly consider the place of the sinus itself, whether it feels pain in its lord or not: and whether there is no pain in it, and whether there is a swelling in it, or not.
And when you extend your medicine so, and see the matter which flows out over the opening of the sinus: then know that the sinus is already attached, or is approaching attachment: so then dissolve it in the morning, or in the third day: and when you have dissolved the wound, then change the cloth, and renew the unguent.
But if it is discharged from the Sinus after a long time, then do not despair of its adherentium, for the cure approaches, because there are people who delay the generation of flesh in their wounds, and from them come those who act opposite to it.
But if it is discharged from the sinus after many days of pus, then you should know that the sinus does not adhere.
But if the adherentium of the sinus is delayed, and its duration is prolonged: then add to it, that doctors may make medicine, so that it is in its substance moist and in its virtue dry: like the unguent of dyafinicon, when it is added to it superfluitas additionis ex zegi.
And from the greatest last, when it is cured, it is, that you take the unguent of dyafinicon, and dissolves with olive oil, and drips on the old wine with equal substance.
Then put it together with it, and use it.
And also does this action similar to this, when the unguent of dyafinicon is not present with you, honey, when it is heated, and you use it. Or take myrrh and aloe and olive oil: grind them all together, and powder it over honey while it is on fire. Then tie a cloth over the wound and tighten it around the sinus: and grind with honey that you have prepared, until it has thickened: and powder the species on top of it, and put it on the cloth, and tighten it.
And when these are administered to it, the long arnebia, and the roots of the star lily, and is a lily: and flour of herbs, and centaurea. Use them simple, or mixed together, grind it up, and sift the powder over honey that you have prepared, and use it.
If the duration of the sinus is prolonged, and it does not heal with this cure: then you should know that there is corruption in its depth: or it already makes an impression on the bones, or on the other hard parts of the body, or ligaments: then care for the wound with surgery, as has been stated.
On the treatment of a sprained ankle and a sore toenail, and the addition of a cut finger and an incision.
On the treatment of a sprained ankle and a sore toenail, and the addition of a cut finger and an incision
If it is prolonged and neglected in its treatment, and becomes inflamed, or putrid, until it corrode the nail-root: and perhaps it corrupts all of it, and perhaps the corruption reaches to the mouth, until there is a foul odor; and the end of the finger becomes swollen, and its color turns black.
When you treat it then, with the same treatment as we have spoken of in the division, and your treatment does not help: then you should cut away the whole excess that remains from the nail. Then anoint the wound after that. The cautery of a wound is very strong.
If the mouth is healthy, and the nail also is healthy, and the little additions of the nail are pressing on the flesh inwardly, and they begin to hurt it: then you should place a very fine ray under the corner of the nail that hurts the flesh, and push it upwards: and cut off the flesh easily, and place over it what remains of the flesh from the medicines burning, and the corrosion, until all of it is moved away. Then treat that with ointment, until it heals.
If the corruption has already pressed into the mouth, then you should cut off that mouth, and take it out: for it does not heal at all while there is still corruption in it.
If you see the corruption and the corruption spreading in the finger, then cut it at one end, according to what has been said above in its recollection. Then treat that, until it heals.
If, however, a toenail is sore or has been hit, and there is a sharp pain with it, then you should first draw blood from the nail. Then cut the nail with a sharp chisel from above down to the eye.
And beware that the cut does not go into the flesh under the nail, for you may cause a very painful pain by doing so, and it will be a cause of the birth of flesh added to the place.
Then care for the place with the medicine that relieves the pain.
The finger added which is born in some men's hands, perhaps is flesh all over: and perhaps there are bones in it, and perhaps there is a nail in it: and the birth of some of their fingers is in the root of the tendon, or its birth is in some of its nodules. So this one who is born in the nodules of a finger does not move: and perhaps he who is born by the joint of a finger moves.
Therefore, in the case of the flesh which is born, it is easy to cut him. That is, so that you might strike him at his root with a chisel.
But the cure for him whose birth is in the root of the tendon is difficult. Therefore, abstain from cutting him.
In that one who is born in a finger at the last nodule, then it should be that you strike the first flesh of his incision round up to the mouth. Then close the mouth with one of those knives suitable for closing it. Then care for the man, until he is healed.
The healing of the fingers which happens from one side to another, often happens or is born from the birth of man, that is, is born with him, or from the healing of a wound, or fire burn, and similar things.
Therefore, it should be so that he removes this healing, until the fingers regain their natural shape. Then place between them a chisel, or cloth dipped in rose oil: that they may not heal quickly, and separate them: or place between them a thin lead plate, until the place heals as it should.
And likewise if some consolidation of the fingers with the palm should occur, then dry that consolidation, according to how it was prepared and suited to the form of the member.
On Incision The Fault.
Veins that are swollen and full of melancholy humors, which occur in many parts of the body, especially in the thighs, since they are the main limbs for moving, working and carrying.
Therefore, it is necessary that you should treat the body's discharge from black cholera by a strong emission of urine.
Then, the patient's bloodletting should be done in the main room.
The treatment of these veins with iron is done according to two methods. One is that they should be made to sit and black blood should be drawn from them. And the other method is that the vein should be ligated and all of it should be extracted.
The sectioning of this is done according to this mode. Wrap the thigh with hot water until the thick, foul blood resolves. Then tie the thigh of the patient from the upper part of the hip down to the knee with the sutural thread, and tie it up tightly. Then dry one, two, or three veins that are widely separated.
Then ligate it, that is to say, extract blood from the lower part of the thigh in your hand all the way up, and above all, bloodletting must be done to the patient first. Then dry the leg down to the toe: until it runs out of blood, as much as you see will be enough, and as much as the nurse' strength can tolerate.
Then tie it up: and tell him to refrain from foods that generate black cholera, and again to administer urine emission and bloodletting when the veins are filled up, and let him feel the pain of the illness.
The elevation of this is done according to this mode. Scrape away the crust, if there are many hairs in it. Then insert the finger into water: or wet it with warm water, until it turns red and the veins swell: or exercise it firmly, if there is no water available, until it warms up.
Then dry the skin with a direct stroke along the length: or at the end near the knee, or in the lower part near the heel.
Then open the skin with a hook, and scrub the vein from all sides until it appears to touch: and at its appearance, you will see it turn red to blackish-red. When you remove it from the skin, you will see it white as a string.
Then insert under it Radium, until it comes out and leaves the skin: hang it with a blind hook, soft.
Then dry another section next to that section with three fingers. Then scrub the skin from the top part of the vein until it appears. Then rub it with Radium as you did, and hang it with another hook as you did before.
Then dry another section, or multiple sections, if you can tolerate it. Then rub it and cut it at the heel.
Then remove it to the section above it.
And do this, until you remove it from the upper section; or with higher sections, until it comes out completely; then cut it.
If it does not submit to you when you try to remove and rub it; then insert a sharp instrument with two strong threads, tie it, and pull it out: or insert under it Radium: and turn your hand around all sides, until it comes out. Then tie it so that it does not cut you. For if it cuts you, it is difficult for you to remove it deeply; and it enters into the body and leaves a scar behind it.
So when you have extracted it all: then place it on the wound's site, soaked with wine and oil rose, or oil; and cure it itself, until it heals.
If the vine is contracted, it has a twist to its parts that requires an adjustment to those parts, and it is not like what we said before regarding straightness: then you must find on top of it for all parts of its twist, and places of its adjustment.
Then hang it with hooks until you have raised it all: and be careful when you cut through your part above it, or hurt any wounds: because it will be difficult to raise it over yourself, or to extract it. Therefore, preserve your prudence.
Form a shape of the wound when the vine heals.
Form a hook shape.
It is not curvy like the other hooks, and it does not have a sharp extreme, so that it does not hurt the skin: and it has a dull bend, soft: because if it were thin, it would hit the skin with its thinness: but it has excess dullness, as we said.
On the extraction of a vein from the leg.
This vein is produced in the legs on warm lands, such as the Alps and the Arab lands, and in dry and hot lands that have little tenderness, that is, where no grass grows, nor trees.
And perhaps it is produced in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And its generation is from the decay that happens under the skin, just as it happens within the bodies of snakes and worms and scabies, and the worms that grow between the skin and meat.
And the sign of the beginning of this vein is, that inflammation occurs in the leg. Then a sore place forms. Then the vein begins to come out of that place of its sore, as if it were the root of a plant, or an animal.
Now then, when this extremity appears, you should fasten a plumb weight onto it; the weight of which is two drachmas and a knot, up to two drachmas; and let the lead hang from the leg.
Whenever then this leaves something on the outside, you should fix it into lead, and mark it. If then it is prolonged a long time, then cut away part of it, and fasten the remainder. And do not cut it away at its roots before it has left all of it. For if you cut it, it will contract, and go into the flesh; and it will cause an ulcer to form, and corruption in the place, and a bad wound.
Therefore it should be handled gently, and removed slowly, until it has left all of it, and nothing remains of it in the body; and from this one vein emerges in some men, which is five palms long and ten fingers' breadth across. And it has already reached me, for it came out of twenty palms.
But if it should happen to you during the time of your own treatment: then insert a needle into the hole, and pierce it with a long one, along with the flesh; until all that is in it has come out of it, all of it putrefied: and administer corruption of the place with medicines for several days. And then take care of yourself in curing ulcers.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears in the joint of the foot, or in the foot itself: and it has many openings, and emerges from every opening a branch.
Therefore take care of herself, as we have said in the division, and with what is added to it.
On the cutting off above the worms which come out under the skin, and it is called a bad fever.
This fever is called in our country Bouine fever: because it often happens to the bouis, and there is one kind of it which springs up between the skin and the flesh.
And he felt through the entire body, ascending and descending: and it was shown to him through the sense of touch during his walk, from limb to limb, until he had finished everywhere where he had stopped on the skin, and he had gone away.
And his generation is from the corruption of some of the humors. As do happen worms and snakes, that is, worms and roundworms in the belly.
And they are afraid of his malice. For when he felt through the body, and went up to the head, and came to a place: then perhaps he would open within him, and go out, and destroy his eye: and this has happened many times.
But when you are going to care for him, and take him out, then that should not happen except through his sense of touch during his walk, and the appearance of it.
Therefore, you need to tie down what is above him, and what is under him with strong constriction by means of a ligament. Then dry off on top of him, and take him out.
That if he should sink into the flesh, and not harm himself: then place over the place a caustic with fire, until he dies.
And greater than that which he fears is his corruption, which corrupts his eye, as we have said.
But if you see him already come to the head near the eye, then tie under him with good constriction by means of a ligament. Then dry off on top of him, and take him out.
And it is necessary that the sick one should use his own purification, with medicines solving the bad korosive humors.
And let him guard himself from foods that generate corruption.
关于疾病的切开部分纳基尔。
这种疾病在我们的土地上被称为纳基尔：并在某些肢体部位痛苦，然后从肢体转移到另一肢体。
And I have already seen him myself, according to what I tell you now. I am called to a sick woman with some ailments. And he detected his arm, and saw the swelling of the lung in the vein of the shoulder.
And after an hour had passed, I saw one swelling run up with a whip, as it runs on the skin, faster than it can be: so that it is like silver running, when it runs from place to place.
So the pain receded from that spot, and was fixed in the shoulder.
Then I sat for an hour, and it ran through the rest of the body until it reached the other arm.
Then he told me that he was shaking all over his whole body, according to which I saw.
So I was amazed at the speed of the changing of its member from one member to another. And neither before that did I see this sickness with my eyes in such a way. However, I saw many, who found pain changing from one member to another: and I did not see him with my eyes, as I saw him in the woman.
And I do not think that was it, unless because the woman was one of those who are found with dry lungs detected by the touch: so therefore this seems to be the reason for the change in sensation.
And it is necessary that those who are delicious and have wet bodies do not appear in this way, by reason of the hidden lungs.
When then you will see his cure, and the patient feels pain: then if it appears to you with your eye, as we have said, then squeeze him above himself, and below him quickly: and dry above himself, until this windiness is driven out: and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see him with your eyes: then the cure of the body, and with it that he drives out windiness, and makes them come to a head with pills of fennel, and with those of serapine, and others like them.
On the Extraction of Arrows.
Arrows differ according to their species and according to the places in which they enter the body.
Of these arrows there are several kinds, some having large points and some small; some are conic and some flat. Of these there are three-angle arrows. And of these there are arrows with tongue-shaped heads. And of these there are arrows with spined heads.
These, however, that enter the body according to the limbs, fall into two ways. For example, if they enter the main limbs, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, and bladder, or similar organs. But if it falls into one of these main limbs and you see the signs of death that I shall describe to you, then you should withdraw the arrow at once, for death will soon follow otherwise. But if these bad signs are not evident to you and the arrow does not enter deeply into the body, then withdraw it and be concerned about the wound itself.
For when the arrow enters the skull and passes through the bone and exits above the brain, it causes a kind of dizziness, and swelling, and trembling in the eyes, and swelling, and spasm, and confusion of thought, and amnesia, and colic. And perhaps blood will come from the nose or ears. And perhaps speech will be lost and words destroyed. And a white pus-like substance may come from the wound's site. And there will come out a substance similar to meat juices.
But if you see these signs, then refrain from treating it, and withdraw the arrow if it has not come out.
The signs of an arrow that enters the heart are: it is near the left nipple; and when it feels like it is fixed in a hard place rather than in a soft one. And perhaps arrows are a movement similar to pulsation; and black blood runs from the ulna. And then follows that coldness of limbs, and cold sweat, and fainting fits. So you see, death has come by all means.
And when an arrow hits the lung, the exit of bloody blood from the ulna; and when the neck is injured, it turns pale, and changes color in the nurse. And he breathes out great, deep breaths; and seeks the attraction of cold air.
That if an arrow falls into the breast-bone, which is within a few inches of the back; then it is near to the ribs: and causes great pain with loud breathing, with gasps: and all the arms tremble.
And if an arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps it has come out from some undigested food in the ulna.
And if an arrow falls into the belly and is locked up in it: then some stool comes out from the ulna, or a piece of dung, or disrupted intestine. There is therefore no hope for his cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
That if an arrow falls into the bladder, and urine comes out: and proceeds from it something to the outside, and the pain is stronger on the sick; then you know that it is deadly.
The rest of the limbs, such as the face, neck, throat, tongue, jaw, spine, femur, hip, leg, and feet, are saved according to various dispositions; but when an arrow does not hit a blood vessel or nerve, and is not deadly.
And I tell you that I saw such things as these arrows; so that you may understand by this about your cure.
That is, because a man was struck by an arrow in the tear duct of his eye, at the root of his nose. I therefore removed it from his own side, under the fat of his ear: and he recovered, and there was no harm to his eye.
And I drew out another arrow from the Jew, which had fallen into his fat under his eye-lid: and the arrow was now hidden, and I did not succeed in drawing it out but for its narrow end, by which it stuck to his wood; and this was a great arrow of the Turks' arrows, with a soft iron; whereon there were no folds.
So the Jew recovered, and there was no harm to his eye with any harm.
And I drew out another arrow from the throat of a Christian man.
And this was an arrow made in the Arab way, and it was one whose end was pointed. So I followed up on it with two other arrows between two guides; and now it was submerged in his throat. I was careful with it until I drew it out: and the Christian man recovered.
And I drew out another arrow from the belly of a man which had fallen into his belly: and we thought that he would die from it.
After he had therefore passed thirty days, and there was no change in him with regard to his disposition, I followed up on the arrow: and I was careful about it, and drew it out: and he recovered, and there was no harm to him with any harm.
And I saw a man whom the arrow had fallen into his back, and the wound was closed over it. After he had therefore been seven years, the arrow came out at the root of his thigh.
And I saw a woman to whom an arrow had fallen into her belly, and the wound was closed over it, and the arrow remained within her: nor was there any change in her disposition with regard to her natural operations, and the woman found no harm in him with regard to any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow had fallen into his face: and the wound was closed, and it remained, not finding him much pain: and there were many such things like these.
And I drew an arrow from the king's Prince, which had fallen to him in the middle of his nose, and had already declined towards the right side about as much: and the whole arrow was hidden.
So I was called to cure him after the fall of the arrow for three days. I then found a very stiff arrow shaft.
I then examined it with a delicate touch, and I did not feel it: but he himself perceived the prick and pain on his right cheek. So I hoped that it was the prick from the end of the arrow.
So I plastered the place with plaster where there was the attractive and digesting power, confiding to myself that it would heal, and I would see a sign of the arrow so that I could cut it off: but there happened nothing in the place which indicated that the arrow had followed the place.
So I kept plastering over him for many days: and nothing happened, and the bone was well hardened by then: but he remained sick because of the loss of the arrow from his space for some day, until he felt the arrow in his nose on a certain day. And he told me about that.
And he told me about that. So I put acute medicine on that bone for many days, until it was opened: and when I examined him, I felt a very slight prick of the arrow which was holding onto the wood.
Then I added more of the acute medicine to the opening of the wound, until the end of the arrow was clearly visible: and there passed by me with him about four months of time.
Then when the bone had strengthened, and it seemed possible to me to put my finger into it, and move it, and it would not come out: so I kept up the delicate work, and devised means for it, until on a certain day I came upon it with crooked fingers, according as the shape of them was at the end of the passage, until I drew it out. Then I repaired the break.
And the physicians indeed say that the nose cartilage is not restored. So I repaired it, and the fracture was solid, and the health was restored to its whole strength: nor did it harm him in any way at all.
And I tell you the quality of the extraction of certain arrows: that you set down that rule and significance about it which I did not say.
For the parts of this art and their distinctions are not to be understood with narration: nor does that book comprehend them, and the crafty craftsman compares little with much: and when he is away, he has what is missing, and finds a new operation and a new instrument for the descent of foreign things of this art when they happen.
So I say that arrows do not come out of the member from which they are fixed, except according to two ways. Or by attraction from the place from which it entered. Or by the opposite part of the other.
And that which comes out where it entered, or is an arrow going out in a fleshly place: and is attracted, and goes out.
That if it does not obey to go out at the time at which it falls: then you must let it go for a few days, until the flesh that is around it putsrefies: and the attraction of it will be allayed, and its exit.
And likewise if it is broken into a bone, and does not obey to come out for you: then let it go also for a few days: and again with the attraction and movement every day, until it comes out.
That if it does not obey to come out for you after a few days: then you must drill in the circle of the arrow in the bone from all sides with a sharp bit, until the arrows become larger. Then attract it, and pull it out.
But if the arrow has already gone deep into the body and is hidden and concealed from sight; then try to find it out. But if you feel it, then pull it out with some tools that are suitable for pulling it out.
But if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow deep inside; and there is no bone or nerve or vein at that place: then try to find it out until the wound becomes bigger, so that it can be possible to pull out the arrow.
That if there are ears that hold the arrow, then free the meat that is attached to them from all sides with all your skill and tools; and try, if you cannot bring about the release of the meat in the breaking of the ears or their twisting, until it is released.
And when you try to pull out the arrow, in whichever part it is, then use your twisted hands with forceps to all sides until you make it come out: and use the finest tools so that the arrow does not break, and so that it becomes difficult for you to attract it and pull it out.
That if you cannot reach it in one hour, then leave it for a few days until what is around it begins to rot. Then repeat it: for often the flow of blood causes ease; then apply what I have said in our book on curing; and guard your skill from cutting the flesh or a nerve or a vein.
And administer art every way which thou canst of the bow of Sagittarius: and let it be with ease, and quietness, or tardiness, and firmness, as I have told thee.
And it is necessary that you do when you shoot Sagittarius, so that the injured person is in the same position as was the case with Sagittarius at the fall of Sagittarius in himself. For it is more safe. But if you are not able to do that, then administer what you can of the figures.
But the arrow which comes from the opposite side, or has already gone out a little towards the outside: or makes a protuberance at the extreme end of Sagittarius by feeling from the upper part of the skin near it, and you see it protruding: then cut over it, and let the section be according to the quantity that it holds in it.
Then attract it: for it becomes easy to come out.
But if it is held in the bone, then twist your hand according to the roundness, until Sagittarius presses upon the bone and strengthens itself on it: then draw it out.
And if not: leave it for a few days: then repeat it, until it comes out.
That if the wood of Sagittarius is in it, then push it with that.
But if it has fallen wood, and you can administer the push: then introduce into it the tool that is sharp, so that the sharpness of it enters into the end of Sagittarius: then push it with that.
But if Sagittarius is drawn up, then push it with an instrument which enters into it. For the arrow glides through it.
That if Sagittarius is poisoned, then you must, so that the sharpness of the meat is in it, where the poison is: if you can do that. Then take care of it with that which comes to that.
That if Sagittarius is falling in the breast, or in the belly, or in the groin, and it is close to that which you touch with the hand, and can cut over it: then cut off, and cause away from the incision of the vein, or nerve, and take it out.
Then cut the bone, if you see it, and heal that, until it is healed.
And this is the form of the pincers, with which the arrows are extracted.
They should be made similar in shape to the ear, which is made like a wedge: when they grasp on to the arrow, they do not let it go.
And there are many kinds of them, great and small and medium, according to the quantity of the size of the arrow and its width and the constriction of the wound.
The form of the spur.
And the form of the spur is deaf.
This is the extreme end of the spur like a ray, so that it may be introduced into the hole in the conic arrow, and driven with it.
Of phlebotomy of veins.
There are thirty veins of phlebotomy, from which the custom of bloodletting is made in the body.
Of these there are sixteen in the head: two pulsating veins, which are behind the ears, called the two herbs; and two arteries, which appear at the two temples; and two veins which come from the two eyelids of the two eyes, called the two gaze; and a vein prepared in the middle of the forehead; and a vein which is in the tip of the nose. And two arteries are in the neck. And two veins are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins are in the lower lip. These are called Algecirach's veins. And two veins which are under the tongue.
But the veins of phlebotomy in the arms are five in all the arm.
One of them is the cephalica vein, and it comes from the side of the skull: and it is called the common head vein. And the wound. And the wound is good, and it is made up of a branch of the basilica, and a branch of the skull: and it is called by the people a good part of the body. And the basilica, and it is placed in the domestic lateral: and it is also called Titlicarus. And they call it a good part of the hand. And the tendon of the biceps, and it is placed on the shaft: and this is that from which blood is drawn, and this is that which appears above the thumb with a visible line of tension.
And the bursa salis, and it is good part that is between the ring finger and the little finger: and there are two branches.
In the leg and in the foot there are three good parts. One of these is that which is under the thumb with a green edge from the side. And the second is the saphenous vein, and its location is near the heel from the inside. And the third is the nerve: and its location is near the heel on the outside.
In the other leg, there are three similar parts.
Regarding the veins of the two ears.
The phlebotomy of the two veins that are behind the ears, it is an ancient practice to prevent nosebleeds, hemorraging, and a headache-causing condition, and to treat a bad ulcer on the head.
And the quality of phlebotomy depends on the skill of the one who does it. And it is good for a person to wash their head, and to rub the occiput with a rough cloth. Then tie the injured neck with a cloth, until the two veins appear. And their locations are behind the ears in two depressed spots on the head. So go and feel with your finger, and where you feel the pulse of these veins below your finger, there are the marks with the cautery.
Then take a cauterizing knife, and this one is called the "incisor. Then introduce him under the youth in the wound, until the phlebotome reaches the mouth. Then wash your hands with soap and water, and cut the skin with a knife, cutting the wound at an angle. And the length of the incision should be as much as two fingers spread out, or about that: and let go out as much blood as you can.
Then tie it up with a powder, and leave it alone until it is healed.
And now let us begin with the incision of the ears, and their cauterization.
But the two arteries which are in the two temples, and which are subject to headaches of old standing, and which have a swollen vein, and a drooping eyelid: and run over the course of the flowing blood, which is acute, towards the eyes.
And what is the quality of phlebotomy? I will tell you. Let the sick man stretch his neck very much, until two wounds appear in a noticeable way: and he shall feel the pulse of his ears under your finger. For then are the signs with the caustic.
Then wash the skin of the neck with soap and water, and put in the phlebotome above it, and wash the blood away upwardly. And cut it as you did with the two wounds, and let the blood run out according to your need.
Then dissolve the constriction of the vein, and place your finger on a wound for an hour. Then put powder and dust on it, and tighten the constriction with a strong hand: and let go of it until it is healed.
And now let us remember the ears, their incision, and their extraction, at the beginning of the book.
The phlebotomy of the forehead is after phlebotomy of the head, for old standing ailments of the face: and for a headache, and redness: and for foul ulcers.
And the quality of phlebotomy is according to what I tell you. The injured man raises his neck with his hand until the vein appears. Then take the instrument that is called a fossorum.
Place the prominent tip of the fossorum on top of the vein, and strike down upon it with a pin or in some other way: and let the blood flow according to the amount that you want. Then make the hole clean, and tighten it, until it has healed over.
And when it opens again with the phlebotomist on the side. However, it is not necessary that the phlebotomist be acute of limb, as are the other phlebotomists, so that he have a sharp end of limb. And make the incision according to the transversion: since the hole is close by: and perhaps, when it is thin, the phlebotomist will break when it is made delicate.
But the cutting of two veins that are in the two lacrimal glands of the two eyes, is to cut at the eye from a scab and from a red color; and it will be bad for an eye, and for facial ailments.
And the quality of phlebotomy of them is, that he should tighten the neck of the injured man with his hand, so that the vein appears. Then make the incision on them: and you stand over his head.
And let the phlebotomy be made according to the transversion a little bit along its length, with a little bit of a blade, for there is no flesh in that place. If the phlebotomist is acute of limb, perhaps it will break.
Then let the blood flow according to what you need. And place a cloth over them, and tighten them in one night, and then let them go.
But the nasopharyngeal phlebotomy is useful for acute fever, and violent headache, and facial diseases, such as haemorrhage, and redness that occurs on the face; above all when it is old.
And the quality of its phlebotomy, so that it tightens the neck of the ill person. Then take the nose of him with your left hand, and take up a fine, long needle; and fix it in the middle of his larynx, between that which divides the nose according to its straightness. For the vein does not appear there to the sense, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
And you should let your hand with the needle run out a little with the blood, and make it run out according to your need. Then bind him up for the night. For he will recover very quickly.
Of the two veins of Guidej, one is for constriction of the throat, and the beginning of lepra, and melancholic diseases, and impetigo and bad ulcers, and corrosive wounds, that is, herpes zoster.
And the quality of their phlebotomy, so that it tightens the neck of the ill person with a ligament: and let the craftsman stand over the head of the nurse, and let the ill person sit on a seat.
Then phlebotomize a vein that is wide towards its end. Then take out a measured quantity of blood, or according to what you see from necessity, which is for that person. Then do the same with another vein.
Then unravel the ligaments, and tighten two veins in the middle: so that the ill person does not get tight. And let go of it until morning. For the wound will heal.
This is a guide to phlebotomy veins of Algebirch. Veins, however, are the Al-Gharib's phlebotomy aid: because they join to the alcohol in the mouth, and to gingival corruption; and bad ulcers; and labial fissures, and bad ulcers, also those which are in the nose, and about it.
And the quality of their phlebotomy is that you should make the sick sit before you; and tighten his neck with a band. Then turn his lips and look at two veins; the one is on the right side of his lip, and the second is on the left side of it; and the indication of each is by the color of amber. And that is true: because around them are small veins, black. So cut both incisions as you do.
But if there is doubt over you, and you do not know which of them it is: then turn to the larger incision, and more manifest.
And also make the same for the two veins that are in the upper lip: and much more so runs the custom with him: and cut the two veins that are in the lower lip.
On phlebotomy Veins under the tongue after phlebotomy of the head. The two veins that are under the tongue are a phlebotomy aid: because phlebotomy of the head is to the pre-eminences which are in the throat, and to the ailments of the uvula, and to the ailments of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that the sick sit between your hands towards the sun; and rinse his tongue, and look under his tongue on one side with one vein, and on the other side with another vein: and the color of each of them goes to the color of amber.
So phlebotomy both: and guard, so that you do not put your hand into their veins afterwards. For under them are arteries, and perhaps it happens that the flow of blood comes out of those arteries.
The veins which are used for phlebotomy on the thigh, are those in which phlebotomy is done in all people.
And phlebotomy from these two ways is done. Or with a phlebotome and piercing to the side of the vein; or with oil to relax the skin; or by closing with a phlebotome and a blade, and this is called Alneous. And this is its shape.
And from these are species broad and narrow according to the width of the veins and their form; The shape of the phlebotome and the piercing is broad, as you see it. And it is suitable for opening closed veins, full, coming from the body, visible, thick, and those which contain thick blood.
And this phlebotome is smaller in width, and narrower at the end.
And it is suitable for phlebotomy of thin veins which contain yellow-colored blood.
The Basilica, which is one of three veins to be phlebotomized, is the right one. Because it draws blood from the ailments which are under the throat and neck, because it follows the chest and belly: and it is suitable for a phlebotomist to cut it, so that he may avoid an artery underneath it. If then one should make a mistake and add to the piercing of the phlebotomy, he will hit the artery, and will spill the flow of blood. Therefore it should not be pierced with a phlebotome and piercing; but rather cut with the Alneous way.
That if not the Basilica appears with an obvious sign, then it is necessary to remove it, and to turn it to another one, or to search for some of its branches: or to pierce a place near it, instead of piercing at the branch of the brachial artery. For it is clear and cut with the Alnesil way using a phlebotome, as we have said.
If, however, you wish to perform venipuncture on yourself, then it is necessary to approach the vein before stricture of the brachial artery, so that you may feel the place where the pulse can be found. Then mark the spot with caustic, then move on to the arm, and dry up the vein by cutting it concavely with Phlebotomus Alnesis, as we have said. And let not the pressure fall through space from the place of the artery.
And when you see it, when you tighten the ligament, the swelling at the place where you have marked with caustic, then that swelling is swelling of the artery: so remove it.
That if you see blood rise during venipuncture, like a boy's urine, and it is thin blood, red in color: then you will know that it comes from the artery's blood. Then therefore put your finger on the spot and keep it there for a long time, then remove your finger. If therefore blood is cut off (for it is often cut off) then tighten the arm and let go of it: and so that it does not move: and so that it stands still.
And so that the person does not move for several days, until they are healed.
If therefore blood does not cut off and does not stop you: and there is no present medicine for you at the moment of your need, then cut the artery, if it appears to you. For its extremities will crack, and blood will be cut off.
Or take a piece of an axe, and find it: take half, and tighten it to the place where the vein narrows going down, with ligament and powder up to the next day.
Then if blood is cut off, it is good. Then if it does not: then take care of the person with the reminder from the place where the powder-cut blood flow was flowing: and cutting off his blood is not difficult in many dispositions, because of the small wound, and possibility of the ligament from the arm.
But the veins of Fuscas are for phlebotomy, which draws blood from the upper part of the head and the lower body: therefore, because it is composed of the Basilicae branch and the Cephalica branch, as we have said.
And it belongs to the phlebotomist to make a cut above the vein so that he does not bleed from the vein itself, for under it is the nerve. But if he adds a cut to the vein when he is phlebotomizing, and it comes upon the nerve, there results a coma, and difficult recovery, and perhaps no complete healing.
And this nerve often appears to sensation. But if it is hidden in some people and is thin, and does not show itself: then you must make your cut with Alne's blade, and remove the nerves with your strength.
That if a vein is between two nerves, then find the vein in length.
On the Cephalic vein. But the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is a technique, because it draws blood from the head, and provides for the ailments of the eyes.
And you should use your own skill in this vein, if you will, to phlebotomize it with oil-phlebotomy, or with Myrtle-phlebotomy: for all veins are healthier, because they are not under an artery, nor a nerve.
But it is necessary for you to do the phlebotomy, so that you ask the phlebotomist only at the top of the lacertus, and seek a softer place: and it does not harm him if, after the first strike, you return to it with phlebotomy from time to time.
But perhaps he abstains from phlebotomy in some people when not struck first, but it does not harm him that abstention from phlebotomy at some time.
On the usefulness of phlebotomy and cautions to be observed when observing it. The quality and the accidents of phlebotomy, for you should consider their correction.
First of all it is necessary that you should know that phlebotomy is not performed unless in the conservation of health, and its perseverance and caution from the occurrence of ailments.
And to be done phlebotomy on one of three which are in the bed, namely Cephalica, and Fusca, and Basilica. And to be done phlebotomy at the beginning of spring on a fast, in ver, and summer: and autumn, and winter after feasting, when there are signs of satiety.
And to be done phlebotomy on the first day, or on the third day after having gone past three hours from the day.
But the phlebotomy which is administered in ailments does not have a determined time: but when it provokes convenience and necessity towards it, at night, or during the day, and at any hour, and at all times.
And it is not necessary that boys should be bled before they are fourteen years old. And woman who is pregnant should not be bled until the fourth month up to the seventh month. And elderly people should not be bled if they have already passed sixty years old.
But when someone is to be bled by whatever method it may be: let him purify his intestines before phlebotomy with a soft laxative, if there is much rubbish retained in them: so that the blood does not attract the bowels of the main members from phlebotomy because of putrid effluents.
And a patient who is to be bled should not be tired, that is, nausea: and drunkards should not be phlebotomized, until they have removed this from them. And an invalid with the gout.
And let phlebotomy be repeated after a feverish illness, and forgetfulness, and flow of blood, and multiplication of copulation, and toil, and exercise, and vigils, and fasting, and all that dissolves virtue from the body or from an animal.
Then consider in subtlety of humors before that, if blood is thick with food and drink, and medicines: if possible is to him that.
Then bath the water, if not prohibits itself anything: or exercises himself some exercise, to subtilize the blood.
And put phlebotomy its chest in his bosom, about third day, as we have said: and be careful, so that is discharged its chest that day all animal accidents bad: like anger, and wrath, and fear: and all body accidents, like labor, and penalty, and abundance, and those similar.
And make its present these things with which used custom of men from aromatic substance, and odorous matter, and mirth and similar ones by quantity possibility.
Then sits the phlebotomator over pulvinar, that is higher than pulvinar phlebotomando: then draws its arm, and rubs it phlebotomator hand itself twice, or three times. Then tie the ligature with corrigia, and wrap it around it twice.
And sit the tightened one temperate, because the tightened one when is unequal, or by superfluity in the tightened one, then prohibits the course of blood: or in the softening, then also prohibits the course of blood.
Then after the tightened one it is necessary, so that rubs the phlebotomando hand itself simultaneously towards innuem, until are inflated veins, and present to sense.
Then wipes the phlebotomator phlebotomo with little oil, old its own proper.
Then puts the finger its index left hand on itself under place whose phlebotomiam it wanted, little: so that does not flee the vein, and strikes a percussion. Because from veins is what inuens like a chord fleeing at phlebotomizing: and from them is that is full of air; and when puts the phlebotomo on it, contrahitur against phlebotomo, and deceives the phlebotomator, and does not open the phlebotomo vein: and if opens it, is tightened: so that therefore it is necessary, so that firm phlebotomizer, and sit vigilant in these things all.
Then let the patient lie down. If, however, a new wound is to be made with a single cut, then it is good. And if not, then that same cut should be made again in another place below or above it with some haste: if the wound does not stop.
That if it stops bleeding, or the sick person gets better, then let him be discharged after one or two days, and do not tie up the bandage. For perhaps the cold will attract the wound to stop bleeding. And let no bath be taken.
Then let the patient's blood be drained again, if he desires it.
That if the opening is small, or the blood runs lightly: and be careful not to let out a quantity of blood that is greater than what you intend: then repeat the phlebotomy in the same hole according to the right order, and add a little more during the procedure.
And do this with some haste, before the place stops bleeding; for a bleeding place is unpleasant for many people during the course of an operation.
If you see that the person has already started to bleed, then do not even touch the place above; for it is not good with you to leave anything unfinished. And put something soft on top of the wound; for it smoothes out the course of the blood. And is better in this place than oil itself, and than any other oil.
And administer the same oil to all your bloodlettings, except when it is necessary to stop the flow of blood; and make use of a mixture of alfarache and sage, when put on top of the place.
For blood is thinned out and made smooth when it is thick.
That if a great amount of blood comes out at the place where you are bleeding, or if it is a small opening with a cut, then come quickly and put on top of the place a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly warmed up: and tie it for an hour: for it will be made smooth.
It is necessary that you should do this after the blood has come out from herself with her own complement or from another young one.
That if it remains in the place after some days of blackening, or reddening, it does not harm that one; and if it is scar, put on it something of aloe, or of dissolved myrrh: or some of the juice of mint, that is, of calamus or like it.
And indeed many times there occur hemorrhoids and eminences in the bloodletting at the Basilica.
So put your hand on herself, then if it is soft to touch with your pressure on herself, then that eminence is a bad one. Cause therefore that you put on her something of that which we have said. For perhaps it flows from her the blood of an artery.
But make a plaster with that which is in it for the stenosis, so that the place heals. Then take care of herself with the rest of the cure, until she is healed.
And it is necessary that you should keep from every person all the blood within the quantity of his own virtue. And that which appears from the bright color on the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let her not come out, until she reddens; and likewise if she appears gross, then let her not come out, until she becomes subtle; and likewise if it is sharp, then let the sharpness be taken away from it.
And it is necessary that he who is full, strong, and resistant to the extraction of blood should have a single force, so as to increase the bloodletting from a young one, and to be a bleeder on his side; and in him who is weak, to be the opposite of that.
And it is necessary that he should take himself out in twos, and that there be a tight hole; and it is better that it should be administered in the bloodletting from a young one, so that it is a turned section, not a puncture.
And this mode of bloodletting is healthier than the flow of blood, and from the incision of a nerve; and it is more praiseworthy, and healthier than the bloodletting by width and length.
And he who has become accustomed to a syncopation of the pulse should eat a little bread infused with water of grapefruit before phlebotomy; or, if he is warm, then secaniabin: and let him draw out blood into three or four vessels.
And if his complexion is cold, then he should take a little bread infused with syrup of myrrh, or with syrup of honey aromatized with spices, or with aromatic syrup.
If a syncopation should occur during phlebotomy, and it is due to an exit of blood from many vessels: then he should take, in a cup, water of meat, and syrupy substance that is fragrant; and let him apply aromaticity with aloe, and open his chest while doing so: and let him use the other things which we have said in the division on syncopation from exhaustion in relation to bloodletting.
But he who wants to stop his arm from bleeding and to make his blood flow again: it is necessary for him that the phlebotomy which stops a lot of blood loss be done with small force in continuous days.
But he who wants to stop his arm from bleeding and to make his blood flow again, and his body is strong: then let him do it after seven or nine hours since his first phlebotomy.
But he who wants to draw blood from his body in the opposite direction of the part to which it declines: it is necessary that he do this in the second or third day.
In the body of which there is much blood already warmed and activated, and it causes fever: it is necessary that he leave it from there in a single direction, and draw out a large quantity of it: and make its opening larger until a syncopation occurs: after you have kept all the conditions of bloodletting: and let you place your hand on its pulse during the flow of blood, so that no death should occur at the place of a syncopation. For this reason it happened that when the phlebotomist did not know, and he fell because of negligence.
And it is not appropriate that when you are going to cut the arm and draw the blood in a second, if the orifice of the vein has already been closed, and let the exit of the blood be difficult, so that he presses on himself with sudden motion, and let him bend quickly. For this is a bad thing, far from it, until you have left yourself, unless the phlebotomist draws blood in a second.
Or take away with you the acuteness of phlebotomy that which is coagulated from blood in the orifice of the vein, and put on yourself some dissolved salt in water. And put on yourself some tar-oil or green-worts, and put the compression on the body part, until blood comes out.
But if the vein is already open, then let it go, and do not press on it, until it is closed.
What if necessity compels to draw blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then either phlebotomize the person above that place, or in an arm on another vein.
But the vein of the arm is phlebotomized at the place of the foot, and the Basilica, if they are not found, and are hidden, because it is composed from them.
And the quality of phlebotomy is, so that it puts his hand in hot water, until he feels a throbbing pain, and the vein appears clearly.
Then tighten the ligature on top of it with slight compression. Then phlebotomize a second time, gradually, not transversally, and not according to the length: and let the opening be wide, and your phlebotomy let it go a little above the knuckle.
What if the blood is not coming out, then again put your hand in hot water, and let the blood run into the water, until you satisfy your need.
But if you are in the summer days, then you are absolved from the washing of your hands in warm water. And indeed, it is put forth that a great deal of the blood flow is in warm water in the time of winter.
And phlebotomy of this vein is salutary for all veins, because there is no pulsation under it, nor are the nerves affected.
Phlebotomy of the right hand, indeed, is salutary for diseases of the liver.
And the quality of phlebotomy is such that you should squeeze the hand with a ligature, or your own hand, after you have put it into warm water, until the vein is contracted, and is evident to the touch. Then phlebotomize it by passing over it. And if you cut it entirely, it will not hurt it in any way.
And preserve your hand, so that you do not phlebotomize it again. Under it are the nerves of the fingers bare from the flesh.
Then repeat your hand to the warm water, and let the blood run in it. For if you do not repeat your hand in warm water, the blood will clot in the orifice of the vein, and the flow will be prevented.
But when you extract a quantity of blood that is necessary, then put oil and salt on the vein: so that it does not congeal quickly.
And likewise, you should do the same for all the branches that are tight.
The grip of phlebotomy is from the left hand, because it is salutary for diseases of the spleen: and likewise do the same in phlebotomizing it as you did in the second equally.
The grip of phlebotomizing the saphenous vein is for ailments that are in the lower part of the body, such as ailments of the womb, and retention of menstruation, diseases of the kidneys and bladder, old sores of the legs and buttocks, and similar ailments from ailments.
And the quality of phlebotomy is so that the sick person puts his foot into hot water; and he rubs it until the blood comes out; and he ties a bandage over the foot with a thong. And the vein is indeed at the heel, visible towards the thumb; and many branches come out of it on the face of the foot.
So phlebotomize it either in a larger branch of it or at the heel in a cluster of veins; for it is better and healthier.
If you phlebotomize it on the face of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are beneath it on the surface of the foot.
And place your phlebotomy where you phlebotomize it across from each other, so that you do not want to wound it: and let the phlebotomist be calm.
If, however, the exit of the blood is prevented, then turn his foot again into hot water; and let the blood not run into it until it has drained out.
That if the vein that the phlebotomist hits is in the first pulse, then continue with phlebotomy to the upper part somewhat, since the place is healthier and you do not want to harm it out of it when you are pulling from it, as we have said.
And likewise with the saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
But the location of the sciatic veins, as we have said, is at the heel from the side of the tree.
And the quality of phlebotomy is, to a pain in the leg, when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of phlebotomy is, so that the sick person takes a hot bath and it cools off; and he ties his thigh from the side of the tree up to the heel with a long slender string: for it does not appear otherwise because of it.
When then appears, then phlebotomize it according to whatever skill you have possible, or across from each other; and it is better, or as if you had wounded it with an incision, or cut it with a section. For this reason it is salutary; and itself is concealed to a great extent in many men.
For this reason it is salutary; and itself is concealed to a great extent in many men. For if you do not inject it and it does not appear at all to the sense: then take some blood from one of its veins and that which appears on the back of the foot, and towards the ear: and cut off from the nerves, and make it run out a quantity as much as you wish.
Then bind tightly, and place flesh over the place of phlebotomy, and squeeze the spot. For it heals quickly.
Of Ventosaation, and quality of use of it.
Of the ventosations, they are made from horns, and from air, and from heat.
And the ventosation is made in two ways. When with scarification and extraction of blood: and the other is a ventosation without scarification.
And this ventosation which is without scarification, is in two ways. Or indeed it is with fire. Or it is without fire.
And the ventosations which are administered with scarification and extraction of blood, are fourteen places of the body. Of which one is the Ventosation of the Lord, and it is at the end of the head: and Alkehel, and it is in the middle of the neck: and the ventosations of Alhagdahim, and they are two laminae of the neck from the two parts simultaneously: and the ventosation of the mind, and it is under the mandible in the lower mouth: and the ventosations of the two spatulas: and the ventosation of Alachosos at the end of the tail: and the ventosations of the two flames, and they are in the middle of the two arms: and the ventosations of the two crura: and the ventosation of the two cauillae.
And the ventosation also does not extract blood from your small veins scattered in the flesh, and because of this its power does not come from them, as is the case with the phlebotomy. It is not necessary that wound dressing be done with fire or without fire in any disease that happens from fullness until the whole body is drained.
If necessity requires wound dressing because of illness or out of custom, we shall administer it at any time in the beginning, in the end and in the middle of the month and at any other time.
That is because a person is suffering from headache and vomiting when blood multiplies within him until he needs to be drained by wound dressing, but he does not find it until he has passed stool.
And among them is the one who finds fullness and redness on his face, head, and neck. And among them is the one who finds itching on his face, forehead, darkness, and numbness in his eyes.
And among them is the one who scratches the place where he wound dressing was applied. And among them is the one whose laughter multiplies. And among them is the one who finds blood taste in his mouth, or he spits with his tongue and spits out the blood. And among them is the one whose dream multiplies. And among them is the one who sees blood and redness, killed people, plagues, and similar things in his sleep.
When we see something from among them, and especially if it is in the middle of the third month: We then order wound dressing to be done after having passed two or three hours since daybreak.
However, the wound dressing of the nose is: because it brings about headache in the head, and because it drips into the eyes. But it is necessary that that be done after draining the whole body.
And this Wound dressing is for the case of phlebothrombosis of the head.
And it is not allowed to use wound dressing on someone who has a cold complexion, or in a place that is catarrhal. For this Wound dressing causes a great harm.
Since they shouldn't use these when their heads are cold and have diseases that cause coldness.
But if a man is patient with it, forgetfulness comes to him.
And for this reason, it is fitting that you order the person who uses it to put his hand down a little when he is blowing out, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Blowing out, or Al-Kohl, is the place of phlebotomy of Fusca, and phlebotomy of Basilica, and for this reason it confers ash, constriction of anhelosis, and fissures of the instrument of anhelosis, and coughs, and filling.
And it is fitting that it be blown out by Al-Kohl a little, because if it is put down, it generates weakness in the heart and stomach.
Blowing out, however, is the cause of pains in the head and eyes, and hemiplegia, and perforations, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is the place of phlebotomy of Basilica.
And it is fitting that you order the person who blows out not to put his hand on the scarification: lest he strike an artery, and blood flow.
But if he blows out under his chin, it brings alcohol into the mouth, and corruption of the gingival, and similar ailments that are in the mouth; and it is the place of phlebotomy of Aliherich, which are in the two lips.
But if he blows out with a spatula, it brings to Al-Kohl, which is made by reflexion, and heat.
Blowing out from the interior parts of the two foci brings assistance to phlebotomy of the new three, Basilica, and Fusca, and Cephalica: for it itself attracts blood from all those small veins that are in the flesh; and these small veins attract those grosser veins from others, until the attraction comes to the three veins.
It is necessary that you do not let Ventosator go too far with scarification because the place is stripped of flesh and below it are nerves and arteries.
But if Ventosa goes too far on the back of the thigh, it causes hemorrhoids in the anus and ulcers at the bottom.
And it is necessary that you order Ventosator to make the wound large and of brass because the place needs strong suction and perhaps the thin Ventosas break: and let there be a large scarification.
But the Ventosas of the legs diminish visibly because they draw blood from all the body and cause old pains in the veins and ligaments and blisters: they bring on periods, and produce both the menstrue and anemias, and excitement; and stand at the place of phlebotomy of the two saphenous veins and the alhorcobeni.
However, they weaken the body greatly, and cause fainting in many people.
And the support of the alhorcobeni is near to the support of the two legs.
The quality of the position of the Ventosas is that you place the wound first in a hollow, and drain with moderate suction; and do not prolong the position of the Ventosas, but put them quickly, and shake them quickly so that the humors come to the opening equally: and do not cease to repeat this and continue, until you see the place already red and swollen, and the redness of blood appears; then therefore scarify, and repeat suction slowly. Then consider in the disposition of the bodies.
For he who is of tender flesh and rare porridge, should scarify himself once only, not more: lest the place should ulcerate.Et uelos quae sunt corporis uentosa, et qui in subluna sunt, scutiantur sedecem diem, non plus: sed primum ponas uentosam in pratis,
And let the Ventosas that are on the body, and which are in the belly, rub for sixteen days, not more: but first let him who has the wound make it large, a little more shall he make it: and let him temper suction in ease, and quickness, and shaking.
If there is a thickening in the blood, then it should be cut twice. In wine indeed the first opening of the avenue of the refinement of blood, and its hydration: and in the second indeed the close scrutiny of the thorough extraction of thick blood.
If indeed the blood is very foul, then let the incision be made three times: that the last consequence may be obtained.
And to the last, when we wish to extract blood little by little, or a little less, one incision is sufficient for us. That if we wish to extract blood many times, we make several incisions.
And if we measure that the blood is thick: then it should be cut deeply; and the equal term in the incision, is the depth of the skin.
What is that which should be administered from oils concerning the positioning of the wind, and what cauterizes the wind.
IN that which has a thick, tough, dark skin, and whose pores are closed, it is necessary to spread the places of the Wind with open, soothing, relaxing oils: if it is in the time of summer, as is the oil of the alker, or the oil of castor-oil, or the oil of almonds, or the oil of pumpkin-seed.
And if it is in the time of winter, then olive-oil, or rose-water-oil, or chamomile-oil, or pomegranate-salt: and similar ones.
If indeed the excess is thick, cold: then let there be bitter-oil, or oil of myrrh, or white-oliver-oil, or red-crown-oil: and similar ones.
If indeed the wind is of wide pores, tender flesh: then it should be prevented from oil, and it should be washed with rose-water, or cold water, or spring-water, or pumpkin-water, or porter's-water: and similar ones.
But he whose blood is of a watery nature, let him wash with vinegar, or with myrtle water, and sumac: and similar things.
But he whose fluid excesses are coarse, let him wash with old wine, or with water of samphire, or with a decoction of aniseed, or of camomile: and similar things to these.
And it is necessary that the washing-out should be done in a bath, or in a tub; and also that he should receive a medicine after leaving the bath for an hour, or for two hours.
And it is not necessary that anyone should sleep after washing-out.
What is needed so that the person may be treated with a bloodletting, or with phlebotomy, before the washing-out?
And after this, consider first of all: if the person is cholerical, and the sharpness and inflammation of his blood are increased by bloodletting or phlebotomy; then let him take something cooling, like pomegranate; also lettuce, vinegar, and mint, and mint tea, and fennel-seed.
And put on his food dishes of downy stuff, and meats that are wet, and cooked food with apples: and similar things.
And if the person's complexion is cold, let him drink in a cup syrup of honey, or of alfalfa, or of mint-seed made; and he should drink medium-strong wine, which is between old and new: and let him be directed to eat in moderation. And put on his food downy stuff, and birches: and doves, that is, many birds: and let him eat pigeon-meat.
And it is necessary that the drink after washing-out and phlebotomy should be stronger than the food; and let it be given in a cup to some men in a strong wine, or in a medicine of musk, that is, musket, or in alselin water; before the washing-out: and before phlebotomy, or after: so as to strengthen the main limbs, and to refine the blood. They should not take it from a hot beverage.
On the wound, without scarification. But those that are without scarification, and that are put on the skin, and the spleen, and the podagra, and over the bowels, and the places of the ribs, and the side, and the belly: for these members do not bear the scarification above them.
And it is not sought through them, unless it be an attack from the blood of a member to a member: for we put the ventosae over the breasts in a fever of the blood of the nose. And we make use of them, to remove from a member a cold wet pain that is in the member: for we put the ventosae over the bowels, and the umbilicus. For she tightens the member, and warms it, and takes away the pain for that reason, because she has resolved the uentosity.
And is also put on the ribs, when there happens to them an obstruction, or a stone. For his own virtue of its attraction may possibly open an obstruction, or it removes a stone from its place.
And likewise does when it is put on the skin, and the spleen for the purpose of cooling an inflammation in both: for it cools the inflammation.
And these ventosae are administered with a few cuts only. And they are sometimes administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered full of warm water in a fever of pleurisy: and that is, so that the ventosae may be filled, and large, with warm water alone, or with water in which have been boiled the herbs that are suitable.
Form of the winds administered with fire.
Let the width of its opening be that of two open fingers, according to which we form it: and let the quantity of it be in the depth half a palm: and let it be in the back of its place, which is around the middle of it, a little hole, according to the quantity that is put into it: let it be made of copper, or of brass, smooth-edged, equal, sharp-edged: that it may not wound the member at its position on it: and let there be in the middle of it a wire of copper, or of iron, where the candle with fire is placed.
And this well-known wound has now healed greatly, greater than that which we have told, and somewhat smaller than that one, according to the sickness and age of him who used it.
For the winds of young men do away with them, and some others, as much as the winds of old men, and of great bodies.
The quality of such a wound as this is, that you kindle the fire with the hay, or candle, and place it on the middle of the arm that lies across the middle of the wound, so that the fire does not burn the body of the wounded.
Then place it on the body, and the finger on the hole that I have said, until we hold the wound closed: while we are holding it closed, take away the finger, and the steam will come out through the hole and close the wound at once.
Then set fire to the hay according to its habit, and light it again if you like that one.
But in the wound that is being treated with pleurisy water, there is no crosswise arm and no hole; it is not administered, unless it is filled with water and placed on the body only.
And this is its form.
And this wound is the better because it can hold a lot of water.
Of the suspension of blood-sugar.
Blood-sugar is not administered in many cases, unless the member is unable to hold a wound, because of its smallness, like the lip, and gums, and such things. Or on a bare member, deprived of flesh, like the finger, and nose, and such things.
And the quality of their use is: that you should take them from blood-sugar which is in sweet water, clean from腐敗.
Then they are to be removed in the day and in the night out of sweet water, until they become thirsty, and there remains nothing in their stomachs. Then the body is to be drained first with phlebotomy, and then with venesection. Then wash the limb well with water until it turns red. Then bandage the wound.
When it has healed a little and the wound falls, and suction is possible at the site with venesection, then it is more beneficial to treat with bandages; and if not, then wash the place with vinegar. Then with much water, and rub, and squeeze.
If the course of blood is prolonged after the fall of blood-letting, and it is a resorption: then immerse a linen cloth in cold water, and place it on top, until the resorption comes away.
If the blood increases, then sprinkle powder on top of the wound, crushed oak-moisture, or similar things from astringent: until the blood comes away.
Or bandage the place with half-raw herb-juices: and let them alone, until the herbs stick to the place, because the blood has dried up.
And it is necessary if the blood-letting is necessary, when it is possible, to change them.
If, however, blood-letting is forbidden by suspension, then wash the place with recent blood. Or wrap it up now in places, until someone comes out with some of the blood. Then bandage them, for they themselves, when they feel some of the blood, stick immediately.
When you wish to make them fall, sprinkle on them something from crushed aloe, or salt, or ash: and they will fall immediately.
This chapter is also frequently necessary in the art of Medicine, and is the restoration of fractures, and the dislocation of accidents in bones.
You know, my son, because the stupid doctors and the laymen have always scorned this chapter of the old book, and have not read its letter.
And for this reason it has happened that this method from the sciences is hidden from our country. And I have never been satisfied with it at all, and I was not perfected from it except because of the length of reading the old books, and studying their intelligence, until I extracted the science of them from them.
Then, attached to experience and study, the length of my life passed away.
And I have now described for you from that all the science that contains my knowledge: and on what concerns experience, after I abbreviated it for you, and freed it from the occupation of length, and abbreviated it by the end of abbreviation, and showed it by the end of declination: and I formed in it many forms from the forms of instruments that are administered in it, because it is from the addition of declination, as I did in two preceding chapters.
Chapter II.
It is necessary that we say in the prolog of this chapter, the highest speech and chapters, to which the understanding is considered in the first place of the artisan in the station on their veracity: namely that you, and those who are ready, know, or learn this noble art, and others from you.
I say, therefore, that when it happens to someone that there is a fracture, or a dislocation, or a torsion, or a fall: then you should be ready in the first place to phlebotomate him, and to solve it, or both together: if not prevent something, like the strength of virtue: or is he who happened to something from these boys, or an old man going on his knees: or is the time of a sudden fever, or a sudden cold.
Then let him be satisfied with his food, cold odors, and meat of the ears and hair: and prohibit wine, and thick meats, and food that fills the veins with blood. Until he is completely well from the fever and no longer has a flow of material into the limbs: then let the sick person return to his usual routine at first with which his custom used to be.
But when the broken jaw begins to be healed, then it is necessary that the sick person eat food with a lot of nourishment, thick, dark, in which there is moisture: such as food made from wheat cooked with water, and rice, and heads, and feet, and bellies of animals, and fish recently caught: and strong wine, and things like them. For with this regime the clotting of the fracture is speeded, and better.
And know that bones which are broken, when they are in the hair of old age and decrepitude, can no longer continue and consolidate themselves according to their nature forever, by reason of the drying up of the limbs: but they consolidate themselves and continue in the end of slowness, like the bones of young children's small limbs.
However, nature joins together a broken bone from every side with some similar glue, in which there is roughness, by which it holds and tightens itself, until it becomes joined together, and tied together, until it comes to the end of strength and firmness, as it was at first, until it allows nothing to its operations: and for this reason it is necessary that you put food with a lot of nourishment, in which there are things rough, and moist, and thick, as we have said.
And know that the species of fractures are diverse, according to the diversity of limbs: for a fracture of the leg is different from a fracture of the head-bone: and a fracture of the breast-bone is different from a fracture of the spine: and so all the other limbs are different one from another: and I come to remind you of each species of fracture set out in its own place, distinguished from the others. They also differ in the types of bone fractures.
Since the fracture is curved, except for what happens to it, stars are not present in it. And when the fracture is along the length of the bone: and there are fractures that are dislocations, that is, stars, and additions that come from it, such as those found in a reed with the blade held against it to write. And not coming from it: and there is a fracture with the ulna and disruption at the head: and there is a small crack.
And all of its kinds are talents, or their own instruments for repairing it, according to how the memory of it is preserved, separated into its places.
And from this one knows the fracture of the bone, it is its curvature and eminence: and its appearance to the sense, and its sound when you compress it with your hand.
And when there is no movement of the site, then the curvature does not appear and its sound does not sound to you in contact with the bone as it is agitated, nor does it cause a great deal of pain: then it is not broken there, but it may be that there is a curvature or a small crack: so it is not necessary for you to move it at all by your hand, except that you put it on top of it from doctors whose memory comes, after the moment that fits into place: and then tie it tightly with a thin rope.
And you should know that when the site is curved and divided into two parts, apart from what happens to it, all of its parts move with respect to each other: then it is necessary for you to begin correcting it from your own time before the accident happens to it, making it level before it gets hot.
But if it happens to it that it is hot, then let go of it for a few days, until the heat has settled down. Then make the bone level in any way you can with ease and skill.
And you should know that repairing it, and making it level, is easier than the bones in which dislocations occur.
Then tighten it up, according to what you remember of it.
If the fractures are in the bones of the hand or foot, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts, if the hand is there, or the foot: or with your own hand, if the member is small: or with two threads, or a thread and a hand.
And your position should be such that you place the member on a place of equality, according to its natural figure, until, when the parts of the broken member are extended: then try, by all means, to make those additions as good as possible, and in accordance with any manner you can in their places: and carefully, according to your strength, so that no pain occurs on the weak part by your operation, or by a fault: and carefully, according to your strength, so that you apply one of two bones to its associate, according to better shapes.
And at that hour, you should try and touch it with your own hand. If then you see anything different there, straighten it out, and make that equal by the amount of your strength.
And carefully avoid rapid extension, and strong compression, as many stiff people do. For many times such an operation causes burning pain, or contracture in the member: as we have seen that from their operations many times.
Then afterwards, after the member has been made equal, and the operation has been relaxed, and the member tightened, and rest, and quietness: and warn against touching the member. And make the member calm, so that it does not move in the hour of its strength, and its sleep during its rotation, and its agitation during its digestion, and all its movements at its last strength. And carefully, so that the member's position is not a position from which pain follows. That is, because when it feels pain, or injury, from the position of the member: then you should turn it over to another position from which it does not feel pain.
And because of that, so that its position is equal and straight: so that there does not come about any curvature in the limb when it is restored.
And the quality of the stricture of the broken member is according to what the bow says.
You should know that broken limbs differ in their length and in their size and shape.
Which of them are smaller, like the arm and the finger and the phalanges and such with them, then it should be so that the wrapping is soft and thin. But which of them are thick, like the hip and the thigh, then it should be so that there is a thick wrapping for them.
For a wide ligament connects the large member and tightens it equally from all sides, so that it does not enter it with any stain.
Then begin after you have drained it to put the healing balm that is suitable for it on it in a thin layer over the break spot. Then begin to wrap the ligament over the break spot three or four times, depending on how much the member is stretched, and grasp it lightly with your hand.
Then go forward with it to the upper side from the break spot, and tighten less than when you tightened the broken place, how much you tightened the broken place. Then lengthen yourself with the wrapping slightly from the break spot, and soften the wrap slowly until you take away the full wrap from the broken spot.
Then take another and wrap it over again on the break spot with wraps. Then go forward with the wrapping to the lower side from the break. And let your action be in the wrapping and softening of it, according to what we have said in the first upper wrapping.
Then put between the wraps a soft cloth or something that is equal to the curvature of the break if there is any curvature: and if not, do not put anything in it.
Then cut off the other one from it. Then immediately cut off the equal stars of these incisions if there is no swelling or heat in the place.
But if there is inflammation or swelling in it: then put on top of it what sits there, and take away the inflammation; and let it go for a few days. Then tie the stars over that one.
And let the stars be made from the middle of the canes, cut, formed wisely: or from wood where cribra are made, which are made from pine, or from branches, that is, palms, or let there be a width in all the stars, according to this form, and this same figure.
But it is necessary that the star which is placed over that one, is a little heavier and wider than the others: and the length of the stars should be according to what is allowed by the member in size and proportion.
Then tie the stars with an additional one above it, according to this form and this same shape. Then tie from above with the branches slightly bent, according to what we said about the tightness: and let it be tight over the place of the fracture more than: and whatever is further away from the fracture, let it be tighter.
And let there be middle rows in thickness and softness, and they are made of soft woolen thread.
Because if the rows are thick, as if they were made from an operation of the foolish surgeons who put their own rows out of place with twisted linen strings, it is a great mistake: for the tightness falls out of its place with them.
And the very fine rows do not agree: because you will not achieve what you want by means of the tightness and these rows.
And it is not necessary that there be a distance between one star and another less than a finger's length.
What if an infirm person is left to heal under the stars after the tightness in healthy places: then put something soft under them, or red wool, until nothing hurts from it.
When there is a fracture with the ulna, and it has happened that the skin has been torn, I will come to this in the second chapter for its singularity.
And you shall know that not every broken member needs to be fixed with strings from the first day. That is, because when the member is large, it should not be placed on top of strings, unless after five days or seven or more, according to your security from the risk of suppuration by heat.
And this is the method of the ancient bandages which were placed on the fracture and dislocation.
The common abbreviated method of the bandage, for restoring the fracture, suitable for many coverings, especially for women and children; because it does not cause heat or cold.
And it is so that you take it from the flour that is kneaded, and it is a dough hanging on the walls of the mill when it moves; and you shall shape it as it is, except that you add chalk to it: and you shall not make its covering thick or thin. Then use it.
The other method of the bandage, for restoring fracture, dislocation and torsion. Take myrrh, spikenard, acacia, and resin; and honey, of all of which there are XX myrrh, XV spikenard, and XX acacia; mix them with water of alethah; or with chalk, if the covering is heated. Then use this bandage. For it is a good composition, which restores bones that are broken quickly, and benefits many people.
The other method of the bandage, which also is useful for fractures and torsion. Take honey, myrrh, alethah and chalk; of which there is XX honey, XV myrrh, VI acacia, and XX bulrushes of Armenia; all mixed together with much pounding, and shaped with the fingers; and apply to the body, either with water or with chalk.
The mode of making plasters to close wounds and separate bones from their places; and it soothes the pain, accident, separation of bone, and fracture. Take wet wool and immerse it in vinegar and oil cooked: and place it on the spot.
And this plaster has no power of restoration, but it is good for soothing boils and purifications; and it takes away its own pain.
The mode of the plaster, which restores the broken bone. Take leaves of fig and leaves of wild papaw: and dry them thoroughly, and make a plaster with both.
The mode of a plaster made short, applied to the restoration of the fracture of a bone; and when you wish to effect the removal of a boil. Take one part of root of althaea and one part of camomile and flowers of chamomile and one part of barley grass; dry them thoroughly, and make them into a paste with wine, if it is not a member being warmed.
But if it is being warmed, then prepare that with water and coriander seed, or with water only, and use it.
The mode of a stronger plaster for effecting the removal, which is more than this one, when a hard boil occurs during the restoration of a member. Take one part of root of althaea and one part of flax seed and bilberry and mealy-mouthed oroborus and samsac and flowers of chamomile and camomile leaves, all of which dry them thoroughly, and make them into a paste with water of willow, or with sweet water, or with wine. This entire thing depends on the temperature of the member, and the absence of heat.
Hippocrates did not say in his book that a plaster be placed on a broken member, if it has been made with ash and oil; no more than this: he related, that there should be an 중간 between grossness and lameness.
But Galen wishes that plasters be placed on a broken member to effect its restoration, in which there is an drying up of heat, such as myrrh and aloe and olive oil and the like, of which we have spoken.
The method of poultices which is useful for wounds and pain. Take mealy bread and chickpeas and hairs of human teeth or feathers of bird and sea-shells and salt in equal parts: these are to be pounded and sieved and made into a poultice.
But as for the quantity, depending on whether it is necessary to keep the bandage in place, and then to remove it, consider this, if not pain, itching or movement of a broken jaw from its place does not occur: then do not remove it over many days. If however there happens to be a severe itching or disturbing pain or swelling: then attend to it immediately, and remove the poultice at once, and take off the linen cloth: and take a linen rag or sea-sponge wet with water: and rinse out the wound with it in warm water, until the itching is soothed and the pain subsides.
If however there happens to be a severe itching or disturbing pain or swelling: then attend to it immediately, and remove the poultice at once, and take off the linen cloth: and take a linen rag or sea-sponge wet with water: and rinse out the wound with it in warm water, until the itching is soothed and the pain subsides. Then let the member rest for an hour. Then put on over it a linen cloth dipped in vinegar and oil, or olive-oil: and bandage it up for the night, so that he is no longer exposed to heat, and the swelling of the member subsides and the pain is relieved.
Then repeat the application of the poultice several times a day, and do not tighten the bandage too much at first, and use a light one, until it has healed.
If you see that the swelling, redness, pain and inflammation, and all other symptoms are now completely gone, and you find the poultice comfortable and the bandage not too tight, then repeat the application as before.
If none of the things which I have mentioned happens to the member, do not remove the poultice, unless after three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when after twenty days all of that has been resolved according to your observations, as we have said, until such time as the fracture appears to have healed and the clot of flesh over it: also add at that time more bandage than before: and add also to the diet as much milk as he can bear.
If, however, you see the site of fracture drying up and healing more rapidly than is necessary: then know that nutrition must be withheld from it. So wrap the wound with warm water around it for all six days and then apply a loose bandage.
Therefore, by this operation, nutrition runs to the limb and heals quickly.
But that which the blind restorers do from a broken limb, when they do not restore at first, second because it should be restored, and restore according to the tortuosity, is an error from their operation, and a great fear: and if it were right, the ancients would have written in their books, and would have operated with that.
And I did not see any trace of this at all, and it is better that this should not be done.
Regarding the making of an accident in the head.
There are various kinds of fractures, and many forms of them: and their causes are distinct.
For from a fracture is caused by a blow which passes on to the bone so far that it comes to the sinew, which is beneath the bone, as it does in the wood by an ax: and because of this, this kind of fracture is called the axial fracture.
Or a certain blade of a weapon injures some bone, and wounds the face, and does not pierce by the wound to the very end: and this kind of fracture is called a Caloan fracture, that is, an absolute Lobation.
And there is a wound of two fractures, or great, or small.
And from a fracture there is a crushing, or rubbing: and its cause is a blow with a stone, or a fall on a stone, or similar things.
And this fracture is also piercing, which is coming near to a flap, which is beneath the bone: or is in the face of the bone: and this kind of fracture among these two fractures is small, or great.
It is from a fracture that is hidden in bone and subtlety of hair: and it is a small crack, and for this reason this type of fracture is called Capillaris.
And from them is a fracture that is made by accident, or by the impact of a stone, and similar to it, which makes a layer of bone come inwards, and it is broken like this: such as happens with the bones of the skull when an impact occurs and part of them comes inwards.
And many times that happens to the skulls of wet bones, such as are the heads of boys.
And all these types of fracture separate and I will not forget them at all in their own place.
And we know all these types of fractures by examination on them, and inquiry about them with the help of tests, and the removal of the corrupted flesh that is above them.
The species called Capillaris is recognized by the fact that it is found on bone and wiped off and placed above it with a caustic: for the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of a fracture, consider first the patient's condition: for if you see from the symptoms what it means to be clear of danger, such as with cholera, or its extension, or loss of mind, or loss of speech, or fainting, or acute fever, or watering of the eyes, and their redness, and other similar things from accidents in many ways, there is certainly no hope of recovery: but if you see that the patient does not seem to be frightened by these symptoms, and hopes for recovery, then start his treatment.
That is to say, if a person comes to you wounded for the first time: and this happens on the 24th day of the month, then it is necessary that you should study the removal of the bone before the 24th day in all ways.
And if it is in the days of summer, then you should remove the bone before the 7th day, so that what is underneath the bone does not corrode because of a piece of skin, and those accidents which we have described.
If the fracture of the bone has reached the brain membrane, and is with little effort and attraction, then you should break the broken side, and grind it according to what I have told you.
And then you should shave the injured head: and examine the bone according to whatever way is possible for you: and in the form of the wound, and what is higher on the weak one.
That if it happens to you that there is a flow of blood or pus at the examination of the bone, then oppose it with what is necessary. And that you fill the place with wet cloths in wine, and oiled rags: and make the joint rest until the pus is dried up, and are safe from the flow of blood. Then begin in the cure of the bone, and removal of it.
And that is done in two ways.
One way is that you break the bone with a sharp chisel: and this is its form.
Then take another Incisium wider by an inch or more: and this is its form.
Then also take another Incisium wider than the second.
And the second way is that you have with you a number of Incisoria different in width: some of them are wider on some sides, and some shorter: and let them be at the ends of their sharpness, and be of iron or brass: and use convenience in hitting on the Incisorium, so that it does not hit on the head, and hurts itself.
But if the bone is strong and hard: then you should bore around it before you administer the Incisoria with those called Terebra not penetrating: and are not so called unless they do not pass beyond the end of the bony part towards that one: because Terebra is a round extremity on that side, under the head, like a margin, and a small circle prevents from sinking in, and passing through the thickness of the bone.
It is necessary for you to take from these Terribles a great number, each one corresponding to the quantity of thickness of bone, until the present time is completely crânum Terrible: whose extremities are acute in length and brevity, according to the quantity of thickness of his cranium.
And this is the form of the three Terribles, or trepans.
The quality of the piercing in the circumference of the fractured bone is: so that you place the Terrible on the bone and rotate it with your fingers, until you know that the bone has been pierced. Then change the Terrible to another place, and place what is between all the cavities of the thickness of the radius, or around it.
Then cut with the Incisors what is between all the cavities from the bone: and make it thinner than you can on it at the end of lightness, as we have said, until you remove the bone, or with your hand, or with any other instrument that you have prepared for it: such as scalpel, and fine forkes.
And it is necessary, so that you do not cause any accident, for the Terrible or the Incisor to touch anything of the skin.
When you have thus circled the bone by piercing it, and separated it from the skin, if it is continuous with it, and you extract it, you should saw off, and make equal the end of it which remains in the bone with another similar Incisory instrument. However, it is necessary that it is thin and subtle rather than with other Incisors.
That if there remains anything of the bones small, and fragile: then take it with ease, along with what is with you from the instruments. Then care for the wound after that with liniments, and unguents which we have said.
And another mode of the operation is simple, absolutely far from fear: which Galen said, and praised it greatly: and this is his speech. It is necessary that you, first of all, begin to remove the bone from the place where the fracture is more severe and obvious: until such time as you have removed that part, and placed under it this lens-shaped incisor, whose shape this is.
And the lens-shaped part, nothing is injured by it: and the acute part of it on its sides running in length, as you see: so that the lens-shaped part may be placed at the syphac, with the acute side incident to the bone.
Then strike over the incisor from one side with a small mallet, until you strike all the bone with ease, as it revolves: and you are safe from the paniculum, which does not happen to it, which you fear most certainly.
And if the healer is not more foolish than men, and more ignorant of it, and is not asleep, then if anything was left attached to the bone from the paniculum in some places, he would strike himself with the extreme end of the lens-shaped incisor, and release himself from it with ease. For he is released from it without harm, and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate as far as the paniculum, and that which is severed from the bone is its shape, and there remain in it sharp and subtle roughness: then you should scrape off that roughness, and cut off those subtleties with fine razors which you have prepared for various quantities, so that it may be possible for you to administer them at all convenient times, and straightened out of them, according to the fact that the operation leads you to, and the bone fractured, and its shape. And it is necessary that you administer in your proportion, first of all, a nail which is wider than those razors. Then use after it the thinner one.
And it is necessary that you administer in your proportion, first of all, a nail which is wider than those razors. Then use after it the thinner one. And do not cease to do that according to continuity, until you have reached the point of administering the thinnest, and the finer of them all.
In every remaining fissure of the lung, and in a subtle fracture, you should administer care according to what leads to its rectification.
And this is a thing that is not hidden over all, to which in this art there is any kind of study, and stood on what we have written, and showed in large fractures.
But if a patch is caught, when you remove the bone: then you should take a piece of linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and immerse it in rose oil, and put it over the opening of the wound. Then take another piece of cloth, doubled or tripled, immerse it in wine and rose oil, and put it over the first cloth: and make it so that you can do it more easily over it, so that it does not hurt the wound.
Then administer over it a broad ligament: and do not tighten it unless by the quantity that holds the bone alone: and leave it with this cure for one day or two days, until you are safe from scorching heat. Then dissolve it, and administer after it medicines with which there is no need of dryness: such as the roots of the lily, and the flour of herbs, and the powder of thistle, and aristolochia, and similar ones: and it is so that you should make a powder of these medicines, which is powdered over the bone like those that are dry.
And administer universally in it all medicine of the property by which it cleanses and does not bite. And take care, according to your skill, that the bone is in your cure clear: and it is not in it an oil of ointment, nor any kind of dirtiness.
And take care, according to your skill, that the bone is in your cure clear: and it is not in it an oil of ointment, nor any kind of dirtiness. And do not leave a scar on it at all: for when the scar is placed on the linen cloth of the brain, it corrupts and spoils itself, and causes great mischief after it: and it has already happened to the scalp of the head, when it is cleaned from it by neglect of its care, blackening on its surface.
Therefore, consider then, if these accidents happen to the sick, that they are certainly lethal.
And if the black color does not occur, except because of the medicine that is put on it, and this medicine has the virtue of making it black: then you must take one part of honey, three parts of rose oil, and with them a piece of linen cloth. Then put the piece on the syringe: then care for the piece with the curing species that are appropriate, until it heals.
Of restoring the nose when it is broken.
You know that the two upper parts of the nose do not break at the same time, or one of them: for they are two bones; because the lower part is cartilaginous, it does not break, and does not happen to it except by friction, and twists, and turns.
If one of the two parts of his nose breaks, then you must insert your little finger into the nostril hole and fix it with your index finger and thumb, until the nose returns to its natural shape: and do this with ease. And be careful so that you don't cause him any pain during your operation on him.
That if the break is in the upper part of the nose and does not reach that little finger: then it is necessary to even out the edge on which the little finger rests.
If, however, the break is in two parts, then make it similar: and hurry with its restoration on the first day of the break, if it is possible. And if not, then after seven or ten days from the time of the accident, when you are free from fever.
Then insert into the nose's edge a piece of linen cloth if the break is in one part: or insert two pieces if the break is in two parts: and let it be of such a length that it fills the nostril hole.
And some of the restorers of old times said, let licinia be filled with butter, and be exchanged every day. That is not true, however, I think that it should be filled with alumen mixed with powder for grinding. Then let go of the licinia until the os firm, and the cartilage dries.
And when it is inserted into the nose instead of licinia a goose feather after it has been wrapped with a soft cloth: and so it is, that it holds the fracture of the nose more firmly, and does not prevent the sick from breathing.
And this is not necessary. If you want, make it so: and if you want, make licinia.
That if it should happen to the nose while you are operating an apoplexy of warm wax, a nasum plastered with cerite, or with a little oil infused with rosemary, or with a little dyaquillon.
But if an apoplexy of warm wax does not occur, then let the plaster itself be made with siamese flour, and the powder of dried thistle mixed with alumen. Then place a piece of lint on top, and do not bind the nose at all.
But if the bones of the nose are broken or crushed, then you should split them and remove the pieces with the appropriate instruments. Then carry out the incision, and care for the nose when it becomes inflamed, and consolidated with the appropriate plasters or ointment.
That if a nail should get caught between the nose, then you should take care of the nose with licinia: and administer a lead tube, until it heals.
Of the restoration of the lower jaw when broken.
When the lower jaw is broken, and the fracture is not with the nail: then consider if it is a single fracture, and not broken into two parts, and care for the interior: then the knowledge of it is easy.
If there is a fracture on the right side of his body, then you should insert the left index finger into the wound: if there is a fracture in the left mandible, then you should insert the right index finger; and push it with ease from the inside towards the outside with your other hand, moving it equal to the fracture.
If the mandible has already separated into two pieces, then you should handle the extraction of the two parts according to their straightness: until it is possible to restore equality to it.
If an injury or fracture has already occurred to the teeth, and they have been moved from their place, then you should tighten them together with the hope that they will remain with gold, silver, or silk. Then put on top of the fractured mandible a poultice. Then place over it a double cloth, and place over the cloth a large wooden splint that has been made equal in length to the mandible; or a piece of skin cut to size, equaling the length of the mandible.
Then tie it from above, according to how you have prepared the ligature for yourself, and let the application remain as it is until it has healed; and order the patient to use calmness and silence; and provide him with soft food to eat.
If, however, you think that something has changed in its appearance in some way: then approach and undo it on the third day. Then straighten out what has been moved from it, and cover the mandible with flour that has been sifted, mixed with egg white or wheat flour, after you have removed the poultice; and place a layer of soft wool over the covering.
While the attached poultice remains on the mandible and its disposition of bones does not change, then release it, do not undo it, until it has healed: or tighten the fracture. This fracture is often tightened seven times.
If, however, a hot swelling occurs in the meantime, then administer to it what we have said many times regarding sedating it, until it disappears.
And if there is a fracture with the radius, consider. I have already separated the fragment of bone, or from the satlage; then carefully in this place, so that you remove those satages with it when you need to take away them from the instruments.
If, however, the opening of the wound is tight, then increase it with the phlebotome according to the quantity of your need.
Then when you remove those satages, and there remains none of them, then close the opening of the wound if it is wide; and if not, put on top of it plaster that suits it, and let it heal until it is healed.
The restoration of the Fork, when it breaks.
Many things break from the front part of the shoulder, and the fracture of the fork is made in one of three ways.
Or it breaks and separates into two, except that they happen to be in it satages: and it is easier to restore its.
Or thus, so that they happen on the bone of satage: and it is more difficult to restore.
Or so, so that there is a fracture with the radius.
And the operation in it when there is a fracture without radius, is, as you make present these two ministers, that one of them holds the help that follows the broken fork, and the other extends the neck towards the side.
Then you should equalize your fingers' fractures, until it is shaped according to what needs to be done: and there should not be any eminence in it, or closed.
If you can tolerate an extension further, then it is necessary that you put under a cotton ball or woolen sphere: and let the magnitude of it be according to your need: and let it extend, and close the fork, and grasp the sphere with your hand, until you equalize the fracture, according to what needs to be done.
If you can't get to the end of the fork towards the outside: for this reason, because it reaches the depth: then it is necessary that you lie down on your back on a tray: and put under his shoulder a medium-sized pillow in its magnitude, and press the minister of his shoulder to the lower side, until it lifts up the bone of the fork that is at the depth towards the top: and then you should straighten out the fracture, and equalize it with your fingers.
If, however, you feel a pulse in the furcula, and it is pulsatile: then you should, with ease, find upon it, and extract the pulse.
If, however, it is retained in the bone, then you should use one of the incisorii which you prepared for that purpose after you had placed under the furcula the siffach-holder: and the holder is made either of wood or of iron. And this is its shape.
It is attached to the ear which has not been incised.
And its length should be according to that at which you are accustomed, by reason of the size of the bone and its proportion. The length, however, should also be according to what is possible for you in the operation.
And let it have two ends, as you see: and one end let it be wide, and the other end let it be narrow.
If, however, the wound which you made while extracting the pulse from the bone is wide, and if it is secure from the dry heat: then you should join the two lips of the wound with a suture.
And if the wound is small, or if you have no difficulty in keeping the dry heat away: then you should fill the wound with rags, and with powder according to the size of the wound which has been cut.
If, however, the dry heat should occur: then you should pour on the cloth in rosewater, and vinegar, and wine, and put it on the top.
The stricture of the bone, however, when it is free from wound and from section, is, that you should place on the bone a paste made of crushed flour with aloes. And put on a wooden plank above it. Then you should place a ball under the tip of the bone, if you can bear that: and then you should raise the foot with the help of a block. Then you should take up the blood, that is, the roller which the Saracens hold, which is long and wide: and its length should be that of a palm, or about it. Then place a doubled pad over the stump and plaster. Then take a small tray, whose length is three fingers wide and whose width is also three fingers wide. Then wrap it in cloth. Then wrap the cloth and tray together at the edge of the wound where the healing begins, over the broken area and place. Then place the healing over the fracture like a bandage, and wrap it around his neck, and under the chin, healthy and sick, and bring it back to all parts, and as you see that the pressure holds the fracture together: and this is what does not cover you up, and all, so that it does not rub against the broken bone. And for this, you should see the sick person every day. Whenever you see that the ligaments have loosened, then straighten out the bandage, and tighten up the ligaments.
Then place a soft mattress on his back, and under the chin of the person lying down on it, so that when he moves, he feels relief from the side of his neck; and place a thin pillow behind him in bed at night, so that he feels support for his neck from behind. Then the fracture will heal with arm movement.
Or bind his arm to the neck: and do not break the ligaments, unless there is an accident from itching or hanging by the neck for twelve days.
Then patch up the bandage again if you see that he is going back to the wound. And add pressure, and let him go, until it has healed and clotted.
And the fracture will heal and strengthen over a period of twenty days; and sometimes it takes longer in some people to heal this.
## Of restoring a broken Spatul
It is rare for a spatula to break, and not if it breaks in the middle of its width: and it will not break from the edge of it.
When therefore the fracture is broken out of it, and broken in the middle of it, and is not known but by feeling: then according to what is the form of the fracture prepare its preparation. And reduce her to the natural form in every way possible with your skill, which is possible for you.
Then put on the place of the wound with a powdery substance with chalk and wood spice, and put on top of it a cloth towel. Then put on over the body a thin wooden plate from a thin board according to the amount of the spoon of all, or larger it a little.
If however under the plate is broken into some places of the spoon, then make it equal with soft spice until the plate descends according to equality.
Then rub over it with long-lasting, tightening as it is applied, and the strength of the plate, until it does not move from its place.
And consider the bandage every day. Whenever you loosen the bandage, tighten it again, and make the plate equal if it moves away from its place: and let the sick lie on his healthy side.
And the spoon is restored after twenty days, or after thirty-five days.
When therefore this number has been completed, then you shall loosen the bandage: and you will be safe. For that is from the bones, of which communion there is no fear, nor is their solution.
If however it proceeds from a bone-fragment, and pierces under the skin: then cut over it, and take it away. And do what I said in the fracture of the fork from sitting with the hot poultice, if anything comes from it.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the chest.
The chest sometimes breaks in the middle of itself, and that rarely happens. Its extremities however most frequently break, and are destroyed by the accidents of it.
When his middle is broken and it inclines towards the lower parts, and he feels a great pain, and difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and perhaps he vomits blood, and there appears to be fracture of the bone, and it does not remain hidden from sensation, then his recovery is that he should lie down on his back: and place between his palms.
Then press his shoulders, and join the ribs from both sides with the hands: and gently adjust his alignment, in whatever way is possible for him to be so adjusted, until his ribcage regains its shape, according to what is necessary.
Then place over him an embrocation and a cushion, and place under him a board made of thin boards from willow or linden, or similar, in lightness, after you have spread it out with cloth. Then gently adjust the binding over the broken bone so that it does not move: and sometimes with the binding turn him around according to the roundness towards his back, and tighten him by tightening him.
Then consider the binding every hour, and whenever it softens, tighten it: and if need be to bring about its healing when there is itching, or a sore spot, or pain, or swelling: then apply, and unravel it, and remove the embrocation, and adjust whatever has happened with the course of treatment.
Then remove the embrocation if you see towards it: and attach the binding, until he is healed.
The restoration of ribs when they are broken.
You should know that the fracture of ribs does not occur, except in the places near the back, and from the outer ends towards the front. And it does not happen to them any grinding, except therefore, because they are cartilage-like. And the knowledge of this does not remain hidden from sensation during inquiry with the fingers.
And his restoration is so that a broken rib with the fingers in any way that is possible for him to be so adjusted, until its shape is even, according to what is necessary. Then bind the plaster, and tightly tie the broken bone with a cable, if it is not enough.
If the fracture is of the ribs and goes into the interior: then it happens to the sick person a great pain, and also a piercing, such as that which happened to him who has pleurisy: for the rib stings the wound, and also it happens to him difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and much spitting of blood: and this is difficult to cure.
And the ancient ones have already devised it with many contrivances: and from them are those who say, that you put on food which generates inflammation and ventosity, so that it inflames the abdomen, and is extended, and drives the fracture towards the outside.
But we shun, so that there is no need to make a quick poultice hot, if it does not happen. If it has already happened, then add this to it.
And some of them said: Let it be placed on a damp place, and then suck it with determination, and it is similar to reasoning. However, they are afraid that the moisture attracts fluctuations to the place, because of the weakness of disposition.
And some of them said: It is necessary that the place be covered with wool which has already been immersed in hot oil: and let there be placed fluffy things between the ribs, until it is filled: so that the bandage is equal when it is wrapped up according to the roundness.
Then the sick person will be cured with a diet and medicine which cures pleurisy.
That if the rib breaks the sick person's wound, which he does not bear, and stings the wound with the cable, and we fear for the sick: then let us break it on the place, and let us find the broken rib. Then let us put on it an instrument which preserves the scent, of which the memory precedes: and let us cut the bone easily, and let us cut the bone itself.
Then let us gather together two lips of the wound if it is large with stitches; and let us cure it with plasters until it is healed.
If, however, between them there is a hot swelling, then let it be covered, and pour powder in rose oil and place it over the place; and let the sick person be treated with it as long as is necessary for the poultice.
Then also he should lie on his side, on a mattress, until he gets well.
For the restoration of a broken spine of the back and neck.
Of the bones of the neck when a fracture occurs, and this rarely happens to them by abrasion: also of the spine of the back. When, therefore, it has happened to anyone and you want to know whether it is healed or not, then trust it. For if you see his hands already softened, and stupefied, and dead: and he cannot move them, nor extend them, nor tighten them with your fingers, and when you prick them with a needle, he feels no pain, and does not feel the pain in them: then know that he is not healed, and is deathly in many respects.
If he feels movement in them and feels the tension with your fingers and the prick: then know that the spine of the neck is healed, and that the sick person will recover with treatment.
If there is a similar thing in his spine of the back, and you want to know whether it is healed or not, then look at his feet: if you see that they are already softened, and what has happened in his hands also happens in them: then when he lies on his back, he walks with a limp and without volition; and when he rises on his stomach, he walks without volition: and when he rises again on his back, and wants to drink, but cannot: then know that it is deadly. Non ergo labores in curatione eius.
If indeed nothing happens to him from that, the matter is lighter.
And the cure of him that happens from that is, as you seek to calm an inflammation of hot blisters: so, as you put on oil of rose alone: or when you go out, as you wash yourself.
Place on that for some times in the day until it is calmed down: then place on a place of plasters that comfort and dry up and bind well to it with bandage: and order the sick person to use rest and tranquillity. And let him not sleep on the side where he feels pain until it heals.
If indeed there happens a separation of the bone with a blister, or something that has already been separated from it: then let it be separate on the skin, and remove it. Then bind together two lips of the wound if it is large, with a stitch. Then take care of the person with some ointment, from balm, until he heals.
If indeed the end of a bone is broken and the tail is cut off: then let it be that the thumb of the left hand enters into the wound, and the other hand fixes the broken bone as well as possible, according to the second principle of correction.
Then place on it, and remove it: and take care of the wound with the cure that preceded, until it heals.
§ On the restoration of the anchae.
On the treatment of the head.
Rarely do the bones of the skull fracture. If they are broken, then their break is not, unless it is a crack at the ends of them: and they split along their length, and turn inwardly: and there happens a sore pain in the place where it is broken, and a bruise: and the foot that is broken turns black.
And the restoration of that is, as you stretch your hand over it, until you stand on the break, as is the figure of it.
If the fracture is in its extremities only, then make that fracture equal, according to how it is prepared for you from equality, until such time as it takes on a natural shape of its own.
But if the fracture is in length, or already leans towards the inside: then let the sick one lie on his belly, until such time as that fracture is prepared for you by restoration. When you have made that equal, then place a plaster on it: and then place on it a frame of wood, or of skin: and tightly bind with strapping, so as not to fear the shifting of the fracture, nor the removal of the frame.
And equal concavity of those with it, so that it fills it, until such time as it takes it by equality: and direct the sick one, so that he sleeps on his back, or on his healthy side.
But if there happens to be a swelling of heat on him: then cease from extending it, and from its restoration, until such time as the swelling of heat has settled down: and place over him that sits, according to what preceded, and then return to its restoration: and tightly bind him as is right.
But if it has happened in the bone, or is broken, remove it.
The Helper for Restoration of a Fracture
The Helper is that which is between the hip bone and the head of the spatula.
But if it is broken, then its restoration is according to two ways.
Of which one is: that you should take a flat piece of wood of middle thickness, according to this form, which follows.
And bind with two straps on both ends.
Then let it hang from a raised place: and the sick one should sit on a seat. Then let him throw his broken arm over the wood, until it reaches to the tip of his elbow, at which point is annexed the width of the wood.
Then suspend something heavy from above it so that the doctor can reach below. Then the doctor should break the bones of his own hands at the same time, until he heals, according to what is necessary.
And another method is that the sick person should lie on his back on a pillow: and his hand be suspended from his neck with a strap. Then order two servants, so that one of them holds what is above the fracture with his hands: and the other one holds his lower parts, and each one extends to his side.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then tie something under the fracture with a strap, and above it with another strap: and each of the two servants should extend to his side.
If therefore the fracture is near the end of the arm, then it is necessary that one strap be placed under the joint, and another under the fracture in relation to the shoulder.
And likewise if the fracture is near the hip: then it is necessary that a strap be placed on that spot, and on the hip itself.
Then make the fracture heal easily without effort, until it is healed in the way that is necessary, and applied with a good application: then tie it up, if there is no swelling of the hot kind.
But if a swelling of the hot kind does occur, then do not tie it up until the seventh day. And place on the body a woolen cloth soaked in vinegar and olive oil, until it stops when the swelling quiets down: then tie it up: and the method of tying it up is that you place a patch over the fracture.
Then place an innovation made from new cloth on top of the patch. Then the doctor should put his arm on a support, and place his open hand on his shoulder.
And place a cloth, and tie it over the support of the arm, so that the arm stays in place with the help of the supports: unless you are forbidden to touch him, or if he moves around you or anything else made from broken bone.
If time permits and a bone breaks above you, then use stars: and it is, as you place upon the break itself a star which is wider and stronger than the others. And you should place between all the stars the length of a finger: and its length should be according to the break with the addition of three fingers from every part.
Then tighten over the stars with the tension that I said at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is, so that your tension over the place of the break is tighter. And the more the break lengthens, the looser should be the tension.
If then you see the stars' distance and tension, like we said, at the moment when you restore the limb immediately, then do it: and if you have time for a poultice warm, then dismiss tension and stars until the seventh day, as we said.
Then consider the ligament for three days, so that there does not occur in the place itchiness, or swelling, or to prevent food from reaching the limb, due to the tension's excess. So straighten out all of this, according to what we said.
But if you have confidence, that nothing will occur from it: then do not loosen the ligaments, unless after three days, or more.
And let him sleep on his back, and his hands on his stomach: and let you place under the pillow a full blanket evenly.
And consider at every hour of night or day, so that the broken limb does not loosen, or become weak the ligaments. So straighten out all of this with your strength.
And place food for the nurse according to the order that we set forth, so that it is a light meal in the beginning, until he begins to tighten his jaw: and then it should grow heavier.
For the custom of support and splint is, so that it is tightened for forty days: so then it should be loosened, and a bath is given to it, and treated with a ointment that corrects it.
If the fracture is foul and bruised, then do not disassemble it from its ligaments and sprains for fifty days, and up to two months.
On the Restoration of a Fracture of the Arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two femurs.
Of which one is small: and that is what follows the thumb. And the other is large, and that which is placed below on the lower part.
Perhaps therefore does the larger bone alone break, or the smaller one: and perhaps both break at the same time.
When therefore the small bone breaks above, then is its restoration easy, and its recovery easier.
And when the smaller bone breaks below, it is a bad fracture, and its recovery difficult.
And worse is it when both bones break at the same time.
If therefore is the bone that breaks slightly above, then it behooves the physician to take care in its restoration, that he may put an extension on the small one with ease, until it is equal.
But if the larger bone is the one that breaks: then should he put a stronger extension on with zeal.
And it behooves him to put the shape of the hand in its restoration, and an extended extension above the wrist. And let the thumb of the hand be higher on all the fingers: and let the flexor muscle be present on all the fingers, or else missing: and let it sit quadrangular before itself, or in front of it, or to its left, or to its right, so that it does not incur pain while sitting.
Then he should extend the arm from its lower part, or from his own hand, or with a ligament. And another minister should extend from above.
Then the physician should even out the bone, until he can reduce it to the best shape that he can obtain.
If there are any knots in the fracture of the bone, then you should strive to reduce each projeniture in its own place by your own virtue.
If indeed it appears that there is a separate satuma in it, and you pierce the skin, and there is no hope of restoring it: then remove it according to the manner which we have said in those preceding words.
But if the fracture is with the ulna, I have already done to that chapter a singular thing, so take the cure of it there.
That if it should happen in the beginning of your restoration to have a hot swelling, then make a panel of thin cloth with a yellow color from oiled oil, and white, and put between its thickness and thinness: and tighten the panel on him with a strict but gentle string, until when he settles down the swelling: then remove the panel, and place a prepared patch made from ground dust with albumen. Then put on patches, and let the patch that is put on the fracture be a little wider, and stronger.
And know, that the number of patches for the arm is six in several dispositions: whether it is a fracture in one finger, or in two fingers together.
Then put on your bandage in a stronger and more durable place, and slightly more with the bandage of its fracture: or put on a softer bandage according to what preceded its memory in the beginning of the chapter.
And let there be cloth wrapped around the fracture, soft, damp cloth: and not be hard, rough. And let there be a thread with which it is tightened from linen itself, between thinness and thickness, as we have said.
And consider the limb and ligaments after a few days. That if anything should happen for which correction is necessary, such as itching that occurs in the limb: then let it be, to immerse the limb with hot water, until that itch subsides, and remove the bandage not constricted, until it is calm, and then repeat the bandage.
That if the bandage has already become softened, and the bone is already removed, and similar things: then restore it completely with your skill, and consider again.
If nourishment is forbidden from reaching the limb because of the excess of the scar tissue, then it should be left for a little while and then tightened afterwards.
If, however, nothing of what we have said happens to the sick person, then it is not necessary that he should be healed unless after twenty days or so.
Then the patient's hand should be suspended from his neck. And his neck should be kept level and guarded from sudden movements by a strong bandage. And let him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in twenty or thirty days; and perhaps it will be restored in twenty-eight days. All of this depends on the condition of the skin and the strength of the healing power.
[On the Restoration of Fractures of the Hand].
Know that it is rare for a fracture to occur in the hand or in the knuckles of the fingers. And does not happen to him unless there is repeated bruising.
When, however, the fracture or bruising occurs while sitting, then let the sick person sit in a square shape, and let there be a second seat opposite to it for a witness. Then put his hand on top of it.
Then the surgeon should make the broken bones join together by means of a proper bandage, until they are joined together well.
Then it is necessary that a plaster and a support be placed there, unless a feverish swelling occurs. Then place the plaster from above by the quantity of the place: and you have already covered it with linen cloth.
If, however, the fracture is toward the lower part of the hand near the wrist, then make a sort of a ball from cloth: and instruct the sick person to wrap his hand with it so that it will be bent like a ball; and then tie it tightly with a long cloth.
And let the plaster be made of liniment that is soft, so that it may be applied to the body with the skin; and tie it tightly, according to what is necessary.
If, however, the fracture is external, then it should be: you should place a staff above, and another staff below the foot: and hold the hand open and straight. Then put the splint on, as the hand is extended: and extend it between the fingers with a bandage.
If, however, the fracture affects any of the joints of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, it should be treated according to what is necessary. Then tie it up with the foot: and if the patient has a preference, then put a staff that is straight and firm: so that the fracture may be kept immobile, and not move.
If, however, the fracture affects any of the other digits, such as the middle, index, or ring finger, then it should be treated by joining it with the next healthy digit: or by tying them all together according to their continuity: and that is better. Or place a staff above it, as we have said for the thumb.
And consider in your restoration, and after that disposition aposteme of heat: and oppose with it whatever is necessary, when anything happens from it, according to what it returns of his narrative.
On the Restoration of a Fracture of the Pelvis.
The pelvis often breaks, and it is declared to the sense: because it turns towards the inner and back parts.
And its restoration was made so that it is tightened by ligaments above the fracture, and a ligament below the fracture. And the injured person extends his hand over his face.
Then he extends all the ligaments to the side according to equality: and this, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
If, however, there is a fracture near the root of the pelvis, then put the ligament on the side facing towards the pelvis so that it extends upwards: and another ligament below the fracture.
And in the same way if there is a fracture near the knee, then put the ligament close to the knee so that it extends towards the bottom: and another ligament above the fracture.
Then the doctor makes the two hands of the patient even, until he reduces it according to its natural shape: and the bones are joined together with a good union.
Then let it be placed with plaster and tightened if there is no swelling of the member. That if there is a swelling on it: then let him rest for a few days, until the swelling goes down, and then return to your cure.
The tightening should be like this. It is necessary that you wrap the bone with a hard cloth, that is, leather: and make it twice as long, or three times: and let there be an excess of it. Then wrap the leg, until it reaches the heel bone.
And put a long thread between the pelvis and the leg near the knee from below, and make its ends come out of the two sides from the upper part. Then wrap the crus and pelvis with a surplus of leather.
Then put two stars above the pelvis where the fracture is: and place one star on top of the leg bone.
Then fill with linen swabs between the leg and pelvis where the ligaments are to be placed, so that it is even.
Then begin with a strong constriction from the middle over the site of the fracture into three or four evolutions. And to the extent that you extend it with a ligament from the site of the fracture, your constriction will be less tight and softer, and milder.
Then introduce between the hip and the thigh. Bind then with three threads that are from above. Then introduce the two ends of the thread into the lower part, until you reach the ankle bone. And when you tighten each end of the thread and also the ends of the strands from the other side: so that the ligament does not move away from its place.
Then remove the constriction over that while it remains, so that no member corruption occurs, nor swelling, nor inflammation, and such like. If anything of that happens. Then apply the solution to it and make straight what has happened there completely, as we have said many times.
But if a fragment from the bone prickles: then it should be made even, if it is possible for you to do so. And if not, find over that and move it: and take care with the memory of its predecessor until it heals.
And when this fracture in the hip is constricted, apart from adding strands to it as we have said in the lower leg and arm.
However, when repairing this fracture in such a way that no limp or pain occurs. And if it is repaired alone, apart from having the other leg applied to it, then that person will always limp.
And you should know that the hip is constricted in fifty days, or a little added, or a little stretched: all of this is according to difference of color, and the condition of the others.
Regarding the repair of a fracture in the knuckle of the knee.
You should know that a fracture in the knuckle of the knee is rare, but it occurs to it often by wear and tear.
If, however, a fracture has occurred, then only a fracture, or a notch, or an opening in his parts. And that is when the ulna is broken, and without the ulna. And he will stand completely on that with his sense.
And the restoration of him is such that it equals what is broken out of his parts with fingers, until it coalesces, and joins together according to what is possible from equality and convenience, and manufacture.
Then put plaster from flour, or grinding, with albumen, and put on top of it a round paddle, if you can endure that: and tighten the tightness corresponding to it.
Then consider all the dispositions that we have spoken of in the remaining fractures: such as the swelling of heat, and their likes: so that you oppose every accident with him that is suitable to him, until he heals.
On the restoration of a leg fracture
You should know that there are two bones in the leg, one is large and is called the femur bone: and the other is slender, and is called the fibula.
And it has happened to both of the types of leg fracture that happens to the two bones of the arm: and because of that its restoration is made like the restoration of the arm in equality, and the operation is one.
That if both bones break together, the leg becomes bent in all parts.
And if the slender bone breaks, the leg bends forward.
And if the large bone breaks, it inclines downwardly: and is one of those which do not hide themselves from you.
Then administer extension, equality, and binding of the joints according to that which is equal.
However, if the leg fracture is a bad fracture, having many complications: let it be that there is less extension, and milder relief to you.
And in the leg there is also an operation similar to that of the arm: and it is, when you equalize the joints, and perform all your operation, then take two strips of pine wood, which is used in making shoulder blades that are placed under tables: and they are made from palm leaves: and choose from them those that have little thickness, and there are none from the small ones: and let their length be according to the length of the leg from the knee down.
Then he sewed together two pieces of cloth with two sutures according to its length. And place one end of the leg at one side and the other end at the other side: and they should come together from the knee down to the foot.
Then he sewed together two layers at three places from the ends and middle. For when there is a tightening, the leg leans to the right and left, and it stands in good position.
And now he will prepare the splint of wood according to the length of the leg and place the leg in it so that it may be preserved from movement.
And indeed you must do this very much when you have a fracture, when it has broken on its own.
Then consider the leg every day and make careful examination to check for any swelling or other problems. If then anything happens from these things, then oppose it with him as is necessary until he is healed, if God wills it.
For the fracture of the bones of the foot and toes.
The heel does not have a deep fracture.
However, when there is a fracture of the bones of the foot and also of the toes, and when there is little or no fracture to them, they only experience damage in many situations.
What if there is a fracture of the bones of the foot and you see those bones sliding away from each other on top, then place the injured foot on the ground as if walking.
Then stand you up and place your foot on that which raises it from those bones, then press or step on it, and make it even, until it returns to its places.
Then put on a splint, and support from above: and place under the ankle a flat board with two ends.
Then tighten it with the leg as you lower it, after you have wrapped it up with rags and the rest with which it needs to be wrapped.
After three days or four have passed, then solve the ligaments. For you shall not recognize the bones that are equal, nor shall you know if they are fractured, or if they are dislocated. The operation on these is the same as for those.
But if some of the fingers are broken, then restore them, and equal the rest according to what I have told you in the restoration of finger-joints of the hand. Then put your finger on a ruler according to the length of the finger, and make it a little wider: then place this table under the foot as I have told you, and tighten it with a tight fastening.
But if what is broken is two or three or more bones, then place over each finger a staff of its own length, wrapped in a cloth: and tighten the table in the lower foot: and let it stand on one corner of the table outside the navel of the foot, so that it holds by good retention.
And it should be for you, so that you do not forget, to consider all that I have told you about the other broken bones from the accidents which we have mentioned: and oppose every accident with him that it may be needed.
As for the fracture of a woman's vulva, and the bones of the chest, and the penis of a man.
When the vulva of a woman is broken, then let her sit square. Then lean her towards the back side of herself, and hold her in place.
Then fill the vulva of the woman with cotton, until it is filled: and let it be shaped in the vulva like a sphere.
Then stir the woman up, and gently spread her back. For that cotton will come out, until it is before the door of the vulva like a sphere, and the broken opening will return.
Then place a small ball on her back. But when she wants to urinate, let the cotton come out easily, and then let her urinate: and bring it back to its place, as you put it in first: and then let her return to her ball first.
Let it be seven days, or about that, because the bone itself is restored.
And if you want, take a scimitar, and tightly insert a twig of fern through its hole, and introduce the entire wound into his Vuluam. Then blow into the twig with force, until the wound bends inside the Vuluam; for it returns broken.
Then fill it with poultice, and let it stand for a few days, according to what we have said, until it is healed.
And when the Pectis bone breaks due to a man's or woman's strength, then administer to its restoration, and that which we have said concerning the anchoring of it into the bone.
And a straight bone does not hide in those who are next to it, which happens little, especially if it is someone who has some study, or use.
And understand my book well, for the fracture itself signifies to you many things about the right way to restore its own strictness: therefore understand.
But when the man' s bone breaks, take the throat of a goose; and introduce the entire arm into it. Then place over it a healing cloth, and heal it, and let it stand for three days, or about that, and it will be healed, if God wills.
For the restoration of broken bones, when it is with the arm.
It belongs to him who has suffered a fracture with an injury, especially if it is a large bone, such as the hip, or auxiliaries, or similar to it, as you please, and stop the bleeding immediately: if you are able to control the conditions of bloodletting, as we have mentioned.
If the wound spurts blood, then you should, as you please, aim at cutting off its supply so that it turns into dust on the bone: if you do not have anything else present.
Then begin to repair the fracture on that very day; and do not delay it, unless an apostema occurs.
If, however, an apostema occurs, then put off the restoration until the ninth day, until it has subsided. And do not approach it on the third day and on the fourth at all, for you will make bad accidents happen to it.
If, however, the broken bone is prominent above the detected wound: then it should be necessary for you to reduce it, and make it even with your hands easily and with a small extension.
If, however, the extension is not prepared, and its equalling with your hands: then reduce it with this instrument. And that instrument is made of iron, the length of which is the quantity of seven or eight fingers; and its width according to the amount of the wound. And for this reason it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of them according to the amount that he needs for healing of any type of fracture.
And let it be round: and let there be a little thickness in it so that it does not split when pressed upon the wound during the operation: and let its ends be acute, having a margin in its ends. And let it be above in thickness from half of it to the bottom.
This is its form.
In this operation, the acute end of the instrument should be placed over the prominent end of the bone: and push it with a single force until, when the bone has been reduced, it is even with a certain equaling.
So keep in mind to make the ends of the fracture even with each other face-to-face.
If, however, the ends of the fracture are thin, and the instrument cannot take hold of them well: then it should be necessary for you to knock the end of the bone so that the instrument can have a grip on it.
If, however, you cannot reduce them with the instrument I have described at all, then strike it with one of the incisers that we mentioned: or saw it with a saw in any way possible for you to do.
Then cut off what remains in the bone from roughness and small cortex.
When the bone is thus reduced, and remains after its reduction a great pain sore lamed, then know that the bone has not returned to its own place.
Do therefore this also. For thou hast a great help in the infirmity, when thou hast completed thy restoration which thou doest to the bone.
Then dip the cloth in black sour wine. And if it is in summer. And do not put on any woolen cloth, nor anything in which there be oil; lest that it should come to pass in it that the putrefaction and corruption should take place.
Then administer the herbs in the hour of your complentation from the restoration of the bone. And discharge the cloth laid on: so that you may fall with the hooks into the openings second by second in quantity of the wound.
And take all care, lest thou shouldest draw the bone with a fracture. For many times have done this foolish physicians: and it has come to pass in their infirmities or death or corruption or putrefaction, that is, rot. And may your constriction be soft, gentle, diverse from the constriction of broken fractures.
That if the bone is ill, or is a great bone, and be patient on the top of it such an evil thing which we have described, and in which pain hangs out in place: then it should not be put on the top of the bone herbs. And make them openings from hard cloths at the place of herbs, and draw the bone with them.
When it is after a day, or days two, and you see the bone begin to come on, as if there were pus generated therein: then take off from above the bone the cloth which thou hast put on above the bone with wine. Then administer leech-blood, and ointments with which we are wont to treat wounds, as the four-drug ointment, and similar things.
And it befits thee to loose the ligature. And consider the wound every day morning and evening until it heals over, and is healed up.
And it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way, that the pus go out of it from below with ease.
That if there pass many days without the wound being healed over, and pus does not come away from it: then know that there are little bones in it. Why you should enquire about the wound when it is hurting. How many of those little bones are separated, remove them and pull them out yourself. And which of those little bones are not separated, and stab the limb, and cause pain to it, prevent that from happening to it, and remove it by any means possible for you.
That if an injury to the limb occurs, or swells up, that is, gangrene, or some other kind of corruption and putrefaction: then you should turn each one of those little bones away from it as far as possible, by using what precedes it in the treatment, whose account was given in its chapter.
And from that in which it is necessary that my speech should remain, and to which you should pay attention when a bone breaks, and comes out on top of the limb, such as the hip bone, and similar ones from the large limbs, namely, that you do not assume attraction from it, for many times death occurs from it, except that you let it go until it putrefies.
Perhaps, however, it falls away of its own accord after twenty days, or thirty.
Then therefore be careful about the wound if you have it, otherwise let it go.
On the treatment of a fracture in a broken limb.
This is often the case with the treatment of a fracture in a broken limb. Especially, that which is near joints: and it is fed from that figure of the limb. And perhaps he may restrain the member from his own operation by nature.
Consider therefore at that time, if the swelling is recent: administer to her medicines which have a constricting action, such as aloe, and olive oil, and myrrh, and siccity-collyrims, and acacia, and similar things.
So, that you should take some of these things, or all of them: and bind them with a stingy liquor, or with an albumen-vial, or with vinegar: and place them on the swelling in a poultice, and tighten them over the good constriction.
And release the constriction, do not break it off after many days. Then remove it, and again apply another one until the swelling disappears.
Or tighten over it a leaden plate askew. For lead is a property to remove all that we fear from the member.
But if the swelling has already become hard and constricted, and there is a need to remove it quickly: then find on top of it, and strike off the surplus: or cut it with some scissors, until it comes off: and take care of it, until it heals.
Of the cure when it is restored, and remains a member after that, not according to its own nature.
When the fracture of the bone is restored, and remains a member after that, feeble: then it is not made because of many causes. Of which one is, a multitude of the solution of the ligament and its not being according to what should be done: or because of the excess of the constriction of the ligaments, until it is restrained from running into the member: or because of a multitude of emollients in an inappropriate time: or because of a lack of blood in the body, and weakness of it.
And its cure is, to feed the sick, and to make the member strong: until there is an increase of blood in it. And apply the balm. And introduce joy and gladness upon him.
Then place the scalpel on the member: so that the scalpel draws toward it a great deal of his nourishment. And make him rub with emollient ointment and warm water until he has returned to his natural form, and then put on a clean bandage.
In the cure for broken bones when they are healing in a twisted position.
When it has happened that a member has been restored after its sanation and eminence of the bone fracture, or tremor: and the nourishment is fed through it in the form of the member, however, the member is not prevented from its natural operation: then you should not hear his complaint that he wants to break the member again.
And there have been many stammerers of doctors and restaurators who made this in our country.
This operation is indeed a great one, leading to death, or great fear, as if it were mortal.
But if the limpness and trembling are recent: then it should be rubbed with warm water in which have been steeped softening herbs such as leaves of althaea, and its root, and mealoza, and similar things. And make him a ointment with a softening ointment, like the diochine made from dandelion roots.
Or be applied mucus of althaea root, and mixed with chicken fat, or oil of sesame: and rubbed with it.
Or take oak leaves, and dry them with ash wood, and similar things that are called medicines which reduce the consolidation.
And when the trembling has been removed by persistent friction, old, and soft, which is done with wet hands. And administer movement of the member to all parts in all hours.
But if the twistedness has already preceded, and is strong, and has become hard like a stone, and there is a need to cure it with iron: then let the upper part be cut off, and the continuation of the bone be healed, and what is in excess of the twist be removed with very fine incisions: and administer ease to him with care and diligence.
On the Dislocation.
Dislocation is the exit of a joint from its normal position. Why does it obstruct its own motion, and distort the form of the limb? And causes pain on an already weak part, and severe injuries.
So when a dislocation occurs, one should immediately seek to restore it: nor should he delay at all.
For if delayed, the joint will stiffen up, and there may be reduction of the dislocation with it.
Therefore, in order not to make him move, nor to extend him in the hour of his stiffening, For it often causes a spasm and painful injuries.
But when that happens, then you should, in order to prepare for the bleeding. Then let it be put away until it is calm.
Then the member is anointed with warm water and oil. Then reduce it with ease.
And take care of each member, bringing it back to its place.
I have already arranged the chapters on dislocation, also according to what preceded it in fracture, from the upper part of the body to the lower.
Chapter on the treatment of a dislocated mandible.
The two mandibles rarely dislocate.
And the dislocation of the upper and lower jaws occurs in two different ways. Or they are removed from their places with a slight distance, and become slightly softer. Or they dislocate completely and firmly, until they become softer towards the chest, until they flow with saliva, and cannot hold it, nor can they close their mouth, and wrap their tongue around the spoon with a sigh.
When however its dislocation is slight, then it returns of itself with some difficulty.
If it is indeed a complete dislocation, then it is whole: then one should give the reduction to him quickly, and not wait long: and it is so that the nurse holds his head: and the doctor inserts his thumb of his hand on one side into the root of the dislocation between the jaw and the mouth if the dislocation is from one part. Or he inserts two thumbs at the same time, if the dislocation is from two parts. And the other fingers of his hand are outside, which he equalizes.
And tell the sick person to clean his jaws and eat with all his teeth. And the doctor equalizes the jaw and pushes it back into place until he gets back to his own place.
That if it is difficult to reduce him, especially if both jaws are together: then give a steam with hot water and oil until the reduction becomes easy: and do not delay reducing the jaws at all, as we have said.
When they are closed and equalized, and the nurse's mouth does not open: then place over them some woolen cloths, with a sponge that is made of wax: and oil-laced.
Then tie it together easily with soft ligaments.
And let the nurse lie on his back: and let his head be between two cloth pieces so that he does not turn to one side or the other: nor does he fidget or try to chew anything: but a soft food is given to him to eat, until such time as he can open his mouth easily, and his jaw is made to move: then he eats what he wants, and it is given to him with ease.
He should not labor over the opening of his mouth when eating and drinking, or talking, until such time as his jaw is made to move and heal.
That if it is difficult to reduce the two jaws when they are dislocated at some time, and do not return to their own place: then many times fever and sour water come from there: and perhaps a sick stomach comes forth, and perhaps pure choler comes out.
For this reason you see that it is a loss, and often he dies who has this thing happen to him in ten days.
On the Reduction of a Dislocation of the Furcula and Extremity of the Humerus.
The furcula does not dislocate from the inside due to its continuation with the chest wall. And it dislocates sometimes to the outside, and this is made known by a sensation.
And its restoration is so that he lies sick on his back, and extends his arms. Then tie the place with your palm by a strong tie, for it will be reduced again.
Then place a plaister on it, and pull it tight, and tie it up.
The extremities that follow the bed, and continue with it, do not dislocate except rarely. If it dislocates on one day: then it should be reduced and made even as we have said, and it should be prepared for you.
Then place a plaister on it, and pull it tight, and tie it up tightly. And order the sick person to adhere to rest and calmness until he is healed.
And with this same cure, the extremity of the Humerus is reduced when it separates from its place also.
On the Reduction of a Dislocation of the Humerus.
You should know that the Humerus does not dislocate unless by three ways.
Of which one is so that it dislocates to the tickling side toward the lower part. The second is so that it dislocates to the side of the chest. And perhaps it dislocates upward on the extremity of the Humerus, and this happens rarely.
And it does not dislocate toward the rear, due to the shape of the shoulder blade. And it does not dislocate forward, due to the nerves.
And much more is dislocated and displaced to the lower side towards the tip: above all in those, whose flesh is scarce. For it is quickly discharged from them, and quickly enters.
But in those, whose flesh is great, is contrary to it, that is to say, because it is discharged with difficulty, and enters with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some men that there is a blow, or a fall, and the humerus is dislocated cold, and it is thought because of that, since it has already been dislocated.
Therefore let it be so, that you experience that thing, until you are sure of its certainty, and then proceed to cure it.
And the dislocation is known when it is towards the lower side towards the tip: and you distinguish between a dislocated shoulder and a healthy shoulder. For you manifestly see a difference between them, and if you touch the tip of the head of the humerus, it seems to be almost itself: and cannot the sick hand reduce to its socket, nor move it in all its movements.
And likewise, if it is dislocated towards the chest or upwards: then there is a manifest touch, and it is not concealed.
And of this kind of dislocation the reduction is easily made, when he is young, or a sick boy.
And its reduction is, as if he raises his own hand to his upper side. Then put your fingers under its tip, and raise the joint with strength towards the upper side to its place: and the minister will raise his hand, and extend it upwards. Then put it down below, for himself he returns quickly.
But if he does not return through that which I have said, and there are many days from the time of dislocation: then let it be, that the sick man bathe in warm water, and an emollient lotion is given to him, which softens and relieves, such as if they had been boiled in oak leaves, and fennel seed, and meadow sweet in water, and given.
Then the sick person shall be placed on his back: and a ball and wool should be placed under him, which is equal to the length and narrowing.
Then the doctor shall place his heel upon the ball, and raise with force the head of the humerus, and draw the hand of the nurse towards the lower part.
And if you wish, reduce him according to this mode: and it is so, that the longer sick person may stand present, and stand on the side, and introduce his shoulder under the ball of the attendant: and raise the ball of the attendant towards the upper part, until the sick person hangs suspended in the air. And another attendant shall hold the hand of the patient at the lower part of his thigh. But if the sick person is light: then it should be so, that he be suspended with something else besides him, so that he does not return to his dislocation: for it returns at once.
And it is also reduced according to another mode: and it is so, that he be placed on the ground a long round wooden figure, whose head is round: like the handle of the pestle: which is neither gross nor subtle. Then a sheet of soft cloth should be placed under the sick person, after it has been placed on the head of the wood: and the sick person should stand standing according to the length of the wood.
Then his hand shall be extended to the lower part from one side, and his body shall be extended from the other side with force: for the joint returns to its place with velocity.
That if it is difficult to reduce him by all that we have said, then use this care: and it is so, that you take a piece of wood whose length is the quantity of two arms, and its width the quantity of four fingers, and its thickness the quantity of two fingers: and its head round, that he may ease the entrance into the depths of his titillica, according to this form.
Then soft cloths are tied tightly around the head, so that the wood does not hurt the weak wood.
Then, under the chin, so that the hands can be extended, or the arm up to the bottom: and the wood is tied over the aid and the arm and the end of the hand.
Then, put the arm across the steps on the side, and extend the hand down, and let the rest of the body hang by the other side. For sure it should be joined immediately.
Since then, as soon as the entry is complete in whatever way possible: then it should be placed under the ball of equal size made of wool. Then put the prepared plaster made from ground flour with olive oil and egg white on the whole shoulder, as it turns away upwards.
Then tighten with a tight belt from below: and turn the ligaments over the plaster from above: and tie his hands to his neck, and let them go, and do not move his hands for seven days.
And it should be that food for the sick is provided until the member is healed: for it is faster to heal it.
Then a larger one is placed after seven or five days, and he exercises with movement. If then it stands firm and does not weaken, then it is healed now.
If then the joint dislocates many times, because of the moisture that occurs with it, or because of another cause: then it should be administered to it a caustic with three openings, as is described in the chapter on cauterization.
That if this is done completely, and the ligaments are allowed to heal after seven days, and the joint does not firm up, and the plaster and tightening fall off a few times, and does not get stiff, and falls down, and he cannot raise it upwards: then you should know that the nerves in his shoulder have been cut, or extended, or weakened: and you should know that the joint never returns to its place.
Dislocation is however that which takes place opposite the chest and nipple, or towards the rear reduction, occurs with an impact and extension with hands: until it returns, and is administered in it remaining constriction and care, until it heals.
That if it should happen after the healing of a slight weight on the limb, and sluggishness in its movement, then the sick person should often use the bath, until that weight softens, and he returns to his natural state first.
On the treatment of dislocation of the cubitus.
Know that the joint of the cubitus dislocates with difficulty, and also returns with difficulty; and it itself dislocates to all parts, especially to the anterior or posterior.
And its dislocation is not hidden from you: for it falls under a sound, and under a touch, and takes whatever form it may take. And when the joint of the cubitus that has been dislocated is joined with a healthy one, it is manifest to you. The joint is irritated, and it cannot bend the arm, nor can it touch the shoulder with it.
And you should, in order to do yourself justice, reduce the dislocation at once, before it has developed a heat swelling.
For if it should happen that the swelling is hot, its reduction is difficult; and it may well not heal completely, especially when it is directed towards the rear. For it is worse in all forms of dislocation, and more painful to it; and it often ends with death.
And when it is restored from such dislocations as can be reduced, it extends its hands with two hands; and the arms are extended, and the thumbs of their hands are placed above the cubitus and under it, and they push the joint with their thumbs at the same time, or with the root of the palm, until it returns to its place.
Or the dislocation is towards the front: then he returns so that he doubles his hand with his own, until he hits the cubitus that is dislocated with the root of his palm.
If he does not obey the dislocation for the purpose of reduction, then administer a powerful and sharp extension: and it is so that two ministers extend the arm; and hold him also by two ministers so that he does not move during the extension.
Then the arm is to be rotated back into place after it has been wrapped with a doubled length of cloth, or with a wide ligament.
And when the doctor touches it with his own hand, he should anoint it with oil: so that it be from those that help in lubrication of the joint with ease. Then he should push the lubrication with a sharp impulso, until it is removed.
And after the reduction of it, let there be placed on it an emplastre, in which sits the stifness, and drying with alum: and let it be tightened by a tightness that goes down. And the arm is to be suspended from the neck by the nurse: and let it be discharged after some days.
Then it is to be released. If the joint then remains firm in its own place, then dissolve the ligaments from it, and let go of it.
And if you see that the joint is not well tightened, then repeat the plaster, and the ligament, and let go of it for a few days, until it is tightened. Then release it.
If, however, it happens to him that he is heavy after the reduction of the joint, and there is movement in it: then administer humidification in a bath, and a subtle friction, and compression, until it is tightened, or place over the joint an iliac, that is, a nate of sheep's fat. Then bind it up, and let go of it on top of her for a day and a night. Then take it off, and put him into the bath. When he then sweats, then rub the joint with a moderate friction. Then repeat over the top of him one time, and then two times, and then three times when he enters the bath, until it softens.
And if you wish, put over it cow dung, moist, warmed with butter, and bind tightly over it.
Do this sometimes. For herself, she is healed, and returns to her own state.
(Here) Albucasis on the treatment of dislocations.
If (the hand) often dislocates, that is to say, the joint which is between the arm and the hand.
And reducing its dislocation is easy. Conversely, those other joints. However, it is necessary that the speed is in reducing its dislocation at the hour at which it dislocates, before measurement of (the) place: or happen in that measurement heat.
And reducing the dislocation is in that (hand), so you put Mahassem of a weak hand on a table, and extends its minister hand: and puts the doctor's palm on the eminence of the joint, and pushes it, until he returns.
However, it is necessary that one considers, if the palm has already receded to the navel of the hand: then put the weak back of the hand on a table during extension and reduction: and if the dislocation is going toward the back of the hand, then the position of the hand should be placed inside the table, that is, the inner part of the hand should be placed on the table, so that the doctor's palm falls over the eminence of the joint.
If then he returns immediately, it is good: and if not, then bind it with a plaster while it is resting, and let go of him, and do not return to it.
For if he does not tolerate it, and you cannot reduce it, after a few days then the joint remains according to its tortuosity: and does not hurt an invalid, unless the hand is softened, and cannot grasp anything: then you should know that nerves are cut off, or rubbed.
It is not therefore a gift in it, unless it is bound with a gauze close to its danger. And perhaps it does not confer something.
For if [the surgeon] does not return the [surgery] bandage, then put it on the wound that we have described. Then tie it and leave it for five days: then loosen it and leave it, and exercise your hands.
But if his movement is restricted, and something heavy happens to him: then make it soft with warm water and sometimes rubbing, until it softens.
[On the treatment of dislocations of the fingers].
When a finger is dislocated completely from the rest, or if it is dislocated towards the back of the hand, or into the belly: then stretch out the finger, and push the dislocation of your thumb, until it comes back.
Then support the end of the finger, and hang it towards the side where it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
Then hang it up, and stretch it out, until it becomes straight again in its own day.
For when night comes, bind him according to the above description: and do not cease to keep him soft during the day: and exercise him with movement: and bind him at night.
Make it for a few days, until it is tied up.
And do the same with him if he is dislocated towards the belly of the hand: and bind him to the side, and do your first operation with him, until he heals.
And do the same with him when he is dislocated from the other parts.
[On the treatment of dislocations of the spine].
When something happens to anyone's spine, or if many of the vertebrae are removed from their places: then there is no cure for it, because death approaches the sick person.
And a sign of this is that the sick person's excrement does not come out willingly, and he cannot hold it in: and many times some member of his body, or two legs, or two arms, or one of them falls away, or one of the vertebrae is removed from its place. And often one of the vertebrae moves from its place.
For many times, it is moved, because many times is moved their removal to the four parts.
But those that are moved to the back, are called Gibbositas.
The cure, however, is such that you consider then, if the Gibbositas occurs from puerility: then it is not in her cure, nor is there any cure from it at all.
But in that which has occurred from accident, or percussion, or similar things, the old men have already said in long speech the methods of cure. Whose much does not return with profit.
But I have already shortened it from that, which little excuses his much from nearness to my intention: and my exposure of that which I exposed, and I formed the instrument in diverse ways from him from whom they showed that, and they exposed the same.
I say, then, that in the Gibbositas which has occurred from the anterior part, is not talent, nor cure from it at all.
And likewise in that which is made on the two sides also.
And they are not cured of those things unless that which has occurred on the back proper, for I tell you that: and it is as if it extends the sick man on his face on a level platform near the wall: and it expands under him a damp cloth so that he does not harm his chest.
Then a straight wood is placed fixed in the ground in the end of the foot, around his head: and another wood is held around his feet in the other end of the foot: and the servant holds the wood, and does not stand firm in the ground. And the other servant holds the other.
Then a nurse turns over his head, and under his chin with leather, firm: and he extends the end of the ligament to the wood that is at his head: and binds him in it.
Then a different ligament is pulled above the thighs of him, and above his knees, and near to his toes. Then gather all the ligaments together and tie them to a different wood which is at his feet.
Then all the ministers should extend to the part of the wood where the ligaments are tied, and they should not remove the two woods from their places where they are fixed: indeed they should not be fixed, as we have said.
And the doctor should place his palms on the spine with strength until he has rotated it back out: or he should place it on the table. Then he should attach his feet to the table with something that will not allow them to move until he has rotated them back out.
If, however, he does not come back by this cure, then take a table whose length is about three arms. And make a hole in the wall from which we have spoken that is near to the sick man, a place where he can enter the end of the table. Then place the middle of the table on top of the spine. And the doctor should place his feet on the other end of the table. And he should tie it well so that the spine is constricted, and return to his own place.
Then if you wish, operate with a tourniquet that is wrapped with your hand: and this is how you should do it, so that you fix on the ground near the head of the sick person two woods whose length is about one arm: and at the head of him, in the last foot of his bed, two woods.
And the length that is between all the wood and the palm should be one: and there has been made, in every place, a hole, through which the tourniquet runs; and all the wood should be firmly fixed on the ground, so that it does not move at all.
Then the round wood should be inserted: and there is a tourniquet in which the ligaments run in two holes of the two woods.
And at the end of it is a hole, in which the wood is fixed, whose length is a palm with what turns with it: and there is also like it in the other two woods.
Then tighten the ligaments that you have tightened in the chest of the patient around his neck which is at the top of him: and the ligaments that you have tightened in his thighs in a belt that is at his feet.
Then stand by all the tourniquets, the one who tightens his hand with a thong, with which he is turned over: and the doctor will apply the spondyl, as we have said.
This is the form of the tourniquet that follows.
Then, when the spondyl has been applied and the place has been made equal, then it is necessary that you put on a dried plaster with alum, which we will call "plaster". Then stand up. Then place above the plaster a board whose width is three fingers, or around them. And its length is such that it takes up the space of the gibbosity, and on the healthy side of the spondyl.
Then tie with a ligament which we have said. And use the sick one with delicate food until he recovers.
If anything remains of the eminence in the place at the end of the recovery: then it is necessary that you administer the medicines which soften and make gentle, with the administration of the tablet which we have mentioned at a time. And now is administered in that plate of lead.
And when it happens that the eminence remains at the end of the spondyl on the back: and it is thought that by means of this dislocation, and it is that very joint which has now come out. Why should not be made the supposition to him with this medicine: perhaps, in fact, will happen to kill him.
The cure of an ankle dislocation.
You should know that the ankles and the shoulders do not happen, except for a dislocation: and they do not happen to them what happens to the other joints by a little distance, and a little sloppiness.
And the ankle joint itself can be dislocated in four ways. It is dislocated both in front and behind.
And indeed it is very much dislocated within; and only a little dislocated in front of and behind.
And the treatment of this dislocation to the inside is: because when you join the healthy leg with the sick one, it is longer; and his knee joint rises higher than the healthy one, so that the sick person cannot double his foot under him; and there is a place that follows the hip behind the warm one, namely, because the head of the hip has already reached there.
And the sign of this dislocation to the outside is that his symptoms are opposite to these symptoms.
And the sign of this dislocation to the front is that he spreads out the healthy leg according to the complement; but he does not double himself without pain in his knee; and if he tries to walk, he cannot stand on it in front; and he holds back his urine, and puts out his hip behind, and during walking he steps on his heel.
And the sign of this dislocation to the back is that he does not spread his knee out, and cannot double himself without stretching his hip; and his leg is also shorter on the other side; and his hip joint is soft, and the head of the hip has reached its place there.
The reduction of this dislocation is that you consider then, if the dislocation is old, which has already become accustomed with having it. Then, if you administer the reduction and it remains according to its position: then it is not at all cured. Therefore it should not be assumed that he has a full recovery.
In that one whose dislocation is recent, and who has only four kinds of dislocations: then approach this so that you can join it together, and extend it both inside and outside, and move it with the right and left hand: for perhaps he will return to his own place without any other cure.
If, however, he does not respond in this way, then one should prepare the surgeon's instruments well and extend his leg from below: or with his hands, or with a band that is tied above his leg above the knee: and another surgeon shall extend his hand from above, so that he can insert his hand between the toes. Then he should tie the leg with a soft bandage below the root of the pelvis and hold the end of one of the ligaments tight.
And it should be either extended from the front part of the groin to the thigh, or from the back to the spine.
And all these things should be done at once, so that the patient with his body is lifted off the ground and hangs by himself.
This type of extension is a common type of four-point extension.
If, therefore, the dislocation returns with him that I mentioned, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary for all the species of what I call treatment for himself to come.
In the reduction, however, when the dislocation is towards the inside, it should be laid out on his healthy side. Then he should place the bandage at the root of the pelvis, in that place which is between the head of the hip and the place that is under the groin. Then he should extend the bandage from the groin side to the higher part of the body, towards the thigh.
Then another strong surgeon should take his arms, and lessen the size of the large hip that is weak, and extend it towards the outside with a sudden extension. He has already returned to his own place.
And this type of reduction is easier for the remaining types of treatment, in which this limb is reduced.
If, however, he refuses to enter at all with this type of treatment: then it should be tied together by two surgeons with a strong bandage, soft and smooth, over the two heels and over the two knees: and the length of each from its own beginning should be four fingers; and his leg should be extended longer by two fingers on the other side.
Then let the sick one be hung on a tree, which is in the house; and let its length from the ground be the width of two arms.
Then command a strong man to hold the sick person's feet: and let another hang with the sick person; and let another push the strong one away from the sick person with force, for the connection will return to its place with speed.
In recovery, however, when there is a dislocation to the outside, it should be laid out on the ground, as we have said in having a gibbus. And let it be pulled up by ligaments on his leg, the sick one himself, and on his chest.
Then two logs should be placed, one at his feet, and another at his head. Then a log should be placed in the middle of his foot, firmly fixed; and let there be placed over it moist cloths so that they do not hurt the sick person; and let the log be placed between his thighs, so that it is not drawn towards the lower part by the extension.
Then all the helpers should stretch out on their side, and the doctor should make a careful reduction with his hand.
If he then obeys to the re-location, it is good.
And if not, place over it the table, and press it down, as we have said in having a gibbus, evenly. However, it should be laid out on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is to the front, then it should be stretched out by the strong man quickly; and this same account is told about the ground: and let the doctor place his right hand palm on the sick person's thigh. Then he should be stretched out by the other hand, and with that stretching place him extended to the lower side of the knee.
And if the dislocation is to the back: then it should not be stretched out by the sick person to the lower side, and let him lie on the ground; but rather, let him be placed on something hard, as also we said concerning his lying on two arms; and he should be on his face, and with ligaments that are extended: according to what we have just said.
It is necessary that compression be applied with a board also to the place from which the discharge has departed, when reduction is complete according to what is necessary.
And the sign of his recovery shall not be hidden from you: and this is that you stretch out two legs for him, and when you see them equal, and the sick man tightens his leg, and extends himself without excuse: then you shall know that his member has returned, according to what is necessary: then join the two thighs together, and put on a plaster, and bind it with bandages, that is, a tourniquet: so that it may not move an inch from any part: and let him remain quiet for three days, or four.
Then loosen the ligaments, and the plaster, and compare the leg with the other: then if you see them equal in position, then you shall know that the dislocation is now fixed: so let the sick man walk then.
And if you see any softening: then go back, and plaster it, and bind it according to your first tightening: and let him also be kept quiet for three days.
Then loosen that one and make him walk a little on both sides for several days, until he is comfortably healed.
The Dislocation of the Knee Joint.
The knee may be dislocated three ways. by the outside, by the inside, and by the bottom, that is to say, from behind.
And it does not dislocate in front.
And the sign of its dislocation is this: that you command the sick man to apply his leg to his thigh. If he does not attach it to the thigh: then you shall know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all the ways of dislocation is this: that you make the sick man sit straight, so that he may extend his leg over it if he can, and attach his back to your face, and place his foot between your feet.
Then attach them to his knee with your palm, and place them straight between your fingers over his knee. Then apply your two palms to the sides of his knee with determination. And another extends his leg until he returns the knee to its place.
And the sign of the re-attachment is that the thigh should adhere to the pelvis with slowness, not forcefully.
Then cover it with a plaster, and attach the leg to the pelvis. Then bind them together at the same time with three or four days' worth of yarn. Then dissolve them.
And let the injured person not walk for a few days, until he is healed.
But if his reduction does not adhere to you, then administer a strong extension with ligaments, of which the preceding account was given in the cure of achilles, until he is returned to his place.
The Cure for Dislocation of the Calcaneus
The Calcaneus is sometimes reduced by a slight rotation, and sometimes dislocates by a second movement. And the dislocation occurs, either internally, or externally.
And the sign of the dislocation is that you see the Calcaneus inflated, protruding towards the part to which it is dislocated.
The cure for the removal of the dislocation, however, is easy to reduce: and it is done by extending with ease with the hands, and adjusting, until it is returned to its place.
In the cure, however, when it dislocates by a second movement, you should make the sick person sit upright: and grasp him firmly from behind his back, in the middle of his back.
Then hold with your right hand the leg from the upper part of it, and with your left hand at the lower part of the foot in place of the nail.
Then pull the foot toward you with your right hand. Then with the two fingers of your left hand.
Then extend with the left hand and push the chest of the foot with the right hand against the thigh without working.
Do this twice, as we have said.
Then push the chest of the foot towards the thigh in a third stroke, and you draw out the nail.
If then he returns in a single stroke or in two strokes after this manner and you see the foot even, it is good: but if not, then repeat the operation over him: for he returns again.
But if you are forbidden to reduce him with it as we have said: then let the sick one lie on his back on the ground, and fasten a cloth firmly on the ground so that he falls between his knees: but now you have already spread over him a cloth, lest he be hurt.
Then let the minister take the leg of the sick one: then let the other minister extend the foot, or with his hands, or with a band that binds around the neck of the foot. Then let all the ministers extend against the extension of their own body: and let the cloth stand between the two knees of the nurse while she holds it so that the body does not move down towards the lower part during extension.
Then let the doctor make the joints even with his hands, and let the other minister hold the sound thigh from below. For the dislocation returns with speed.
When therefore the dislocation has returned, and it has been made known to you that the recovery is good: then let there be put a cloth and a cushion, and bind it with bands firmly, and tie the foot to the thigh with a band.
And it is necessary that you should avoid or not be afraid of the nerves, which are above the heel, behind, lest a band should press on them and hurt them.
Then let go of him after two days, or three. But if the ligament becomes soft, bind the sick one again: then let go of him on the third day or fourth: and forbid the sick one from walking for forty days. If one tries to walk before that space has healed, there is no security unless the dislocation is resolved, and it deteriorates, and does not receive cure after that.
That if he should happen to have a hot swell: then it is necessary that you administer to him in a sedative that which we have preceded in our narration in another place from the cure, and embrocation, until it has disappeared.
Regarding the dislocation of fingers of the foot, and treatment.
It is necessary that he be allowed to rest with little extension without work: and this one is not difficult, on the contrary, it is easy.
If, however, the dislocation is in some of the joints of the back of the foot: then it is necessary that he should sit his injured foot on a level place of the earth, or on a table: and it is standing as if walking.
Then you stand up, and place your foot on that which protrudes from those joints. Then trample that with your foot with force until it turns, and you no longer feel it: and you do not appear to be standing on an edge.
Then place under your foot a table which supports the whole foot, which has two heads. Then tighten it with a tightening of three days. Then solve it, and let it rest from walking for several days, until it tightens and is secured by the reduction.
Regarding the species of dislocation with fracture.
When something like this has happened to him, and he desires to treat it, and to restore its health, many times death succeeds: and for this reason it is not necessary that he should make a hasty judgment about his cure, which is of this kind, unless he is prudent in the art of long use, merciful, gentle, slow, not bold, and not presumptuous: and that he should employ in the beginning of medicines which sit on the hot apostemes: and let him abandon the sick to divine judgment. If you do not expect healing, nor hope for deliverance from destruction with patience towards disease, and when it seems that there is some hope. Then consider the reduction of this at once at the beginning of the thing, before the fever occurs.
But if the limb returns to health as we intended, then administer a regimen that calms the fever; and take care of the sore with the ointment from dry herbs at the same time.
That if the dislocation is with a fracture and they happen to separate in a boney place, then consider removing them, and do in that what we said in simple diseases because it preceded in those places.
And be careful according to your virtue, and guard yourself from the entrance into a state of fear: for my prediction has preceded you.
For that is better for you with your creator, and more enduring to your glory, and healthier for your body among them at your time.
